ST. CLAIR CITY CODE OF ORDINANCES 
____________ 
Published in 1994 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted July 5, 1994 
Effective July 26, 1994 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ST. CLAIR, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
  
William E. Cedar, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Tom Foley 
Butch Kindsvater, Jr. 
Jane Krebs 
Mitch Kuffa 
Mike LaPorte 
Tom McCartney 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Booth 
City Superintendent 
____________ 
James Downey 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Annette Sturdy 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of St. Clair, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, as supplemented through December 17, 1990, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Allen Z. Paul, Supervising Editor, and Charles Vignos, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Janice DiGiusto, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1994-03 
CITY OF ST. CLAIR 
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR, MICHIGAN 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ST. CLAIR; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
The City of St. Clair Ordains: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "St. Clair City Code of Ordinances" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 70, each inclusive, and appendix A, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 20, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 20, 1993 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective July 26, 1994. 
    Passed and adopted by the city council this Fifth day of July, 1994. 
ORDINANCE DECLARED ADOPTED 
/s/   
      Bernard E. Kuhn, Mayor 
      City of St. Clair, Michigan   Certification 
    The foregoing is a true and complete copy of an Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City of St. Clair, St. Clair County, Michigan, at a regular meeting held on July 5, 1994, of which public notice was given pursuant to and in full compliance with the Open Meetings Act, being Act 267, Public Acts of Michigan, 1976, and that the minutes of said meeting were kept and will be or have been made available as required by said Act. 
Members Present: Mayor Kuhn, Bloomfield, Cedar, M. LaPorte, P.LaPorte, Stablein, Westrick. 
Members Absent: None. 
It was Moved by Member M.LaPorte and Supported by Member Cedar to adopt the Ordinance. 
Members Voting Yes: Bloomfield, Cedar, Kuhn, M. LaPorte, P. LaPorte, Stablein, Westrick. 
Members Voting No: None. 
The Ordinance was declared adopted by the Mayor and has been recorded in the Ordinance Book. 
/s/   
      Janice B. DiGiusto, City Clerk, 
      City of St. Clair, Michigan   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2008-01  3- 3-08 Included 13 2008-03 10- 6-08 Included 13 2010-01  4- 5-10 Included 13 2010-02  4-19-10 Included 13 2010-03  4-19-10 Included 13 2010-04  5-17-10 Included 13 2011-01  2-21-11 Included 13 2011-02  2-21-11 Included 13 2011-04  5-16-11 Included 14 2011-05  5-16-11 Included 14 2011-06  8- 1-11 Included 14 2011-07  8-15-11 Included 14 2011-08  8-15-11 Included 14 2011-09  9- 6-11 Included 14 2011-10 10- 3-11 Included 14 2011-11 10- 3-11 Included 14 2011-12 10- 3-11 Included 14 2011-13 11-21-11 Included 14 2011-14 12- 5-11 Included 14 2012-01  3- 5-12 Included 15 2012-03  4-16-12 Included 15 2012-04  6-18-12 Included 15 2012-05  6-18-12 Included 15 2012-06  7- 2-12 Included 15 2012-07  7- 2-12 Included 15 2013-03  9- 3-13 Included 16 2013-04 10- 7-13 Included 16 2013-05 11-18-13 Included 16 2013-06 12- 2-13 Included 16 2013-07 12- 2-13 Included 16 2014-03  5-19-14 Included 17 2015-01  6- 1-15 Included 18 2015-02  7-16-15 Omitted 18 2015-03  8- 3-15 Included 18 2015-04  8- 3-15 Included 18 2016-01  2- 1-16 Included 19 2016-02  2- 1-16 Included 19 2016-03  2-15-16 Included 19 2016-04  4- 4-16 Included 19 2016-05  5- 2-16 Included 19 2016-06  5- 2-16 Included 19 2016-07  5- 2-16 Included 19 2016-08  5- 2-16 Included 19 2016-09  5- 2-16 Included 19 2016-10  9- 6-16 Included 19 2016-11  8-15-16 Included 19 2017-01  2- 6-17 Omitted 20 2017-02  4- 3-17 Included 20 2017-03  5-15-17 Included 20 2017-04 11- 6-17 Included 20  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the St. Clair City Charter, as adopted by the electors on August 7, 1979, and effective on January 1, 1980. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION, BOUNDARY AND POWERS 

Section 1.01. - Incorporation. 
    The existing and established City of St. Clair in the County of St. Clair, State of Michigan, shall be a home rule municipal corporation under the provisions of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.) as now, or hereafter, amended and as declared by Act No. 334 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 81.1c, MSA 5.1591(3)). 
Section 1.02. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the City of St. Clair are established to be: 
    The City of St. Clair lying adjacent to and westerly of the international boundary line in the St. Clair River, being part of Fractional Sections 29 and 30, Township 5 North, Range 17 East, and P.C.'s 304, 305 and 306, St. Clair County, Michigan, being more particularly described as beginning at the east quarter corner of Fractional Section 30; thence westerly along the east and west quarter line of said Section 30 to the west line of said Section 30, said west line also being the centerline of Range Road; thence southerly along the said west line to the centerline of Brown Street, said centerline also being the northerly line of P.C. 305; thence westerly on the said northerly line to the northwest corner of P.C. 305; thence southerly along the westerly line of P.C. 305 to the southwest corner of P.C. 305, said corner being on the centerline of Cox Road, 66 feet wide, 209.60 feet northerly of the centerline of Clinton Avenue, said point being also on the northerly line of P.C. 306; thence westerly on the northerly line of P.C. 306 to the northwest corner of P.C. 306; thence southerly along the west line of P.C. 306 to the centerline of the Pine River; thence southerly and easterly along the centerline of the Pine River to the intersection of said centerline with the easterly line of P.C. 306, said easterly line being also the westerly line of P.C. 304; thence northerly along said line to the southerly line of Outlot No. 13 of the map of P.C.'s 304 and 305 as recorded in Liber D, Page 36, St. Clair County Records; thence easterly along said southerly line to the centerline of the Pine River; thence southerly along said centerline to a point, said point being on a line 44 feet south of the north line of Oak Street extended westerly to the centerline of said Pine River; thence easterly along said line to the westerly shore line of the St. Clair River; thence easterly at the right angles to the thread of the river to the international boundary line; thence northerly along the international boundary line to its intersection with a line which begins on the west shore line of the St. Clair River and its intersection with the east and west quarter line of Fractional Section 29 and runs thence easterly and at the right angles to the thread of the river to the international boundary line; thence westerly on said line to the west shore line; thence westerly along the said east and west quarter line of Fractional Section 29 to the Point of Beginning; 
and shall include any and all territory which may thereafter be annexed or attached thereto. 
State Law reference- Incorporation, consolidation of territory and alteration of boundaries of home rule cities, MCL 117.61 et seq., MSA 5.2085 et seq. 
Section 1.03. - Powers [generally]. 
    The city shall possess and have any and all powers which are possible for a city to possess and have under the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated. In all instances such powers shall be liberally construed in favor of the city. Whenever specific powers may be set forth in the Charter, it shall not be interpreted as limiting in any way the broad grant of general power herein. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3), MSA 5.2083(3). 
Section 1.04. - Exercise of [powers]. 
    The city may exercise any of its powers independently or in joint or common participation with any other municipal, governmental or private persons, bodies or organizations where authorized by law. 
ARTICLE 2. - CITY COUNCIL 

Section 2.01. - Composition, eligibility, election and terms. 
(a)  Composition. There shall be a city council consisting of the mayor and six (6) councilmembers elected by the registered voters of the city. 
(b)  Eligibility. Only registered voters of the city shall be eligible to be a candidate for and hold the office of councilmember. 
(c)  Wards. The city shall be divided into three (3) wards which shall be apportioned as near equally as possible by population. The council shall reapportion the wards within seventy-five (75) days following each official state or federal census. 
(d)  Election and terms. There shall be two (2) councilmembers elected by the registered voters in each ward for a term of two (2) years at the regular election held in odd-numbered years as prescribed by state law and in the manner as prescribed in Article 9 of this Charter. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for one or more wards, MCL 117.3(e), MSA 5.2073(e). 
Section 2.02. - The mayor. 
(a)  Election. The chief executive officer of the city shall be the mayor who shall be elected by the registered voters of the city at large for a term of two (2) years at a regular election held in an odd-numbered year as prescribed by state law and in the manner as prescribed in Article 9. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council, shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for the purposes of military law, but shall have no administrative duties. 
(b)  Member of council. The mayor shall have an equal voice and vote as a member in all proceedings of the council, but shall have no veto power. 
(c)  Eligibility. Only registered voters of the city shall be eligible to be a candidate for and hold the office of mayor. 
(d)  Pro tempore. At the first regular meeting of the new council elected following the odd-year election, the council shall select from among its members the mayor pro tempore who shall act during the absence, disability or unavailability of the mayor, and, if a vacancy occurs, shall become mayor for the remainder of the term. 
Section 2.03. - Compensation and expenses. 
(a)  Compensation. The council shall determine the compensation of the mayor and councilmembers by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such compensation shall become effective until the beginning date of the term of any councilmember elected or appointed thereafter; provided, such election or appointment follows the adoption of such ordinance by not less than six (6) months. 
(b)  Expenses. The mayor and councilmembers shall receive all actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. Appropriate verification of the amount and purpose of such expenses shall be required by the city council. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d). 
Section 2.04. - General powers and duties. 
    All powers of the city shall be vested in the council except when otherwise provided by law or the Charter. The council shall provide for the exercise of its powers and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law or this Charter. 
Section 2.05. - Judge of qualifications. 
    The council shall be the judge of the election qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their offices, and for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence. Those charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of their offices shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand. Notice of such hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city at least one (1) week in advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the council under this section shall be subject to enforcement by the courts in an action of quo warranto. 
Section 2.06. - Procedure. 
(a)  Meetings. 
(1)  The council shall meet regularly at least twice in every month at such times and places as the council may prescribe by resolution. 
(2)  Special meetings shall be called by the clerk on the written request of the mayor or four (4) or more members of the council. Notice of such special meetings with the stated purpose therefor in writing designating the time and place thereof shall be delivered personally to each member or left at his usual place of residence within such time as shall be established by state law but in no event less than twenty-four (24) hours. No action shall be taken at any special meeting unless the same shall have been clearly listed in the purpose of the notice of the special meeting. Notices shall be visibly posted on the front door of the city hall. 
(3)  The public in attendance shall have a right to be heard during council meetings prior to a vote by the council. The council may require each person to identify him or her self by name and address and may prescribe rules for the reasonable exercise of this right. 
(b)  Rules and procedure. The council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall provide for keeping a journal of every meeting of the council. 
(c)  Voting and quorum. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call and the "ayes" and "nays" shall be recorded in the journal. Four (4) members of the council shall constitute a quorum. 
(d)  Publications or proceedings. Within five (5) days after each meeting of the council, the minutes or a synopsis thereof of the proceedings of the city council shall be prepared by the city clerk and approved by the mayor and shall be posted at city hall, and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city prior to the next regular meeting of the council. 
(e)  Conflict of interest. No councilmember shall vote on any question a) involving that member's claimed misconduct; [or] b) where there exists a conflict of interest as provided by state law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for public meetings, MCL 117.3(l), MSA 5.2073(l). 
Section 2.07. - Investigations. 
    The council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
Section 2.08. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding other city employment. Except where authorized by law, no member of council shall be employed by the city or hold any other city office during the term for which he is elected to the council. No former member of the council shall be employed by the city until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected to the council. 
(b)  Appointments and removals. Neither the council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the city superintendent is empowered to appoint. The council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the city superintendent anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(c)  Interference with administration. The council or its members shall not deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city superintendent except through the city superintendent, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee. 
(d)  Powers and duties of city superintendent. The council shall not diminish the duties and/or responsibilities of the office of the city superintendent as prescribed by this Charter, or by the ordinances required for implementation of this Charter. 
Section 2.09. - Vacancies and forfeitures. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of councilmember shall be vacant upon the death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of the office. 
(b)  Forfeiture of office. Forfeiture of the office shall occur if a councilmember: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during the term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by state law; 
(2)  Violates any provision of this Charter; 
(3)  Is convicted of a felony; [or] 
(4)  Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the council without being excused by the council. 
(c)  Filling vacancies. A vacancy in the office of councilmember shall be filled by appointment by majority vote of the council within thirty (30) days of the time the vacancy occurs. The person appointed must possess all of the qualifications required of candidates for that office. The appointment shall be effective until the next regular odd-year election only, at which time a candidate shall be elected for the balance of any unexpired term remaining or for a full new term as the case may require. 
Section 2.10. - Independent audit. 
    The council shall provide for an annual certified audit of all city funds to be made by an independent certified public accountant selected by them who has no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government. The council in its discretion may order such audits at more frequent periods whenever deemed necessary by a vote of five-sevenths ( 5/7 ) of the council. 
ARTICLE 3. - CITY SUPERINTENDENT 

Section 3.01. - Appointment, qualifications and compensation. 
    The council shall appoint a city superintendent for an indefinite term and establish the compensation. The superintendent shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to training and actual experience in municipal administration. The superintendent need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of appointment, but shall be required to become a resident of the city within such period of time established by the city council unless this requirement is specifically waived by them. 
Section 3.02. - Acting city superintendent. 
    The council shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city superintendent during the temporary absence or disability of the city superintendent. 
Section 3.03. - Powers and duties. 
    The city superintendent shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall report to the mayor on administrative detail but shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the administration of all city affairs and administrative policy provided under this Charter or established by ordinance or resolution of the city council. The city superintendent shall: 
(a)  Have all supervisory control over all municipal employees and have such appointive and other authority over city administrative officers as provided by this Charter or ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by laws of the state. The city superintendent may serve as the head of any department when so designated by the city council. 
(c)  Attend all council meetings and shall have the right to participate in council discussion but shall not have any vote. 
(d)  See that all laws, provisions of this Charter and actions of the council subject to enforcement by the city superintendent or by officers subject to his direction and supervision are faithfully executed. 
(e)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the council. 
(f)  Submit to the council and make available to the public a complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(g)  Make such other reports as the council may require concerning the operation of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the city superintendent's direction and supervision. 
(h)  Keep the council fully advised as to the status of the current budget, the overall financial condition and the future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable or necessary. 
(i)  Administer the personnel and employee relation functions of the city and maintain all personnel records of city employees. 
(j)  Administer the purchasing function subject to provisions of this Charter and the procedures therefor established by the city council. 
(k)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required and established by action of the city council. 
Section 3.04. - Removal from office. 
    The council may remove the superintendent from office in accordance with the following procedure: 
(a)  Council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the superintendent from duty for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered to the superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of its adoption. 
(b)  Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is delivered, the superintendent may file with the council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a council meeting not sooner than ten (10) days nor later than twenty-one (21) days after the request is filed. The superintendent shall file with the council a written reply to the charges not later than five (5) days before the hearing. 
(c)  Council may adopt the final resolution of removal which may be made effective immediately by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after five (5) days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered, if the superintendent has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing in the case where one has been requested. The superintendent shall continue to receive salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal or as otherwise required by contract. The action of the council in suspending or removing the superintendent shall not be subject to review by any court or other governmental agency. 
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 4.01. - Administrative departments. 
    The administrative functions of the city shall be assigned to departments of the city attorney, clerk, treasurer, assessor, fire, police, public works, sewer, water, parks and grounds, recreation, and inspection. The city council may by ordinance from time to time create, divide or combine departments whether authorized by this Charter or by ordinance in any manner it deems advisable or necessary for the proper and efficient operation of the city; provided, however, the council may not diminish the duties or responsibilities of the city superintendent by such addition, division or combination. 
Section 4.02. - Appointment of department heads. 
(a)  The city superintendent shall have the power to appoint or remove any administrative department head of the city with the advice and consent of the city council; provided, however, the city attorney shall be appointed or removed by the city council only. 
(b)  The city superintendent shall have the power to appoint and to remove subordinate employees of administrative departments and officers or delegate such power to the head of the particular department or office responsible for the purpose of making such appointments or removals within that department or office. 
(c)  All appointments shall be made solely on the basis of the fitness, training and experience of each candidate for appointment compared to the work expected to be performed. 
Section 4.03. - Duties. 
    All administrative officers and employees of the city shall perform the duties established for such officers or employees either by law, this Charter, the city ordinances or the lawful directives of the city superintendent. 
Section 4.04. - Compensation. 
    Compensation of all administrative officers and employees of the city shall be established and paid in accordance with city council budget appropriations and/or in compliance with the judgments, orders and directives of courts, tribunals and agencies of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 4.05. - City attorney. 
(a)  The legal officer of the city shall be the city attorney who shall be appointed for an indefinite term by the city council. The city attorney shall represent the city in all legal proceedings and shall serve as the legal advisor to the council and city superintendent. He shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the city council or the city superintendent from time to time. 
(b)  The city council may appoint a special attorney whenever it shall appear necessary, or when recommended by the city attorney. 
Section 4.06. - Administrative agent. 
(a)  The city superintendent shall be the administrative agent of the council and shall be vested with all administrative powers of the city except as otherwise provided by this Charter and shall perform the duties of that office under the authority of, and be responsible to, the city council. Unless otherwise provided by Charter or required by law, all administrative officers and employees other than the city attorney shall be responsible to the city superintendent for the performance of their duties. 
(b)  The city superintendent shall supervise the performance of employees of all city boards and commissions in accordance with provisions of the Charter, ordinances establishing, and the directives of such boards and commissions. 
Section 4.07. - Boards and commissions. 
(a)  Boards and commissions may be established for the city by ordinance of the city council. They shall exercise such authority and perform such duties as may be granted to them and shall be subject to the provisions of the ordinance of their creation unless otherwise provided in this Charter or the state law. 
(b)  All members of boards and commissions shall be resident electors appointed by the city council for the prescribed term of office. Such residency requirements may be waived by a majority vote of the city council. Any member of the council, employee of the city or officer of the city may serve on a board or commission; provided, however, that no member of the city council shall serve on the zoning board of appeals. They may be removed from office for cause by the city council who shall be the sole judge of the adequacy of their performances. Such members sought to be removed shall be entitled to a written statement of the charges and to a public hearing based thereon before such removal shall occur. 
(c)  The mayor shall make the appointments with the advice and consent of the council and the council shall attempt to provide for an equal staggering of the terms of office for all members of each board and commission. 
(d)  Each board or commission shall have the authority to organize itself for the conduct of its business including the selection of officers. All rules of procedure shall be adopted after a public hearing. Such rules shall provide for notice in compliance with state law. 
(e)  The city council shall provide annual appropriations for the reasonable and necessary expenses of such boards and commissions to enable them to conduct their business. 
Section 4.08. - Implementation by ordinances. 
    The city council first elected after the effective date of this Charter shall, as soon as possible but not later than one year thereafter, by ordinance, adopt an administrative code which shall contain the specific powers, duties and responsibilities of each administrative department and the voluntary associations directly connected with the city. The administrative code shall also contain a schedule of rights and benefits of city employees. Where such rights or benefits are the subject of and set forth in a labor relations contract which has been negotiated with a collective bargaining unit on behalf of certain city employees, such contract shall control as to the employees in that unit. 
Section 4.09. - Annual reports. 
    All city officers, department heads, boards, commissions and voluntary associations shall at the time for submission of their proposed budget requirements for the coming fiscal year, as provided by Section 6.02, also submit a complete report of their administrative activities for the current fiscal year and the program of activities for the coming fiscal year. 
ARTICLE 5. - LEGISLATION 

Section 5.01. - Legislative power. 
    The legislative power of the city is exclusively vested in the council. All official action of the council shall be by ordinance or resolution, duly adopted by the affirmative vote of four (4) councilmembers. The council shall provide for the public peace, health, safety and the general welfare of persons and property within the city. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Section 5.02. - Introduction of ordinances. 
    Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing. 
Section 5.03. - Identification of ordinances. 
    Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title. The enacting clause of every ordinance shall be "The City of St. Clair ordains." 
Section 5.04. - Time of enactment. 
    At least two (2) weeks shall elapse between the introduction and the enactment of an ordinance. 
Section 5.05. - Changes. 
    No ordinance shall be revised, altered or amended by reference to its title only, but the section or sections of the ordinance revised, altered or amended shall be reenacted and published at length, except where otherwise provided by law. 
Section 5.06. - Repeal. 
    An ordinance which repeals an existing ordinance may state the number, title and a brief description of the ordinance without stating the text of the ordinance being repealed. 
Section 5.07. - Recording. 
    The mayor and city clerk shall authenticate by signature and record all ordinances and resolutions in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose. However, the failure of the mayor and/or city clerk so to do shall not invalidate or suspend the operation of such ordinance or resolution. 
Section 5.08. - Publication. 
    After enactment of any ordinance, or a resolution having the effect of a law, the city clerk shall have it published as soon as possible, but not later than twenty-one (21) days after enactment, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k). 
Section 5.09. - Effective date. 
    The time when any ordinance shall take effect shall be prescribed therein. Such time, when the ordinance imposes a penalty, shall not be less than twenty-one (21) days from the day of its passage. 
Section 5.10. - Emergency ordinances. 
(a)  Emergency power. Emergency ordinances may be enacted to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace; provided, however, an emergency ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, or regulate the rates charged by any public utility for its services. 
(b)  Introduction requirements. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner required for ordinances generally, except that it shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. 
(c)  Adoption and effect of. An emergency ordinance may be adopted at a meeting at which it is introduced and given immediate effect. 
Section 5.11. - Adoption of codes by reference. 
    The council may adopt as an ordinance, by reference thereto without republication in whole or in part, the provisions of: 
(a)  Any Michigan statute; or 
(b)  Any detailed technical rules or regulations promulgated or enacted by: 
(1)  Any state or federal agency; 
(2)  A code of any organization or association which is organized and conducted for the purpose of developing such codes. The code shall be clearly identified in the ordinance which shall be published and shall contain a notice stating its purpose and that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the city clerk where printed copies of the code shall be available for inspection by and distribution to the public at all times. 
Section 5.12. - Codification. 
    All ordinances of the city shall be codified and identified as the St. Clair City Code of Ordinances. Copies [of the Code] shall be furnished to the city officers, placed in libraries and public offices for free public reference, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price fixed by the city council. 
Section 5.13. - Prior city ordinances and official acts. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of St. Clair which are not inconsistent with this Charter, and which are in force and in effect on the effective date of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect until thereafter repealed or amended. 
ARTICLE 6. - FINANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21) et seq. 

Section 6.01. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and end on the thirtieth day of September of the following year. Such year shall constitute the budget year of the city government. 
Section 6.02. - The budget procedure. 
    On or before the first day of March, all city officers and department heads shall submit to the city superintendent an estimate of the expenditure requirements for the next fiscal year of the department or activities under their control. Such estimates shall be submitted on forms and in a manner prescribed by the city superintendent to govern the preparation, submission and the administration of the annual budget. The superintendent shall prepare a complete, itemized, balanced budget document containing the proposal for the next fiscal year, together with a five-year capital program, and shall submit it with a proposed appropriation resolution to the city council on or before the first Monday in May. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h), MSA 5.2073(h). 
Section 6.03. - Budget document. 
    The budget document shall present a complete financial plan for the next fiscal year, a five-year capital program, and shall include information about all the funds of the city except trust and agency funds and special assessment funds. (For budget document purposes, a fund is defined as an independent fiscal and accounting entity with a self-balancing set of accounts.) It shall contain: 
(a)  Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each department and office of the city showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the current and the last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increases and decreases which are recommended, which shall be compared with appropriations for the current year. 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city showing the requirements for debt retirement and interest payments, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any. 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated income of the city from sources other than taxes and borrowing, and a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and the current fiscal year. 
(d)  A statement of the estimated balances or deficits, as the case may be, for the end of the current fiscal year. 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money required to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures and commitments of the city operations during the coming fiscal year. 
(f)  A schedule of capital improvement projects currently in progress, those planned for continuation or completion during the coming budget year, and those planned for continuation, completion or commencement during each of the next four (4) years thereafter. 
(g)  Such other supporting schedules as the city superintendent or the council may deem necessary. 
Section 6.04. - Budget hearing. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption at such time and place as the council shall direct. Such public hearing shall be held in accordance with notice and hearing requirements of state law. 
Section 6.05. - Adoption of the budget. 
    Not later than the fifteenth day of June the council shall, by resolution, adopt a balanced budget for the next fiscal year, shall appropriate from the funds of the city the sums necessary to finance the budget, and shall provide for the levy of an amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes. An appropriation shall be deemed an authorization by the council to make expenditures and to incur obligations for specific purposes set forth therein. An appropriation shall limit the amount which may be spent for such specific purposes, and may specify the period of time during which such amount may be expended. 
Section 6.06. - Budget control and amendments. 
    After the budget and the appropriation resolutions have been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the treasury nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred except pursuant to the terms thereof. The council may amend such budget and resolution at any time so as to authorize: 
(a)  The transfer of any unexpended and unencumbered balance of an appropriation made for a specific purpose; 
(b)  The transfer of appropriations within a department, account or fund; [and/or] 
(c)  The appropriation and allocation of available revenues not included in the annual budget. 
The amending resolution shall be made only upon the concurring vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the council. Any remaining unexpended and unencumbered balances of any appropriated funds at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the general fund of the city. 
Section 6.07. - Emergency appropriations. 
    The council shall have the authority to make emergency appropriations from fund surpluses to meet urgent and immediate needs at any time during the fiscal year. Any resolution of the council authorizing such emergency appropriations shall state the nature of the emergency in detail, the specific purpose for which the appropriation is made, the amount thereof, and the fund surplus from which the appropriation is being made. 
Section 6.08. - Financial reports. 
    The city superintendent shall submit the annual financial report at the end of each fiscal year or at such other times as the council may request within the fiscal year. It shall contain data showing the relation between the estimated and the actual income of the city compared to the expenses incurred or expended to the date of the report. The council shall make adjustments to the budget and the appropriation resolution as may be required to the extent that such financial report requires to keep the budget balanced. 
Section 6.09. - Depository. 
    The city council shall designate the depository or depositories for city funds and shall provide for the regular deposit of all such funds. 
State Law reference- Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12, MSA 3.572; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b, MSA 7.86. 
Section 6.10. - Withdrawal of funds. 
    All funds from the treasury shall be drawn only pursuant to authorization and appropriations of the council and upon checks executed by not less than two (2) officers who shall be designated by the city council. 
Section 6.11. - Purchasing procedure. 
    Competitive bidding for all purchases and public improvements shall be obtained where practicable and contracts awarded to the lowest and/or best bidders. Sealed bids shall be obtained for all transactions involving the expenditure of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more and the transaction shall be evidenced by written contract, purchase order or other suitable instrument, and then submitted to and for action by the city council. Where it appears that it is to the city's advantage to contract or purchase without competitive bidding, and upon receipt of a written recommendation therefor by the city superintendent, the council may, by majority vote, waive the requirements of this section. A purchasing ordinance shall be adopted outlining and detailing specific procedures for city purchasing and for bidding city contracts. 
Section 6.12. - Audit. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all city accounts and funds at least annually and at such other times as deemed necessary by the council. The audit shall be made by a certified public accountant selected by the council to disclose the assets, liabilities, reserves and equity of the funds of the city as of a specific date and shall be prepared in manner and form as required by the uniform municipal accounting laws of the state. 
ARTICLE 7. - TAXATION AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Section 7.01. - Power to tax. 
    The city shall have the power to lay and collect taxes for general municipal purposes. 
Section 7.02. - Limits on. 
    The total annual ad valorem property tax levy shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) per cent (15 mills) of the assessed valuation, as equalized, of all real and personal property in the city. 
Section 7.03. - Subjects of and procedures for [taxation]. 
(a)  The subjects of ad valorem taxation for city purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under the general tax laws of the state. 
(b)  The procedures for the levy, collection and return of all state, county, school and city taxes shall be in conformity with the general law of the state except as otherwise provided herein as to city taxes. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under general law, MCL 117.3(f), MSA 5.2073(f). 
Section 7.04. - Exemptions from [taxation]. 
    No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed except as expressly required or expressly permitted by the general law of the state. 
State Law reference- Property exempt from taxation, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.7 et seq. 
Section 7.05. - Tax day and tax year. 
    The taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the thirty-first day of December, which shall be deemed the tax day for the immediate succeeding calendar year, which shall also be the tax year except where otherwise provided by the general law of the state. 
State Law reference- Designation of tax day, MCL 211.2, MSA 7.2. 
Section 7.06. - Preparation of assessment roll. 
    The assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll for the city in the manner and form provided in the general tax law of the state. 
State Law reference- General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq. 
Section 7.07. - Board of review. 
    A tax board of review shall be appointed by the council annually and shall be composed of five (5) persons who are residents of the city and have the qualifications required by this Charter. At least one (1) member must be licensed by the State of Michigan to engage in real estate transactions and at least one (1) member shall be appointed from each of the three (3) wards. During the term of office, no member of the board of review shall be a city officer, employee or candidate for elected city office. The assessor shall attend all meetings of the board of review upon its request, but shall have no right to vote on any of its decisions. Unless otherwise provided herein, the board of review shall have the same powers and perform the same duties for the purpose of reviewing and correcting the assessment roll as are conferred upon boards of review in townships by the general tax law of the state. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Section 7.08. - Certification for tax levy. 
    Within three (3) days after the council has adopted the budget for the coming fiscal year, the clerk shall certify to the assessor the total amount which the council has determined shall be raised by general ad valorem tax. There shall also be certified all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all other amounts which the city council requires to be assessed, reassessed or charged upon any property or against any person. 
Section 7.09. - Preparation and certification of tax roll. 
    After the board of review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the assessor shall prepare the city tax roll and upon receiving the certifications of the several amounts to be raised by ad valorem taxation, the assessor shall spread the taxes as certified according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in the roll. To avoid fractions in computations the assessor may add such amounts as are permitted by the general tax laws of the state. Such excess created on any tax roll thereby shall belong to the city. After the assessor shall certify the tax roll it shall be delivered to the mayor who shall annex a warrant thereto directing and requiring the treasurer to collect from the persons named in the tax roll, prior to March first of the following year, the several sums set forth therein opposite their respective names as a tax or an assessment. The warrant shall grant for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments and charges on the tax roll, all general state law powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes. The roll shall be delivered on or before the first day of July to the treasurer for collection. 
State Law reference- Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL 211.30a, MSA 7.30(1). 
Section 7.10. - Tax lien. 
    On August first the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed. The amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon such real property for such amounts and for all interest and charges thereon; and all personal taxes shall become a lien on all personal property of such parties so assessed. Such lien shall take precedence over all claims, encumbrances or liens to the extent provided by the general tax laws of the state, and shall continue until such taxes, interest and charges have been paid. 
Section 7.11. - Due date and notice thereof. 
    The treasurer shall give notice of the time when said taxes will be due for collection to the taxpayers of the city by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten (10) days prior to the first day of August in each year, and by first class mail addressed to the owners of the property according to the names and addresses as indicated on the tax roll. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient to require the payment of all taxes assessed and any failure or defect on the part of the treasurer in giving such notice shall not invalidate the taxes as spread on the roll, or release the party or property assessed from any penalty or interest thereafter. 
Section 7.12. - Collection fees. 
    All taxes paid on or before September thirtieth of each year shall be collected by the treasurer without collection fee. Property taxes shall become overdue if they remain unpaid on October first and the treasurer shall add to all taxes paid thereafter a collection fee or fees in the amounts provided by the general tax law of the state. Such collection fees shall belong to the city and shall constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves applied and shall be collectable in the same manner as the taxes to which they were added. 
Section 7.13. - Unpaid personal property taxes. 
    Any personal property taxes remaining unpaid on or after October first may be collected by the treasurer by seizing the personal property against which the taxes were assessed, in an amount sufficient to pay such tax and the fees and charges for the subsequent sale thereof. No property shall be exempt from such seizure. The treasurer may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges in accordance with the procedure established by the general tax law of the state. The treasurer may, in the alternative, collect such unpaid taxes by a civil action against the parties to whom such taxes were assessed and such liability shall be personal. 
State Law reference- Failure or refusal to pay tax, MCL 211.47, MSA 7.91. 
Section 7.14. - Unpaid real property taxes. 
    If the treasurer has been unable to collect any of the city taxes assessed against real property before the first day of March following the date when they come due, it shall be the treasurer's duty to return all such unpaid taxes to the county treasurer in the manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the treasurer and shall include all the additional charges and fees added to the amount assessed. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the county treasurer under the provisions of the general tax law of the state, and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they were assessed until fully paid. 
State Law reference- Return of delinquent taxes, MCL 211.55 et seq., MSA 7.99 et seq. 
Section 7.15. - Protection of the tax lien. 
    The city shall have the power to acquire any premises within the city at any tax or other public sale, or by direct purchase from the state or the owner thereof, when such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of the city for taxes or assessments against said premises. The city may hold, lease or sell such property solely for the purpose of securing therefrom the amount of such taxes or special assessments together with any expenses incurred in connection with the exercise of this power. This power, when exercised by the city in the protection of its tax lien, shall be deemed to be in the public interest and for a public purpose. 
Section 7.16. - Additional powers [established by state law]. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or ordinance, the powers, rights and duties, immunities and procedures established by the general tax law of the state shall apply in the collection and enforcement of city property taxes. 
Section 7.17. - Special assessment powers [of council]. 
    The city council shall have power after public hearing to determine and declare by resolution that the whole or any part of the expense of a public improvement, repair or abatement of nuisance shall be defrayed by special assessments against the property specially benefited thereby. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for assessing costs of improvements, MCL 117.4d, MSA 5.2077. 
Section 7.18. - Procedures for [special assessments]. 
    The complete special assessment procedure to be used in the making of improvements, repairs or abatement of nuisances by the special assessment method shall be established by ordinance. 
Section 7.19. - Lien for [unpaid special assessment]. 
    From and after the date of confirmation of any tax roll levying any special assessment, the city shall possess a lien on the premises subject thereto for the full amount of the unpaid special assessment and the interest on all unpaid installments thereof, and such amount shall also be a debt of the party to whom assessed until paid; and, in the case of delinquency, may be enforced as delinquent city property taxes or by a civil action for recovery against the party assessed. 
ARTICLE 8. - BORROWING POWER 

Section 8.01. - Powers and limitations on [borrowing]. 
    Limited only by the general law of the state, the city may borrow money for any purpose within the scope of its powers and for any other purpose authorized by law and may pledge its full faith and credit for the repayment thereof. 
Section 8.02. - Evidence of obligation and execution. 
    The city may issue bonds, or any other evidence of indebtedness recognized by law as security for the repayment of money borrowed, which shall be obligations of the city. They shall be executed by and bear the signature of the mayor and city clerk and the seal of the city except where otherwise provided by law. Interest coupons on bonds may be executed with facsimile signatures of the executing officials. 
State Law reference- Authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1), MSA 5.2074(1). 
Section 8.03. - Limitation on authorization. 
    Any authorization for the borrowing of money shall be void if the loan shall not have been consummated within three (3) years thereafter. 
Section 8.04. - Purpose and use of proceeds. 
    Each obligation shall contain a statement of the purpose for which it is issued and the proceeds therefrom shall be limited to the purpose so stated. Any remaining proceeds after the purpose has been fulfilled shall be used to prepay the balance owing on the loan in retirement of the obligation. 
Section 8.05. - Validation of prior obligations. 
    All bonds and other obligations heretofore issued and incurred are hereby validated. 
ARTICLE 9. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Section 9.01. - Electors, qualifications and registration. 
    All residents of the city having the qualifications of electors under the general law of the state shall be electors therein. The registration of electors for the purpose of voting in city elections shall be conducted in the manner provided by the general law of the state. 
State Law reference- Qualifications for registration as elector, MCL 168.492, MSA 6.1492. 
Section 9.02. - Election districts. 
    The number of election districts shall be controlled by section 2.01 of this Charter. Each election district shall be divided into as many precincts as shall be mandated by the general law of the state. 
State Law reference- Election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq., MSA 6.1654 et seq. 
Section 9.03. - Elections. 
(a)  Manner conducted. All elections held in the city shall be conducted in the manner provided by the general law of the state for nonpartisan elections or as provided in this Charter. The electors shall vote by ballot for all officers and questions and propositions that may be submitted to them in the manner and form as authorized by the general law of the state or this Charter. 
(b)  General. The general election for all city officers required to be elected shall be held in each odd-numbered year on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November unless otherwise provided by the general law of the state. 
(c)  Primary. The primary election for the nomination of nonpartisan candidates for elective city office shall be held when required in each odd-numbered year on Tuesday following the first Monday in September unless otherwise provided by the general law of the state. 
(d)  Special. Special elections may be called by resolution of the city council to be held at such times and places as the council may designate. The purpose and objectives of such special election shall be fully set forth in the resolution. 
(e)  Ballots. Ballots shall be prepared by the city clerk in accordance with the requirements of the general law of the state for nonpartisan elections. 
(f)  Voting. Voting may be by paper ballot or by mechanical device or any other means authorized by the council not inconsistent with the general election law of the state. 
(Res. No. 03-13, 8-18-2003, referendum 11-4-2003) 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et seq.; mandatory that Charter provide for time, manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c), MSA 5.2073(c). 
Section 9.04. - Election commission. 
    There shall be an election commission consisting of the city attorney, city clerk and city superintendent, any two (2) of which shall have power to act. They shall select their own chairperson and rules of procedure. They shall decide all disputed or uncertain questions of procedure relating to elections except those relating to the procedures or internal affairs of a political party. 
Section 9.05. - Candidates. 
(a)  Nomination. 
(1)  Petition requirements. Nominating petitions for elective offices to be filled at the odd-year general election shall be filed with the office of the city clerk by 4:00 p.m. on the seventh Tuesday prior to the odd-year primary election. The form of nominating petitions shall be substantially as that designated by the Michigan Election Law for the nomination of nonpartisan judicial officers except they shall be signed by not less than fifteen (15) registered electors of the city. 
Editor's note- The Charter language pertaining to filing nominating petitions for the regular city election is superseded by Michigan election law MCL 168.646a(1) as amended under PA 276 of 2012. The candidate nomination petition filing deadline is 4:00 p.m., 15th Tuesday prior to even-year November election. 
(2)  Petition certification. The city clerk's office shall accept only nomination petitions which qualify pursuant to section 9.05(a)(1), and endorse thereon the time and date of filing. Within three (3) days after the deadline for filing, the clerk's office shall declare the validity and sufficiency of each petition and forthwith notify the candidate and certify the names of all qualifying candidates for submission to the electorate at the primary election. 
(3)  Who and when nominated. If upon the expiration of the time for filing nominating petitions for any elective city office, valid petitions have been filed for no more than twice the number of candidates for such office to be elected at the following regular city election, then no primary election shall be held with respect to such office. 
    If a primary election is required, candidates equal in number to twice the number of persons to be elected to each office at the next subsequent regular city election, who receive the highest number of votes at any such primary election shall be declared the nominees for the election to the respective offices for which they are candidates. The names of such candidates, together with the names of candidates who filed valid nominating petitions for any office for which no primary was held, shall be certified by the clerk to the election commission and the county clerk as nominees for the next subsequent regular city election. 
(b)  Canvass of votes cast. Following each election, the ballots shall be counted in the manner provided by the general election law of the state and the successful candidates shall be declared and certified. 
(Res. No. 03-13, 8-18-2003, referendum 11-4-2003) 
ARTICLE 10. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 

Section 10.01. - Initiative and referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition at any time, or a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the council may be had by a petition filed within thirty (30) days of enactment, as hereinafter provided. 
Section 10.02. - Petitions. 
    An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less than fifteen (15) per cent of the registered electors of the city who shall have signed the petition within ninety (90) days before the date of filing the petition with the clerk. An initiatory petition shall set forth the ordinance in full or have a copy attached to it that it proposes to initiate and shall not propose to initiate more than one ordinance. The petition need not be on one piece of paper but may be the aggregate of two (2) or more petition papers. All signatories on a petition shall execute it indelibly and shall place thereon after their names, the date and places of residence by street and number or by other customary designation. To each petition there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator stating the number of signatories thereto and that each signature of the person whose name it purports to be was made in the presence of the circulator. 
Section 10.03. - Filing and sufficiency. 
    All petitions shall be filed with the clerk who shall, within ten (10) days, canvass the signatures thereon to determine their sufficiency. If found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the city, or to be improper as to form or compliance with the provisions of this section, the clerk shall forthwith notify the person filing such petitions who shall have ten (10) days from such notification thereafter for the filing of supplemental petition papers to cure their insufficiency. When petitions are found to be sufficient and proper, the clerk shall present the petitions to the council at its next regular meeting. 
Section 10.04. - Council procedure. 
    Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the clerk, the council shall, within thirty (30) days, either: 
(a)  If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted with the petition without change in substance, or determine to submit the proposed ordinance to the electors of the city; 
(b)  If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the petition refers or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the city. 
Section 10.05. - Ordinance suspended. 
    Certification by the clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending either repeal by the council, or final determination by the electors, as the case may be. 
Section 10.06. - Submission to the electors. 
    Should the council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any other purpose except any school election, or at the discretion of the council, at a special election. The results shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by the general law of the state. 
Section 10.07. - Limitation on amendment or repeal. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed except by further initiatory or referendary proceedings for a period of two (2) years after its original adoption. 
Section 10.08. - Limitation on adoption. 
    An ordinance containing the same provision as that rejected by the electorate through initiatory or referendary proceedings cannot be adopted for a period of two (2) years from the date of the election rejecting the provision. 
Section 10.09. - Conflicting provisions. 
    Should two (2) or more ordinances having conflicting provisions be adopted at the same election, the one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
ARTICLE 11. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 11.01. - Surety bonds and indemnification. 
    The city shall provide, at its expense, bonds for personnel required to be bonded in such surety and in such amounts as the council may require by ordinance. The city may provide for the indemnification of councilmembers, appointees and employees for liability arising out of the performance of their official duties. 
Section 11.02. - City records and meetings. 
    All meetings or sessions of the city council shall be public, except where otherwise provided by the general law of the state, and there shall be maintained a written or printed journal in the English language of every session or meeting of the council. Such journal shall be kept in the city offices except when required for official reasons or for the purpose of safekeeping to be kept elsewhere, and this journal shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. The council shall keep and maintain a system of records and accounts which shall conform to such uniform system as may be required by law. All records and accounts of the city shall be public. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for keeping in the English language a written or printed journal of every session of the legislative body, MCL 117.3(m), MSA 5.2073(m); freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq. 
Section 11.03. - Amendments to or revision of the Charter. 
    The Charter may be amended or revised in any manner authorized by the general law of the state whenever initiated by petition of the electors or initiated by resolution adopted by a three-fifths ( 3/5 ) vote of the council elect. In the event there are two (2) or more amendments adopted at the same election which have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest number of affirmative votes shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 11.04. - Sale or lease of real property. 
    Any agreement for the sale, the exchange, or the lease for three (3) years or more of real property, shall not be valid unless approved by the affirmative vote of five (5) members of the council; provided, however, such approval shall be subject to the approval of the electors voting thereon in the case of a sale of a park or a cemetery or any part thereof. 
Section 11.05. - Restriction on contracts or appointments. 
    No contract shall be awarded or an appointment to an official position made to anyone who is in default to the city. A default for the purpose of this section is defined as the willful failure to perform a legal obligation due the city which is not excused by law. 
Section 11.06. - Severability. 
    This Charter and each article, section, subsection, paragraph, part, provision, sentence, word and portion thereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if they or any of them are found to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this Charter shall not be affected thereby. 
Section 11.07. - Penalty for violation. 
    Violations of this Charter shall be deemed misdemeanors and persons convicted thereof punishable by five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine or ninety (90) days' imprisonment, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
ARTICLE 12. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISION 

Section 12.01. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this transition article is to inaugurate the revision government of the City of St. Clair under this Charter and to provide for a continuity and transition from the prior Charter to this Charter. 
Section 12.02. - Submission to electors. 
(a)  Election. This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electors of the City of St. Clair at an election to be held on August 7, 1979. This Charter shall be adopted when approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. The city clerk shall give and publish notice of such election as required by law. 
(b)  Publication. This Charter shall be published in its entirety with or without commentary by the revision commission in the St. Clair County Independent Press, a newspaper published and circulated in the City of St. Clair, at least two (2) weeks before but not more than four (4) weeks before the date of the election at which it is submitted for approval. 
(c)  Form of ballot. The form of ballot for submission of this revised Charter for approval shall be: 
    "Shall the revised Charter drafted by the Charter Revision Commission elected November 8, 1977 be adopted?" 
? YES 
? NO  
Section 12.03. - Effective date. 
    This Charter, if adopted, shall take effect and become the basic law of the City of St. Clair for all purposes, at twelve o'clock, noon, January 1, 1980, after which date the incumbent city council shall continue to function under this Charter until a city council is elected under this Charter. 
Section 12.04. - Existing legislation and obligations. 
(a)  All ordinances and resolutions of the City of St. Clair, and all orders, rules and regulations made by any official or agency of the city, not inconsistent with this Charter, shall remain in effect until changed by action taken under this Charter. 
(b)  The city shall be vested with all property, monies, credits, contracts, records, files, books and papers belonging to it under its previous Charter. No right or liability, contract, lease or franchise, either in favor of or against the city, and no suit or prosecution of any character, shall be affected in any manner by any change resulting from the adoption of this Charter. All debts and liabilities of the city shall continue to be its debts and liabilities, and all debts owing to it and fines, penalties, interest or fees, imposed and existing at the time of such change, shall be collected by the city. Until the new city council and city superintendent herein authorized have exercised their powers with respect thereto, all appointed officials and employees of the city shall continue to have the same duties, rights, powers and compensation as existed prior to the effective date of this Charter. 
Section 12.05. - Supplemental transition legislation. 
    In all cases involving the transition of the city government under the previous Charter to this Charter, which are not covered by this article, the city council shall make necessary provisions therefor by resolution or ordinance as may be required therefor. 
Section 12.06. - Officers and employees. 
(a)  Rights and privileges preserved. Nothing in this Charter, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are city officers, appointees, or employees at the time of its adoption. 
(b)  Continuation of office or employment. All city officers, appointees and employees will continue in their respective positions until such positions are thereafter altered, vacated or eliminated pursuant to the powers conferred by this Charter, except the offices of constable and ward supervisor, which offices are hereby abolished. 
Section 12.07. - Transfer of power. 
    If a city department, office, board or commission is eliminated by this Charter, the powers and duties given it by law shall be transferred to the city department, office, board or commission designated in this Charter, or if the Charter makes no provision therefor, then [to that department, office, board or commission] designated by the city council. 
Section 12.08. - Mandatory legislation. 
    Wherever by this Charter an action by ordinance of the city council is required to enable the exercise of any power or function of city government, such ordinance shall be enacted and in effect within the period provided in section 4.08. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance/ 
Resolution 
Number Date Referendum 
Date Section  Section 
this Charter  8- 7-79 1.01-12.08 1.01-12.08 03-13(Res.)  8-18-2003 11- 4-2003 9.03 9.05  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "St. Clair City Code of Ordinances." 
Charter reference- Authority to codify,  5.12. 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" means the Home Rule Charter of the City of St. Clair, Michigan, and includes any amendment to such Charter. 
    City. The word "city" means the City of St. Clair, Michigan. 
    City council. The words "city council" or "council" mean the city council of the City of St. Clair, Michigan. 
    City superintendent. The words "city superintendent" mean the city superintendent of the City of St. Clair, Michigan, or his designee. 
    Code. The words "Code" or "this Code" mean the St. Clair City Code of Ordinances, as designated in section 1-1, and as modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded. When the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
    County. The words "the county" mean the County of St. Clair in the State of Michigan. 
    Gender. A word importing gender shall extend and be applied to both genders and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well. 
    Health officer or health department. The words "health officer" or "health department" mean the county health officer or the county health department. 
    MCL, MSA. The abbreviations "MCL" and "MSA" mean respectively the Michigan Compiled Laws and Michigan Statutes Annotated, as amended. 
    Municipal civil infraction. The words "municipal civil infraction" mean an act or omission that is prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under this Code or other ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as authorized by Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of St. Clair, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency shall mean and include such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency or deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Person. The word "person" and its derivatives and the word "whoever" shall include a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" or "whoever" as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Shall, may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" mean the State of Michigan. 
    Tense. Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption of this Code but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any act, event or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement or prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08,  1, 9-7-99) 
State Law reference- Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq., MSA 2.212 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
Sec. 1-4. - Captions. 
    Headings and captions used in this Code following the chapter, article, division and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-5. - References and notes. 
    Charter references, cross references, state law references and editor's notes in this Code are explanatory only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-6. - Application to future legislation. 
    All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 1-7. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section of this Code, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
Sec. 1-8. - Reference to offices. 
    Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code, when not inconsistent with this Code, shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money; 
(2)  Establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons; 
(3)  Prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets; 
(4)  Pertaining to zoning; 
(5)  Which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. No offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code shall be affected. 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability. 
(a)  It is the legislative intent of the city council in adopting this Code that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. If any provision or section of this Code is held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalties and sanctions for violations of Code and city ordinances; continuing violations; injunctive relief. 
(a)  Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city is specifically designated in the Code of Ordinances as a municipal civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding $500.00 (plus cost of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation by this Code or any ordinance. 
(c)  The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, and other applicable laws. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)  Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision (1) committed by a person within any 18-month period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance), and (2) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00, plus costs. 
b.  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. 
(d)  A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any ordinance. 
(e)  Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(f)  In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this Code or any city ordinance. 
(g)  No person or business shall engage in any activity that is in violation of any local, state, or federal statute, law, ordinance or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08,  1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2010-04,  1, 5-17-10) 
Charter reference- Limitation on penalties,  11.07. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i. 
Sec. 1-13. - Open meetings. 
    The city council shall comply with the requirements of the Open Meetings Act, Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq., as amended. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 18; cemeteries, ch. 22; law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses, ch. 38; special assessments, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; subdivisions, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; parking violations bureau,  58-41 et seq.; utilities, ch. 62; waterways, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-26-2-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY SUPERINTENDENT 

Sec. 2-36. - Appointment; qualifications; residency. 
    The mayor with the advice and consent of the city council shall appoint a city superintendent for an indefinite term and establish by resolution the compensation for such superintendent. The superintendent shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to training and actual experience in municipal administration. The superintendent need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of appointment, but shall be required to become a resident of the city within such period of time established by the city council unless this requirement is specifically waived by the council. 
(Code 1975,  1-80) 
Sec. 2-37. - Powers and duties. 
    The city superintendent shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall report to the mayor on administrative detail but shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the administration of all city affairs and administrative policy provided under this division or resolution of the city council. The city superintendent shall: 
(1)  Have all supervisory control over all municipal employees and have such appointive and other authority over city administrative officers as provided by this division or resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city except as otherwise provided by the laws of the state. The city superintendent may serve as the head of any department when so designated by the city council. 
(3)  Attend all council meetings and shall have the right to participate in council discussion but shall not have any vote. 
(4)  See that all laws, ordinances and actions of the council subject to enforcement by the city superintendent or by officers subject to his direction and supervision are faithfully executed. 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the council. 
(6)  Submit to the council and make available to the public a complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(7)  Make such other reports as the council may require concerning the operation of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the city superintendent's direction and supervision. 
(8)  Keep the council fully advised as to the status of the current budget, the overall financial condition and the future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable or necessary. 
(9)  Administer the personnel and employee relation functions of the city and maintain all personnel records of city employees. 
(10)  Administer the purchasing function subject to the procedures therefor established by the city council. 
(11)  Perform such other duties as are specified by ordinance or may be required and established by action of the city council. 
(Code 1975,  1-81) 
Sec. 2-38. - Appointment of acting city superintendent. 
    The council shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city superintendent during the temporary absence or disability of the city superintendent. 
(Code 1975,  1-82) 
Sec. 2-39. - Removal by city council. 
    The council may remove the superintendent from office in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the superintendent from duty for a period not to exceed 30 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered to the superintendent within 24 hours of its adoption. 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered, the superintendent may file with the council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a council meeting not sooner than ten days nor later than 21 days after the request is filed. The superintendent shall file with the council a written reply to the charges not later than five days before the hearing. 
(3)  The council may adopt the final resolution of removal which may be made effective immediately by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered, if the superintendent has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing in the case where one has been requested. The superintendent shall continue to receive salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal or as otherwise required by contract. The action of the council in suspending or removing the superintendent shall not be subject to review by any court or other governmental agency. 
(Code 1975,  1-83) 
Secs. 2-40-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES 

Sec. 2-51. - Established. 
    Pursuant to section 4.01 of the Charter, a department of public services is hereby created. 
(Code 1975,  1-111) 
Sec. 2-52. - Supervision. 
    The supervision of the department of public services shall be vested in a department head, who shall be responsible to the city superintendent and who shall be appointed pursuant to section 4.02 of the Charter. 
(Code 1975,  1-114) 
Secs. 2-53-2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-76-2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORICAL COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-86. - Creation. 
    The city hereby creates and establishes, pursuant to section 4.07 of the Charter, the historical commission of the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-30) 
Sec. 2-87. - Purpose. 
    The purpose for which the historical commission is created and established is to collect and preserve items having historical significance to the city and to establish, operate, maintain and manage a museum in connection therewith. 
(Code 1975,  6-31) 
Sec. 2-88. - Powers and authority conferred. 
    The historical commission shall have the power and authority to perform the acts enumerated in this section, together with such other powers as are necessarily incident thereto, including the following: 
(1)  Management, control and direction of the operations, personnel, buildings, grounds, facilities, historical items, articles or artifacts, equipment and fees; 
(2)  Budget preparation and control; 
(3)  Improvement and expansion of the areas described in subsection (1) of this section; 
(4)  Preparation and maintenance of records and reports; and 
(5)  Such other duties and responsibilities as determined necessary from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1975,  6-32) 
Sec. 2-89. - Rules of procedure; bylaws required. 
    Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the parliamentary procedure of the historical commission except in the event a state statute expressly requires a different procedure. The commission shall develop a complete set of bylaws governing the internal affairs and operations of the commission, which bylaws shall not be effective until approved by the city council, who may also, at any time, revoke, modify or amend any such bylaw. 
(Code 1975,  6-33) 
Sec. 2-90. - Requirements of bylaws. 
    The bylaws of the historical commission shall, at a minimum, provide for the following: 
(1)  The procedure for calling special and regular meetings, which procedure shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(2)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, giving notices of commission meetings, which complies with applicable state statutes. 
(3)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, preparing and maintaining a record of official proceedings of the commission, which shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(4)  An enumeration and designation of the officers of the commission together with the terms of office, powers, duties and procedure for election thereof. 
(5)  A procedure for the appointment of advisory committees to serve such purposes as the commission deems necessary. 
(6)  An enumeration of the members of the commission, together with the terms of office, which shall be staggered in accordance with the Charter or in accordance with state law where provided. 
(7)  The conditions for eligibility of nonvoting members of the commission, if there are any. 
(8)  A registered address at which the commission will receive mail and other official communications. 
(9)  A fiscal year, if different from the city's. 
(10)  Such other matters as may be deemed to be advisable by the city council or the commission to be set forth in the bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-34) 
Sec. 2-91. - Membership. 
(a)  Qualifications and eligibility. All members of the historical commission shall be resident electors for their prescribed terms of office. Such residency requirement may be waived as provided in the Charter. Any member of the council, employee of the city or officer thereof may serve on the commission. 
(b)  Removal. Members of the commission may be removed by the city council, for cause, as provided in the Charter. 
(c)  Appointment. The mayor with the advice and consent of the city council, or the council acting on its own motion, may appoint members to staggered terms of office of the commission as provided by the bylaws thereof. 
(d)  Compensation. No member of the historical commission shall receive compensation as such, but the city council may authorize payment of reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by any such member in the performance of authorized business of the historical commission. 
(Code 1975,  6-35-6-37) 
Sec. 2-92. - Budgets and reports. 
    The historical commission shall prepare and submit a proposed budget to the city council as required by the Charter. The commission shall also prepare and file any reports, at such time and in such form as may be required by the city council, the Charter or state statute. 
(Code 1975,  6-38) 
Sec. 2-93. - Public hearing; decisions. 
    If the historical commission holds any public hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of any applicable state statute. Decisions shall be made in accordance with principles of due process of law, and the reasons or facts relied upon in making the decision shall be set forth in the record of the proceeding. 
(Code 1975,  6-39) 
Secs. 2-94-2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-106. - Created. 
    The city hereby creates and establishes, pursuant to section 4.07 of the Charter, the beautification commission of the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-46) 
Sec. 2-107. - Purpose. 
    The purpose for which the beautification commission is created and established is to aid the city administration in beautifying the city and of fostering citizen pride in their city. 
(Code 1975,  6-47) 
Sec. 2-108. - Powers and authority conferred. 
    The beautification commission shall have the power and authority to perform the acts enumerated in this section, together with such other powers as are necessarily incident thereto, including the following: 
(1)  Developing and landscaping city property; 
(2)  Recommending beautification programs for city buildings, streets, sidewalks, and other city property; 
(3)  City street tree plantings; 
(4)  Initiating and administering an awards program for those citizens and businesses who show exceptional use of landscaping in their homes and businesses, including continuation of a suggestion box; 
(5)  Urging residents to use the city flower (marigold) and the city tree (flowering crab apple) in their landscaping plans; 
(6)  Annual celebration of Arbor Day; and 
(7)  Community vegetable gardens. 
(Code 1975,  6-48) 
Sec. 2-109. - Rules of procedure; bylaws required. 
    Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the parliamentary procedure of the beautification commission, except in the event a state statute expressly requires a different procedure. The beautification commission shall develop a complete set of bylaws governing the internal affairs and operations of the beautification commission, which bylaws shall not be effective until approved by the city council, who may also, at any time, revoke, modify or amend any such bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-49) 
Sec. 2-110. - Requirements of bylaws. 
    The bylaws of the beautification commission shall, at a minimum, provide for the following: 
(1)  The procedure for calling special and regular meetings, which procedure shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(2)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, giving notices of commission meetings, which complies with applicable state statutes. 
(3)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, preparing and maintaining a record of official proceedings of the beautification commission, which shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(4)  An enumeration and designation of the officers of the beautification commission, together with the terms of office, powers, duties and procedure for election thereof. 
(5)  A procedure for the appointment of advisory committees, to serve such purposes as the beautification commission deems necessary. 
(6)  An enumeration of the members of the beautification commission together with the terms of office, which shall be staggered in accordance with the Charter or in accordance with state law where provided. 
(7)  The conditions for eligibility of nonvoting members of the beautification commission, if there are any. 
(8)  A registered address at which the beautification commission will receive mail and other official communications. 
(9)  A fiscal year, if different from the city's. 
(10)  Such other matters as may be deemed to be advisable by the city council or the beautification commission to be set forth in the bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-50) 
Sec. 2-111. - Membership. 
(a)  Qualifications and eligibility. All members of the beautification commission shall be resident electors for their prescribed terms of office. Such residency requirement may be waived as provided in the Charter. Any member of the council, employee of the city or officer thereof may serve on the beautification commission. 
(b)  Removal. Members of the beautification commission may be removed by the city council, for cause, as provided in the Charter. 
(c)  Appointment. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, or the council acting on its own motion, may appoint members to staggered terms of office of the beautification commission, as provided by the bylaws thereof. 
(d)  Compensation. No member of the beautification commission shall receive compensation as such, but the city council may authorize payment of reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by any such member in the performance of authorized business of the beautification commission. 
(Code 1975,  6-51-6-53) 
Sec. 2-112. - Budgets and reports. 
    The beautification commission shall prepare and submit a proposed budget to the city council as required by the Charter. The beautification commission shall also prepare and file any reports, at such time and in the form required by the city council, the Charter, or state statute. 
(Code 1975,  6-54) 
Sec. 2-113. - Public hearing; decisions. 
    In the event the beautification commission holds any public hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of any applicable state statute. Decisions shall be made in accordance with principles of due process of law, and the reasons and facts relied upon in making the decision shall be set forth in the record of the proceeding. 
(Code 1975,  6-55) 
Secs. 2-114-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-126. - Creation. 
    The city hereby creates and establishes, pursuant to section 4.07 of the Charter, the parks and recreation commission of the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-62; Ord. No. 2008-01,  1, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 2-127. - Purpose. 
    The purpose for which the parks and recreation commission is created and established is to advise the recreation director and city superintendent in any matters pertaining to the parks and recreation programs and facilities in the city, and to advise as to the use of any properties owned or controlled by the city or as to any other properties, with consent of the owner or authorities who control such properties. 
(Code 1975,  6-63; Ord. No. 2008-01,  1, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 2-128. - Powers and authority conferred. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall have the power and authority to perform the acts enumerated in this section, together with such other powers as are necessarily incident thereto, including the following: 
(1)  Power to solicit or receive gifts and requests of money or any other property or donations from the general public for the furtherance of its objectives. 
(2)  Authority to expend money for the payment of services rendered by the recreation director and to purchase supplies and equipment necessary for the furtherance of programs. 
(Code 1975,  6-64; Ord. No. 2008-01,  1, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 2-129. - Rules of procedure; bylaws required. 
    Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the parliamentary procedure of the parks and recreation commission except in the event a state statute expressly requires a different procedure. The parks and recreation commission shall develop a complete set of bylaws governing the internal affairs and operations of the parks and recreation commission, which bylaws shall not be effective until approved by the city council, which may also, at any time, revoke, modify or amend any such bylaw. 
(Code 1975,  6-65; Ord. No. 2008-01,  1, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 2-130. - Requirements of bylaws. 
    The bylaws of the parks and recreation commission shall, at a minimum, provide for the following: 
(1)  The procedure for calling special and regular meetings, which procedure shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(2)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, giving notice of commission meetings, which complies with applicable state statutes. 
(3)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, preparing and maintaining a record of official proceedings of the parks and recreation commission, which shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(4)  An enumeration and designation of the officers of the parks and recreation commission together with the terms of office, powers, duties and procedure for election thereof. 
(5)  A procedure for the appointment of advisory committees to serve such purposes as the parks and recreation commission deems necessary. 
(6)  An enumeration of the members of the parks and recreation commission together with the terms of office, which shall be staggered in accordance with the Charter or in accordance with state law where provided. 
(7)  The conditions for eligibility of nonvoting members of the parks and recreation commission if there are any. 
(8)  A registered address at which the parks and recreation commission will receive mail and other official communications. 
(9)  A fiscal year, if different from the city's. 
(10)  Such other matters as may be deemed to be advisable by the city council or the parks and recreation commission to be set forth in the bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-66; Ord. No. 2008-01,  1, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 2-131. - Membership. 
(a)  Qualifications and eligibility. All members of the parks and recreation commission shall be resident electors for their prescribed terms of office. The residency requirement may be waived as provided in the Charter. Any member of the council, employee of the city or officer thereof may serve on the parks and recreation commission. 
(b)  Removal. Members of the parks and recreation commission may be removed by the city council, for cause, as provided in the Charter. 
(c)  Appointment. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, or the council acting on its own motion, may appoint members to staggered terms of office of the parks and recreation commission, as provided by the bylaws thereof. 
(d)  Compensation. No member of the parks and recreation commission shall receive compensation as such, but the city council may authorize payment of reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by any such member in the performance of authorized business of the parks and recreation commission. 
(Code 1975,  6-67-6-69; Ord. No. 2008-01,  1, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 2-132. - Budgets and reports. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall prepare and submit a proposed budget to the city council as required by the Charter. The parks and recreation commission shall also prepare and file any reports at such time and in the form required by the city council, the Charter or state statute. 
(Code 1975,  6-70; Ord. No. 2008-01,  1, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 2-133. - Public hearing; decisions. 
    If the parks and recreation commission holds any public hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of any applicable state statute. Decisions shall be made in accordance with principles of due process of law, and the reasons and facts relied upon in making the decision shall be set forth in the record of the proceedings. 
(Code 1975,  6-71; Ord. No. 2008-01,  1, 3-3-08) 
Secs. 2-134-2-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PINE SHORES GOLF COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-146. - Creation. 
    The city hereby creates and establishes, pursuant to section 4.07 of the Charter, the Pine Shores golf commission. 
(Code 1975,  6-78) 
Sec. 2-147. - Purpose. 
    The purpose for which the golf commission is created and established is to plan, organize and direct all managerial and operational functions necessary for the successful operation of Pine Shores Golf Club in the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-79) 
Sec. 2-148. - Powers and authority conferred. 
    The Pine Shores golf commission shall have the power and authority to perform the acts enumerated in this section, together with such other powers as are necessarily incident thereto, including acts directly or indirectly related to but not limited to the following: operations, buildings, grounds, facilities, equipment, fees, budgets, improvements, expansion, records, reports and such other responsibilities and duties as determined necessary from time to time by the city council, relative to the commission's purposes, excepting employment and/or personnel matters which, by way of example and not limitation, include recruitment, appointments and probation periods, compensation, demotions, suspensions, dismissals and layoffs. 
(Code 1975,  6-80) 
Sec. 2-149. - Rules of procedure; bylaws required. 
    Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the parliamentary procedure of the commission except in the event a state statute expressly requires a different procedure. The commission shall develop a complete set of bylaws governing the internal affairs and operations of the Pine Shores golf commission, which bylaws shall not be effective until approved by the city council, which may also, at any time, revoke, modify or amend any such bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-81) 
Sec. 2-150. - Requirements of bylaws. 
    The bylaws of the Pine Shores golf commission shall, at a minimum, provide for the following: 
(1)  The procedure for calling special and regular meetings, which procedure shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(2)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, giving notices of commission meetings, which comply with applicable state statutes. 
(3)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, preparing and maintaining a record of official proceedings of the Pine Shores golf commission, which shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(4)  An enumeration and designation of the officers of the commission together with the terms of office, powers, duties and procedure for election thereof. 
(5)  A procedure for the appointment of advisory committees to serve such purposes as the commission deems necessary. 
(6)  An enumeration of the members of the commission together with the terms of office, which shall be staggered in accordance with the Charter or in accordance with state law where provided. 
(7)  The conditions for eligibility of nonvoting members of the commission, if there are any. 
(8)  A registered address at which the Pine Shores golf commission will receive mail and other official communications. 
(9)  A fiscal year, if different from the city's. 
(10)  Such other matters as may be deemed to be advisable by the city council or the commission to be set forth in the bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-82) 
Sec. 2-151. - Membership. 
(a)  Qualifications and eligibility. All members of the Pine Shores golf commission shall be resident electors for the prescribed term of office. The residency requirement may be waived as provided in the Charter. Any member of the council, employee of the city or officer thereof may serve on the commission. 
(b)  Removal. Members of the Pine Shores golf commission may be removed by the city council, for cause, as provided in the Charter. 
(c)  Appointment. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, or the council acting on its own motion, may appoint members to staggered terms of office of the Pine Shores golf commission, as provided by the bylaws thereof. 
(d)  Compensation. No member of the Pine Shores golf commission shall receive compensation as such, but the city council may authorize payment of reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by any such member in the performance of authorized business of the Pine Shores golf commission. 
(Code 1975,  6-83-6-85) 
Sec. 2-152. - Budgets and reports. 
    The Pine Shores golf commission shall prepare and submit a proposed budget to the city council as required by the Charter. The commission shall also prepare and file any reports at such time and in the form required by the city council, the Charter or state statute. 
(Code 1975,  6-86) 
Sec. 2-153. - Public hearing; decisions. 
    If the Pine Shores golf commission holds any public hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of any applicable state statute. Decisions shall be made in accordance with principles of due process of law, and the reasons and facts relied upon in making the decision shall be set forth in the record of the proceeding. 
(Code 1975,  6-87) 
Secs. 2-154-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - HARBOR COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-166. - Creation. 
    The city hereby creates and establishes, pursuant to section 4.07 of the Charter, the harbor commission of the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-94) 
Sec. 2-167. - Purpose. 
    The purpose for which the harbor commission is created and established is to administer, maintain and operate a marina facility in and for the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-95) 
Sec. 2-168. - Powers and authority conferred. 
    The harbor commission shall have the power and authority to perform the acts enumerated in this section, together with such other powers as are necessarily incident thereto, including the following: 
(1)  Maintain, operate and administer a marina facility in the city and determine the type and level of services thereof; 
(2)  Promulgate necessary regulations for the use and operation of the marina and the services provided therein, and the leasing of boat wells and sites; 
Excepting, however, employment and/or personnel matters which, by way of example and not limitation, include recruitment, appointments and probation periods, compensation, demotions, suspensions, dismissals and layoffs. 
(Code 1975,  6-96) 
Sec. 2-169. - Rules of procedure; bylaws required. 
    Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the parliamentary procedure of the harbor commission except in the event a state statute expressly requires a different procedure. The commission shall develop a complete set of bylaws governing the internal affairs and operations of the harbor commission, which bylaws shall not be effective until approved by the city council, who may also, at any time, revoke, modify or amend any such bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-97) 
Sec. 2-170. - Requirements of bylaws. 
    The bylaws of the harbor commission shall, at a minimum, provide for the following: 
(1)  The procedure for calling special and regular meetings, which procedure shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(2)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, giving notices of commission meetings, which complies with applicable state statutes. 
(3)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, preparing and maintaining a record of official proceedings of the harbor commission, which shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(4)  An enumeration and designation of the officers of the harbor commission together with the terms of office, powers, duties and procedure for election thereof. 
(5)  A procedure for the appointment of advisory committees to serve such purposes as the commission deems necessary. 
(6)  An enumeration of the members of the harbor commission, together with the terms of office, which shall be staggered in accordance with state law where provided. 
(7)  The conditions for eligibility of nonvoting members of the harbor commission, if there are any. 
(8)  A registered address at which the harbor commission will receive mail and other official communications. 
(9)  A fiscal year, if different from the city's. 
(10)  Such other matters as may be deemed to be advisable by the city council or the harbor commission to be set forth in the bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-98) 
Sec. 2-171. - Membership. 
(a)  Qualifications and eligibility. All members of the harbor commission shall be resident electors for their prescribed terms of office. The residency requirement may be waived as provided in the Charter. Any member of the council, employee of the city or officer thereof may serve on the harbor commission. 
(b)  Removal. Members of the commission may be removed by the city council, for cause, as provided in the Charter. 
(c)  Appointment. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, or the council acting on its own motion, may appoint members to staggered terms of office of the harbor commission, as provided by the bylaws thereof. 
(d)  Compensation. No member of the harbor commission shall receive compensation as such, but the city council may authorize payment of reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by any such member in the performance of authorized business of the harbor commission. 
(Code 1975,  6-99-6-101) 
Sec. 2-172. - Budgets and reports. 
    The harbor commission shall prepare and submit a proposed budget to the city council as required by the Charter. The harbor commission shall also prepare and file any reports at such time and in the form required by city council, the Charter or state statute. 
(Code 1975,  6-102) 
Sec. 2-173. - Public hearing; decisions. 
    If the harbor commission holds any public hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of any applicable state statute. Decisions shall be made in accordance with principles of due process of law, and the reasons and facts relied upon in making the decision shall be set forth in the record of the proceeding. 
(Code 1975,  6-103) 
Secs. 2-174-2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - LIBRARY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-186. - Creation. 
    The city hereby creates and establishes, pursuant to section 4.07 of the Charter, the library commission of the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-110) 
Sec. 2-187. - Purpose. 
    The purpose for which the library commission is created and established is to administer, maintain and operate a public library in the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-111) 
Sec. 2-188. - Powers and authority conferred. 
    The library commission shall have the power and authority to perform the acts enumerated in this section, together with such other powers as are necessarily incident thereto, including the following: 
(1)  Maintain, operate and administer a public library in and for the city and determine the type and level of services therein. 
(2)  Acquire facilities and resources necessary therefor. 
(3)  Promulgate necessary regulations for the government of the library facility, resources and services. 
(Code 1975,  6-112) 
Sec. 2-189. - Rules of procedure; bylaws required. 
    Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the parliamentary procedure of the library commission except in the event a state statute expressly requires a different procedure. The library commission shall develop a complete set of bylaws governing the internal affairs and operations of the commission, which bylaws shall not be effective until approved by the city council, which may also, at any time, revoke, modify or amend any such bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-113) 
Sec. 2-190. - Requirements of bylaws. 
    The bylaws of the library commission shall, at a minimum, provide for the following: 
(1)  The procedure for calling special and regular meetings, which procedure shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(2)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, giving notices of commission meetings, which complies with applicable state statutes. 
(3)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, preparing and maintaining a record of official proceedings of the library commission, which shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(4)  An enumeration and designation of the officers of the library commission together with the terms of office, powers, duties and procedure for election thereof. 
(5)  A procedure for the appointment of advisory committees to serve such purposes as the library commission deems necessary. 
(6)  An enumeration of the members of the library commission together with the terms of office, which shall be staggered in accordance with the Charter or in accordance with state law where provided. 
(7)  The conditions for eligibility of nonvoting members of the library commission, if there are any. 
(8)  A registered address at which the library commission will receive mail and other official communications. 
(9)  A fiscal year, if different from the city's. 
(10)  Such other matters as may be deemed to be advisable by the city council or the library commission to be set forth in the bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-114) 
Sec. 2-191. - Membership. 
(a)  Qualifications and eligibility. All members of the library commission shall be resident electors for their prescribed terms of office. The residency requirement may be waived as provided in the Charter. Any member of the council, employee of the city or officer thereof may serve on the library commission. 
(b)  Removal. Members of the commission may be removed by the city council, for cause, as provided in the Charter. 
(c)  Appointment. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, or the council acting on its own motion, may appoint members to staggered terms of office of the library commission, as provided by the bylaws thereof. 
(d)  Compensation. No member of the library commission shall receive compensation as such, but the city council may authorize payment of reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by any such member in the performance of authorized business of the library commission. 
(Code 1975,  6-115-6-117) 
Sec. 2-192. - Budgets and reports. 
    The library commission shall prepare and submit a proposed budget to the city council as required by the Charter. The commission shall also prepare and file any reports at such time and in the form required by the city council, the Charter or state statute. 
(Code 1975,  6-118) 
Sec. 2-193. - Public hearing; decisions. 
    If the library commission holds any public hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of any applicable state statute. Decisions shall be made in accordance with principles of due process of law, and the reasons and facts relied upon in making the decision shall be set forth in the record of the proceeding. 
(Code 1975,  6-119) 
Secs. 2-194-2-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2011-01, adopted Feb. 21, 2011, repealed div. 8,  2-206-2-213, which pertained to community center commission and derived from Code 1975. 

Secs. 2-206-2-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PLANNING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2012-06, adopted July 2, 2012, amended div. 9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 9,  2-226-2-232, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the 1975 Code,  6-141-6-148; Ord. No. 1991-03,  1-3, adopted Aug. 19, 1991; and Ord. No. 2007-01,  1, adopted April 16, 2007. 

Sec. 2-226. - Created. 
    There is created a planning commission for the city, to be known as the city planning commission. The city planning commission is created in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 33 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2008 (MCL 125.3801 et seq.) as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06,  1, 7-2-12) 
Sec. 2-227. - Membership. 
    The city planning commission shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be a member of the city council to be selected by resolution of the city council to serve as a member ex officio with full voting rights. The remaining six members shall be appointed by the mayor. All members of the city planning commission shall serve without compensation. Eligibility for office, term of office, and removal from office, shall be governed by the provisions of section 15 of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (MCL 125.3815) as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06,  1, 7-2-12) 
Sec. 2-228. - Powers and duties. 
    The city planning commission shall have all the duties and powers and perform all the functions provided by Act No. 33 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2008 (MCL 125.3801 et seq.) as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06,  1, 7-2-12) 
Sec. 2-229. - Officers, meetings, records. 
(a)  The city planning commission shall, from as appointed members, annually elect a chairperson, and the city planning commission shall also fill such other offices as it may determine to be necessary and appropriate. The city superintendent or his designee, shall act and serve as the secretary and clerk of the city planning commission, and shall keep a record of all proceedings before the city planning commission, which record shall be placed on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  The city planning commission shall hold at least four regular meetings each year and may adopt rules for the transaction of its business. All business of the planning commission shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act (1976 PA 267, MCL 15.261 to 15.275). Public notice of the time, date, and place of a regular or special meeting shall be given in the manner required by that Act. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06,  1, 7-2-12) 
Sec. 2-230. - Employees and consultants; expenditures and appropriations for planning. 
(a)  The city planning commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants as it may require; provided, however, that the city planning commission shall not expend any funds or enter any contracts or agreements for expenditures in excess of amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council. 
(b)  The city planning commission shall, on or before March 15 in each year, submit to and file with the city superintendent a written request for an appropriation of funds for city planning for the ensuing fiscal year of the city, and the city superintendent shall, in turn, present such request to the city council in the city superintendent's annual budget report. The city council may appropriate such funds for city planning as the city council shall determine to be appropriate and advisable. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06,  1, 7-2-12) 
Sec. 2-231. - Receipt and expenditure of donations. 
    The city planning commission may receive donations for purposes of carrying out its objectives and may expend any funds received in the form of a donation, in such manner as it may deem proper. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06,  1, 7-2-12) 
Sec. 2-232. - Reports and recommendations to council. 
    The city planning commission shall make reports and recommendations to the city council; provided, however, that no such recommendation shall be binding upon the city council, and such recommendation may be overruled by the city council by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its members elect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06,  1, 7-2-12) 
Secs. 2-233-2-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - HOUSING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-246. - Created. 
    Pursuant to Act No. 18 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, Extra Session (MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.), as amended, there is hereby created in and for the city a commission to be known as the St. Clair housing commission. 
(Code 1975,  6-156) 
Sec. 2-247. - Membership. 
(a)  Composition; appointment. The housing commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. City employees and officials, other than elected officials, are hereby declared eligible for appointment to the commission. 
(b)  Term. The term of office of the members of the commission shall be five years. Members of the first commission existing under this division shall be appointed for terms of one year, two years, three years, four years and five years, respectively, and annually thereafter one member shall be appointed for a term of five years. 
(c)  Compensation; removal; filling of vacancies. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation and may be removed from office by the appointing authority. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1975,  6-157) 
Sec. 2-248. - General powers and duties. 
    The St. Clair housing commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Act No. 18 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, Extra Session (MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.), as amended, and any laws which are supplemented thereto, it being the intention of this section to vest in the St. Clair housing commission all powers and duties permitted by law. 
(Code 1975,  6-158) 
Sec. 2-249. - Meetings; rules of procedure; records; quorum; officers and employees. 
(a)  The housing commission shall meet at regular intervals, such meetings to be public. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of the proceedings. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(b)  A president and vice-president shall be elected by the commission. The commission may appoint a director, who may also serve as secretary, and such other employees or officers as shall be necessary. The commission shall prescribe the duties of all its officers and employees and may, with the approval of the appointing authority, fix their compensation. The commission may, from time to time as necessary, employ engineers, architects and consultants. 
(Code 1975,  6-159) 
Sec. 2-250. - Operating funds. 
    Funds for the operation of the housing commission may be provided by the city council, but the commission shall, as soon as possible, reimburse the city for all monies expended by it for the commission from the revenues received from the sale of bonds. 
(Code 1975,  6-160) 
Sec. 2-251. - Reports to city council. 
    The housing commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the city council and shall make such other reports as the city council may, from time to time, direct. 
(Code 1975,  6-161) 
Secs. 2-252-2-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-271-2-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAXATION 

Sec. 2-281. - Levy and collection of taxes in two installments. 
    The levy and collection of taxes within the city shall be in two installments. Such assessments shall be made in two separate rolls, one for the city taxes and special assessments, to be known as the city or July tax roll, and the other for the state, county and school taxes, to be known as the December tax roll, in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 215 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1895 (MCL 81.1 et seq., MSA 5.1591 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1975,  18-1) 
Sec. 2-282. - Appointment and compensation of assessor. 
    The city council, upon the recommendation of the city superintendent, shall appoint an assessor for the city. 
(Code 1975,  18-2) 
Sec. 2-283. - Annual review of assessment roll. 
    The board of review of the city, as established by the state statutes, shall meet and notification will be provided as required by state law at which time and place the city assessor shall submit to such board the general assessment roll for review. 
(Code 1975,  18-3) 
Sec. 2-284. - Tax exemption granted housing projects by state law not applicable in city. 
    The tax exemption established in subsection (1) of Act No. 334 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 125.1415a, MSA 16.114(15a)), as amended, shall not apply to housing projects located within the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1975,  18-4) 
Secs. 2-285-2-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-296. - Purchases of city property valued at less than $500.00. 
(a)  Department heads and/or supervisors may verbally purchase, or place an order to purchase, individual items of city property up to, and including, but not to exceed, the value of $500.00, without a requisition form or purchase order. The city superintendent shall have the authority to suspend this right to purchase in his or her discretion. 
(b)  Department heads and/or supervisors shall, whenever reasonably possible, support any purchase or order made under subsection (a) of this section with a requisition form and purchase order. Failure to support such purchases or orders with such requisition form and purchase order shall not invalidate or impair such purchase. 
(Code 1975,  1-1; Ord. No. 2008-03,  1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 2-297. - Purchase of city property valued at more than $500.00, but less than $2,500.00. 
(a)  No department head or supervisor shall purchase, or place any order for the purchase of, any individual item of city property having a value exceeding $500.00, but less than $2,500.00, until a requisition form therefor has been submitted to the city superintendent's office. 
(b)  A purchase requisition form must be properly and fully completed and signed by the department head and/or supervisor and shall contain a statement of the estimated costs of the purchase. 
(c)  The city superintendent, if he shall approve of the proposed order and purchase of the individual item of city property under this section, shall issue a completed purchase order therefor. 
(d)  Where it appears that it would be to the clear advantage of the city to do so, and where the city superintendent deems it practicable to secure competitive bids, he may require that two competitive bids be obtained for purchase orders under this section; provided, however, he shall not be obligated to do so, and the failure to secure such bids shall not invalidate or impair such purchases. 
(Code 1975,  1-2) 
Sec. 2-298. - Purchase of city property valued in excess of $2,500.00. 
(a)  Purchases, or orders for the purchases, of individual items of city property by any department head and/or supervisor having a value of $2,500.00 or greater, but less than $10,000.00, shall comply with the procedure and provisions contained in section 2-297, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  A requisition form submitted to the city superintendent's office for the purchase of any individual item of city property under this section shall be supported by no less than two written competitive quotations which have been received to serve as proof that the best possible price has been obtained. 
(c)  The city superintendent may require that such competitive bids be submitted in a form satisfactory to him, and he shall also have the authority to request additional competitive bids. 
(Code 1975,  1-3) 
Sec. 2-299. - Purchase of city property valued in excess of $10,000.00. 
(a)  No department head, supervisor, city officer or employee shall purchase, or place any order for any purchase of, any individual item of city property having a value of $10,000.00 or more, except in compliance with the requirements of the Charter, and sealed bids shall be obtained for all such purchases, and the transaction shall be evidenced by written contract, purchase order or other suitable instrument acceptable to the city council, and such contract, purchase order or other instrument shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(b)  Notice soliciting sealed competitive bids shall be published in a newspaper in general circulation in the city at least five days prior to the final date for submitting the bids. Such notice shall briefly state the specifications of the supplies, materials, service or equipment required and shall state the amount of surety to be submitted with the bid and the surety, if any, required to be given with the contract, and shall further state the time and place for filing and opening of bids and the general terms and conditions of the award of the contract. In lieu of advertising, the city superintendent may post notices on the bulletin board in the city hall. 
(c)  The city superintendent shall, in addition, solicit sealed bids from all qualified prospective bidders known by him by sending each a copy of the notice of the proposed award. All bids shall be sealed and submitted to the city superintendent and shall be accompanied by security in the form of a cashier's check, certified check, cash or bond in such amount as prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. The city superintendent shall determine the amount of the performance bond required for construction contracts, and shall determine the amounts of the labor and materials bond required of the successful bidder. 
(d)  All bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the notice. The city council shall have the right to reject any or all bids or parts thereof and to waive any irregularities in any bid. 
(e)  After examination and tabulation, all bids may be inspected by the competing bidders. Whenever two or more low bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, the successful bidder shall be determined by vote of the city council, or whenever such action will best serve the public interest, the city superintendent with the approval of the city council may purchase the commodities in the open market, provided the price paid in the open market shall not exceed the bid price submitted for the same commodity. 
(f)  Each contract submitted to the city council for approval shall be accompanied by a tabulation of all bids received. All bids, deposits of cash, and certified or cashier's checks may be retained until the contract is awarded and signed. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract after its award, the deposit accompanying the bid shall be forfeited and the city council may award the contract to the next lowest and best bidder or readvertise for new bids. 
(g)  A copy of each contract shall be filed with the city clerk. At the time the contract is executed by him, the contractor shall execute a surety company bond to the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and saving the city harmless from all losses or damage caused to any person or property by reason of any carelessness or negligence by the contractor and from all expense of inspection, engineering and otherwise, caused by the delay in the completion of any improvement, and further conditioned to pay all laborers, mechanics, subcontractors and materialmen as well as all just debts and demands incurred in the performance of such work. 
(Code 1975,  1-4) 
Sec. 2-300. - Waiver of requirements. 
    Where it appears that it is to the city's advantage to contract or purchase without competitive bidding, and upon receipt of a written recommendation therefor by the city superintendent, the city council may by a majority vote waive the requirements of this division and of the Charter, as provided for in the Charter. 
(Code 1975,  1-5) 
Sec. 2-301. - Receiving slips to be submitted; inspection required. 
(a)  Receiving slips, signed by the department head and/or supervisor, shall accompany all invoices. Information on the receiving slips shall accurately describe the items of city property purchased and received, and the departmental account number against which the charge is to be made. 
(b)  The department head and/or supervisor who signs the receiving slip shall be responsible for inspection and acceptance of the materials, equipment or other items of city property to which the receiving slip applies. 
(Code 1975,  1-6) 
Secs. 2-302-2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL, MAYOR 

Sec. 2-311. - Determination for compensation. 
    The city council hereby determines that, pursuant to section 2.03(a) of the Charter, the mayor and councilmembers shall be compensated as provided in this division. 
(Code 1975,  1-120) 
Sec. 2-312. - Councilmembers' rate of compensation. 
    The annual rate of compensation for each councilmember shall be $600.00. Such compensation shall be paid in such increments and at such intervals as is most convenient to the city administration. 
(Code 1975,  1-121) 
Sec. 2-313. - Mayor's rate of compensation. 
    The annual rate of compensation for the mayor shall be $800.00, payable in the same manner as is the city council's compensation. 
(Code 1975,  1-122) 
Sec. 2-314. - Increases in compensation. 
    No provision of this division increasing the compensation of any councilmember or of the mayor shall become effective until the beginning date of the term of any councilmember elected or appointed thereafter; provided, such election or appointment follows the adoption of such an ordinance by not less than six months. 
(Code 1975,  1-123) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Offenses relating to public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq., MSA 28.718 et seq.; offenses concerning coin-operated devices, MCL 752.811, MSA 28.643(101). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIRCUSES, EXHIBITIONS, CONCERTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-26. - Hayrides. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public street means the entire width of the right-of-way of any street or road publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
(b)  Certain hayrides prohibited. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any truck, trailer, haywagon, hayrack, sled, sleigh, or other similar mechanical implement or device, nor shall any person ride upon the same, for the purpose of engaging in or participating in any hayride upon any public street within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the use of any truck, trailer, haywagon, hayrack, sled, sleigh, or other similar mechanical implement or device in connection with the furtherance of lawful farming or agricultural operations, nor shall it apply to any truck, trailer, haywagon, hayrack, sled, sleigh, or other similar implement or device if it is used in any parade or other event lawfully permitted under any other ordinance of the city. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person violating or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as prescribed in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  2-7) 
Secs. 6-27-6-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-36. - For public amusements and entertainments generally. 
(a)  No person shall make or exhibit, within the limits of this city, any circus, menagerie, play, game or theatrical exhibition, any concert, vocal or instrumental, or exhibit any natural or artificial curiosity, or give any public amusement or entertainment of any kind, without a license from the city clerk, except as provided in this division. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons who may be desirous of exhibiting any natural or other curiosities or shows, or to perform any games or artificial exhibitions or any other shows or public entertainments of whatever nature, to make application to the city clerk for a license, and such license may be granted, as provided in this division, by the city clerk upon the payment of the required fee as may be from time to time determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1975,  2-1) 
Sec. 6-37. - Temporary licenses for theatres, public halls and other places. 
    The city clerk, upon direction of the city council and upon receipt of the required fee, as may be from time to time determined by resolution of the city council, is hereby authorized and empowered to grant a temporary license for a period not exceeding three consecutive days to use and let and hire any theatre or other public hall, or other place, for the purpose of giving public entertainments and exhibitions, provided that no person who is required to be licensed under the provisions of section 18-27 of this Code shall be required to obtain an additional license under this article, except in such cases as where goods, wares and merchandise shall be offered for sale. 
(Code 1975,  2-2) 
Sec. 6-38. - Exceptions to sections 6-36 and 6-37. 
    Sections 6-36 and 6-37 shall not apply to any public amusement or entertainment or other public event which is conducted by a public school or by an organized church. 
(Code 1975,  2-3) 
Sec. 6-39. - Maintenance of order at amusement places. 
    It shall be the duty of any person receiving a license under this article to keep good order in or about his place of amusement or exhibition, and for this purpose to keep, at his expense, a sufficient police force on the premises. 
(Code 1975,  2-4) 
Sec. 6-40. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Form, contents of application. An applicant for a license as required in sections 6-36 and 6-37 shall make an application to the city clerk in the form and manner prescribed by the city clerk and shall state, under oath, such facts as shall be relevant to the grant of such license, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The names, businesses and residential addresses of all owners, managers and other persons who will conduct the public amusement or entertainment. 
(2)  The location at which the public amusement or entertainment will be conducted, and the name and address of the owner of the location if different than that of the applicant. 
(3)  The nature and character of the public amusement or entertainment. 
(b)  Standards for city clerk's decision. The city clerk shall, within ten days of the date on which the application is made, grant or deny an application for a license required under the terms of this division. The license shall be granted if it is determined that: 
(1)  The application is free from any fraud, misrepresentation or other materially false statement of fact. 
(2)  The public amusement or entertainment for which the application is being made will not be conducted in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or other danger to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
(c)  Revocation or suspension of license. Any license may be suspended or revoked by the city clerk or police chief for not more than 15 days when he has probable cause to believe that: 
(1)  The licensee has made a materially false statement on an application for a license. 
(2)  A licensee has conducted, or is conducting, a public amusement or entertainment in an unlawful manner, or in any manner as to continue a breach of the peace or a danger to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
(d)  Review by city council. Any applicant who deems himself aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk or police chief or any licensee who has had a license suspended or revoked may appeal to the city council, who shall review the action of the city clerk or police chief within 15 days of the date upon which the appeal is made. The licensee or applicant shall be reasonably notified of the time and place of the hearing and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The city council may grant, reinstate or revoke the license, as the facts may warrant, based upon the conditions contained in subsection (b) of this section, but such action shall be taken within ten days of the date of such hearing. 
(e)  Term of license. A license granted under section 6-31 shall have an expiration date determined by the city clerk on the license. 
(f)  Transferability. No license granted under this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1975,  2-5) 
Sec. 6-41. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this division shall be enforced by the police department of the city, and all violations shall be reported to the city clerk within three days of the discovery of the violation. 
(Code 1975,  2-5(g)) 
Sec. 6-42. - Penalty for violations of sections 6-36 through 6-39. 
    Any violation of sections 6-36 through 6-39 shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  2-6) 
Secs. 6-43-6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ARCADES AND GAME DEVICES 

Sec. 6-81. - Determination of necessity. 
    The city council hereby determines that the operation of certain game devices and arcades in the city has such an effect upon the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants thereof that licensing and regulation of such game devices and arcades is required. 
(Code 1975,  2-67) 
Sec. 6-82. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arcade means any place open to the public in which seven or more game devices are located for public use. 
    Game device means any machine, device or contrivance, whether electronic, mechanical or otherwise, which commences play, use or operation by the insertion of a coin, token or other similar object, or by the payment of some consideration for such operation, and which is offered to, or used by, the public for the purposes of playing a game for a contest of skill or chance. Such term shall specifically include devices such as pinball machines, video and electronic game machines, mechanical grab machines, shuffleboard game machines, and any similar devices, machines or contrivances of whatever description or trade name. The term shall not include: 
(1)  Any pool or billiard table; 
(2)  Coin-operated phonographs or merchandise vending machines; 
(3)  Coin-operated blood pressure measuring devices or weight scales; 
(4)  Coin-operated photograph booths; 
(5)  Any device inherent in the operation of a bowling alley or bingo game; or 
(6)  Any other device played as a game of chance or skill. 
    Owner means any person, including an agent or employee, who operates, conducts or has charge or control of any place or establishment in which any game device is available for operation by the public. 
(Code 1975,  2-68) 
Sec. 6-83. - Licenses for operation of arcade and game device registration required. 
    No person shall establish or operate an arcade in the city unless a license has been issued and is conspicuously displayed at all times on the premises. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any game device unless a license therefor has been issued under section 6-89 and is conspicuously displayed at all times on such premises. 
(Code 1975,  2-69) 
Sec. 6-84. - Fees. 
    The fee for each license for an arcade and the fee for each game device registered shall be as prescribed from time to time by resolution of the city council. The city council shall conduct an annual review of the fee schedule for an arcade license and game device registration. 
(Code 1975,  2-70) 
Sec. 6-85. - Locational standards for arcades. 
    All arcades located in the city shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  They shall not be located within 500 feet in any direction from the boundaries of any public, private or parochial school building, or church building. 
(2)  They shall not be located within 500 feet of each other. 
(3)  They shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the applicable city or state building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, zoning, fire and other safety codes. 
(4)  They shall not be located in any zoning district established by the city zoning ordinance, except as permitted by special approval in either the C-1 local commercial district or C-2 general commercial district. 
(Code 1975,  2-71) 
Sec. 6-86. - Operational standards for arcades and game devices. 
    No licensee or owner of an arcade or game device or the servant, employee or agent of any such person shall permit any of the following: 
(1)  Permit the operation of any game device by any person under 16 years of age between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., excluding Saturdays, Sundays, legal holidays, and at times when school is not in session; or to permit such persons to enter, loiter or congregate in any arcade at the times aforesaid for the purpose of operating such game devices. 
(2)  Operate the arcade between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except on Fridays, Saturdays and legal holidays, when the arcade shall not be operated between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. This operational standard shall not apply to any business establishment duly licensed by the state liquor control commission. 
(3)  Permit gambling in any form on the premises. 
(4)  Permit any persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances to be on the premises. 
(5)  Permit any intoxicating liquor or any controlled substance to be brought into, sold, given away or consumed on the premises, except that this operational standard shall not apply to any business establishment duly licensed by the state liquor control commission. 
(6)  Permit disorderly or offensive conduct as defined under the ordinances of the city. 
(7)  Permit any conduct or condition to exist, contributing to juvenile delinquency. 
(8)  Permit loitering on the premises of the arcade or on sidewalks in front of the arcade, so as to obstruct a free and uninterrupted passage of the public. 
(9)  Operate the arcade unless the owner or person at least 18 years of age who is the operator, employee, servant or agent of the owner is present on the premises. 
(10)  Permit the operation of any game device containing any payoff contrivance for the return or discharge of coins, tokens, slugs, merchandise or checks to operators thereof, or to have on the premises any game device which according to federal or state law constitutes a gambling device; provided, however, that this operational standard shall not prohibit the operation of any game device which gives free play or game time to any player or user thereof who gets in excess of a specified number of points or otherwise meets a preestablished performance criteria for such free game or play time. 
(11)  Permit the operation of any game device which displays, produces or emits any picture, printed matter, advertisement, writing, song recitations, speech, music or other matter that is obscene, indecent, pornographic or harmful to minors. 
(12)  Permit any indecent, immoral, illegal and/or profane language, or indecent or immoral conduct, or permit noise or music to emerge from licensed premises, any of which causes a disturbance of the public peace. 
(Code 1975,  2-72) 
Sec. 6-87. - Issuance of arcade licenses. 
(a)  Application, required information. Application for an arcade license shall be made to the city clerk on forms provided by the clerk which shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, date of birth, address, and telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other organization, then the names, ages, addresses and telephone numbers of the officers thereof, and the owners of more than the ten percent interest therein shall also be given. 
(2)  Whether any person named or required to be named on the application has ever been convicted of a crime, and, if so, the nature of the offense, excluding minor misdemeanors not involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  The proposed number of machines or game devices intended to be operated on the premises. 
(4)  The type of machine or game device. 
(5)  The name, address and location of the proposed arcade. 
(6)  The name and address of the owner of the proposed arcade. 
(7)  The name and address of the person responsible for the operation, management and maintenance of the game devices or machines. 
(8)  The location and capacity of motor vehicle parking facilities which are to be provided for patrons using such game devices or machines at the arcade. 
(9)  A scale diagram of the arcade floor plan shall be attached to the application, showing the permanent location of each amusement machine, including electrical outlets, all aisleways, exitway discharges and doorways. A game device may not be located within five feet of any exit and the following minimum aisle widths are required where game devices are located: 
a.  Amusement machines on one side of aisle, 48 inches minimum width of aisle. 
b.  Amusement machines on both sides of aisle, 60 inches minimum width of aisle. 
(b)  Inspections. Upon receipt of the completed application and the license fee, the clerk shall cause an inspection of the premises to be made by the city building official, fire inspector and other city officials to ensure that it conforms to all applicable city codes and the standards set forth in this division. 
(c)  Withholding of license. No license shall be issued to any applicant when a person named or required to be named on the application is under the age of 18 years or has been convicted of any offense involving gambling, violation of controlled substances laws, criminal sexual conduct involving a minor, or accosting, soliciting or contributing to the delinquency of a minor. 
(d)  Issuance upon determination of eligibility. Upon the receipt of a satisfactory report based on the information required by this section, including an occupancy permit from the building official, fire inspector and other city officials, and upon a determination that the applicant is eligible for a license, based on the criteria required by this section, the clerk shall issue a license, which shall not be transferrable and which shall expire on the following December 31, regardless of the date the license was issued. 
(e)  Denial of license. If the clerk shall determine that the applicant is not eligible for a license under this article, then the applicant shall be advised of that determination, and the reasons therefor in writing. Upon the refusal or neglect of the city clerk to issue such license to an applicant within ten days of the receipt of the foregoing report, an applicant may appeal such refusal or neglect to the city council on a form to be provided to such applicant for that purpose, which form shall state the applicant's name and shall have attached thereto a copy of the information required under this division, together with other information deemed pertinent by the city clerk. 
(f)  Renewal of licenses. Licenses shall be renewed by December 31 of each year upon reinspection and satisfactory report by the city building official, fire inspector and other city officials and upon payment of the annual license fee in the same manner as in the case of the original application. 
(Code 1975,  2-73) 
Sec. 6-88. - Consent to inspection by licensee. 
    Any person obtaining a license under this division, as a condition of that license, consents to an inspection by duly authorized agents of the city during the business hours of any licensed premises. Failure to allow such inspection shall be deemed grounds for the revocation of a license. 
(Code 1975,  2-74) 
Sec. 6-89. - Registration of game devices. 
    The number of game devices kept, operated or maintained in any location open to the public in the city shall be registered with the city clerk, and the owner or custodian thereof shall obtain a license identifying the number of game devices therein. The city clerk shall maintain a record of licensed game devices, which shall include the precise number of game devices at each location and the name and addresses of the individual or parties responsible for such devices. A licensed arcade shall be limited to the number of game devices set forth in its application for a license. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall be conspicuously displayed at all times. 
(Code 1975,  2-75) 
Sec. 6-90. - Revocation of license. 
    The city clerk shall, after a written notice to a licensee, revoke any license issued under this division when it is determined that any licensee or his agents, servants, or employees has violated any of the provisions of this division, other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. Such notice shall specify the violation complained of and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail. A licensee under this division may appeal such revocation to the city council within ten days of the date of revocation on a form to be provided by the clerk. 
(Code 1975,  2-76) 
Sec. 6-91. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Administration of division. The provisions of this division shall be enforced by the city superintendent who shall, in his discretion, delegate such enforcement to such of the administrative personnel of the city as he deems proper. 
(b)  Fines and imprisonment. A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  Authority of city police. Police officers of the city shall have the power to issue citations for any violation of this division. Upon the issuance of a citation for a violation of section 6-83, the owner shall apply for a license in accordance with the requirements of section 6-87, or for the registration of the game devices, within three business days from the date of the citation. If such application is not made within three business days, the police officer shall obtain a warrant authorizing the seizure of such machines and confiscate the machines, which shall be returned to the owner only after he has complied with the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1975,  2-77; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 6-92-6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POOLROOMS 

Sec. 6-101. - Determination of necessity. 
    The city council hereby determines that the operation of certain game devices and/or pool room facilities in the city has such an affect upon the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants thereof that licensing and regulation of such poolrooms is required. 
(Ord. 1995-04,  1, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 6-102. - Definitions. 
    Poolroom, when used in this article, shall have the meaning of any place open to the public for playing pool or billiards, with two or more pool or billiard tables operated as a business establishment. 
(Ord. 1995-04,  1, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 6-103. - Licenses for operation of poolrooms required. 
    No person shall establish or operate a poolroom in the city unless a license has been issued and is conspicuously displayed at all times on the premises. No person shall operate or permit the operation of two or more pool or billiard tables unless a license has been issued under chapter 18, businesses, articles I and II. Such license shall be conspicuous at all times on such premises. No person shall be granted a license to operate a poolroom unless he is at least 21 years of age. No such license shall be granted except upon certification by the chief of police and the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. 1995-04,  1, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 6-104. - Fees. 
    The fee for each license for a poolroom shall be prescribed from time to time by resolution of the city council as designated in chapter 18, businesses, article II. The fee for seizure and safekeeping of any and all equipment shall be the actual cost to the city including a ten percent administrative fee. 
(Ord. 1995-04,  1, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 6-105. - Locational standards for poolrooms. 
    All poolrooms located in the city shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  They shall not be located within 500 feet in any direction from the boundaries of any public. private or parochial school building or church building. 
(2)  They shall not be located within 500 feet of each other. 
(3)  They shall conform in all respects with the requirements of applicable city and state building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical, zoning, fire and other safety codes. 
(4)  They shall not be located in any zoning districts established by the city zoning ordinance except as permitted by special use approval in the C-2 general commercial district. 
(Ord. 1995-04,  1, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 6-106. - Operational standards for poolrooms. 
    No licensee or owner of a poolroom or the employee or agent of any such person shall permit any of the following: 
(1)  Permit the operation of the poolroom between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00a.m. This operational standard shall not apply to any business establishment duly licensed by the state liquor control commission. Such establishment will be subject to all other regulations as set forth by all other federal, state or city regulations or ordinances. 
(2)  Permit anyone who is less than 17 years of age or who shall falsely represent himself to be 17 years of age or older to obtain admittance or to remain in any poolroom. Not withstanding the above provisions, a person under 17 years of age may be permitted to remain in the poolroom when accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. 
(3)  Permit gambling in any form on the premises. 
(4)  Permit any persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances to be on the premises. 
(5)  Permit any intoxicating liquor or any controlled substance to be brought into, sold, given away or consumed on the premises, except that this operational standard shall not apply to any business establishment duly licensed by the state liquor control commission. 
(6)  Permit disorderly or offensive conduct as defined in the ordinances of the city. 
(7)  Permit any conduct or condition to exist contributing to juvenile delinquency. 
(8)  Permit loitering on the premises of the poolroom or on sidewalks in front of the poolroom so as to obstruct a free and uninterrupted passage of the public. 
(9)  Permit the obstruction of the public view by use of drawn shades, blinds or screens or advertising displays either permanent or moveable or any other device which obstructs the public view. 
(10)  Permit any indecent, illegal or profane language or indecent or immoral conduct or permit noise or music to emerge from licensed premises, any of which causes a disturbance of the public peace. 
(11)  Permit the operation of the facility without the direct supervision of an individual within the facility 21 years of age or older. 
(Ord. 1995-04,  1, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 6-107. - Consent to inspect by licensee. 
    Any person obtaining a license under this article, as a condition of that license, consents to inspection by duly authorized agents of the city during the business hours of any licensed premises. Failure to allow any such inspection shall be grounds for revocation of a license. 
(Ord. 1995-04,  1, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 6-108. - Revocation of license. 
    The city clerk, after written notice to a licensee, shall revoke any license issued under this article when it is determined that any licensee or his agents, servants or employees has violated any of the provisions of this article, other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. Such notice shall specify the violation complained of and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail. A licensee under this article may appeal such revocation to the city council within ten days of the revocation on a form to be provided by the clerk. 
(Ord. 1995-04,  1, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 6-109. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Administration of article. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the city superintendent who shall, in his discretion, delegate such enforcement to such of the administrative personnel of the city as he deems proper. 
(b)  Fines and imprisonment. A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  Authority of city police. Police officers of the city shall have the power to issue citations for any violation of this article. Upon the issuance of a citation for a violation of section 6-103, the owner shall apply for a license in accordance with the requirements of section 6-103 within three business days from the date of the citation. If such application is not made within three business days, the police officer shall obtain a warrant authorizing the seizure of such machines and confiscate the machines, which shall be returned to the owner only after he has complied with the requirements of this article and paid fees as required per section 6-104. 
(Ord. 1995-04,  1, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 6-110-6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 6-131. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, a "special event" shall mean a block party, festival, celebration, concert, or any similar occurrence or event to be conducted for a charitable, historical, educational or public or civic purpose and not for profit within any zoned district within the city, provided, however that parades and all political activities are specifically excluded from coverage under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-132. - Permit required. 
    No person, firm, corporation or organization shall participate in, advertise for or in any way promote, organize, control, manage, solicit or induce participation in a special event unless a permit has first been obtained from the chief of police. No person, firm, corporation or organization shall violate any of the terms issued for a special event or the terms of this article, nor join or participate in any permitted activity under this article over the objection of a permit holder or in any manner interfere with the progress or orderly conduct of a special event. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-133. - Special events allowed pursuant to permit. 
    A person, firm, corporation or organization shall be allowed to conduct a special event in any zoned area within the city if it has first secured a permit pursuant to this article, as well as final approval from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-134. - Reimbursement for municipal expenses. 
    Upon the recommendation of the city superintendent, or by motion of the city council, that municipal expenses to be incurred in connection with the grant of a permit under this article will be unduly burdensome on the city, the city council may order, as a condition of granting the permit, that the applicant reimburse the city for the costs of city employees and for all other expenses incurred by the city in preparing for and administering the special event at rates to be periodically set by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97; Ord. No. 2015-04,  1, 8-3-15) 
Sec. 6-135. - Application for permit. 
    An application for a permit for the holding of a special event shall be made upon a form provided by the chief of police and shall contain all of the following information: 
(1)  The name, residence and business address and phone number of each person and organization sponsoring the special event. If an organization, the application shall contain the name, residence and business addresses of the president or chairman or individual who is in charge of the event thereof; 
(2)  Description of the activity, event or use and proposed locations; 
(3)  The date(s) of and starting and ending times of the activity, event or use including time required for set-up and clean-up; 
(4)  Whether parking is requested to be restricted or prohibited during the special event and if so, in what areas; 
(5)  Proposed plans to provide necessary parking, security, crowd control, traffic control, refuse disposal, utility service, sanitation facilities, private property protection and restoration, noise control, staging areas, and other areas, personnel and equipment which is or may reasonably be necessary; 
(6)  The type, nature and amount of any rate, fee, charge to be paid or donation made by anyone participating in or attending the activity, event or use; 
(7)  Copies of insurance policies naming the city and any property owners abutting the affected street(s), road(s) or public rights-of-way as named or additional insureds in amounts of coverage to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council and insuring the city and abutting property owners against any and all liability for damage to property and insuring the city against any and all liability for personal injury or death as a result of the activity, event or use, as a result of participation in or attendance at the activity, event or use. The city council may, at its discretion, waive these insurance requirements. 
(8)  A certification, acceptable to the city that the applicant will indemnify the city for and hold it harmless from and defend it against any and all claims, lawsuits or other liability arising from or as a result of the activity, event or use; 
(9)  The signature of an authorized person on behalf of the applicant; 
(10)  A statement of the benefit of the activity, event or use to the general public and the non-profit organization applicant and of the reasons for the activity, event or use; 
(11)  Such other information as the chief of police deems reasonably necessary in order to carry out his duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-136. - Time of filing. 
    The application for a permit shall be filed not less than 90 days prior to the scheduled date of the special event. Failure to file on time will result in the denial of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-137. - Litter collection. 
    Applicants shall provide for the collection and removal of all trash, garbage and litter caused by or arising out of the special event and shall advise the chief of police of the specific plans for same. Should the applicant fail to remove all trash, garbage and litter to the satisfaction of the city the same shall be completed by city employees and the applicant shall reimburse the city at the hourly rate set forth pursuant to section 6-134. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-138. - Vendors. 
    All vendors participating in a special event shall comply with the provision of chapter 18, article IV of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-139. - Conditions in permit. 
    Any permit granted under this article may contain conditions reasonably calculated to reduce or minimize the dangers and hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic and the public health, safety, tranquility, morals or welfare, including but not limited to, changes in time, duration, number of participants or noise levels. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-140. - Standards for issuance. 
    A permit shall be issued by the clerk upon order of the chief of police when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that all of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive, made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in the application for a permit or in any other document required pursuant to this article. 
(2)  The applicant has met the standards in this article and agrees to such conditions as are imposed in the permit. 
(3)  The time, the duration and size of the special event will not substantially disrupt the safe movement of traffic. 
(4)  Any required or necessary street closure is of a size or nature such that it will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers so as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(5)  The concentration of persons will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to that area where the special event is being held. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-141. - Notice of issuance or denial. 
    Written notice of the issuance or denial of the permit shall be provided to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of an application or as soon as practicable if received less than 30 days in advance of the proposed date of the special event. If a permit is denied, such written notice shall state the reason for denial. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-142. - Appeals procedure. 
    Upon the denial of a permit by the chief of police, the applicant may appeal by filing the appeal within four working days, with the city superintendent or his designated representative who shall set the appeal for hearing within three working days. The city superintendent will notify the applicant orally and in writing of the date and time of hearing. After holding a hearing, the city superintendent may reverse, affirm or modify in any respect the determination of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-143. - Waiver of time limitations. 
    For good cause shown, the chief of police may waive the time limitation in section 6-136 for filing an application and the city superintendent may waive the time limitation as set forth in the preceding section for filing an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Sec. 6-144. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any permit for a special event issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the chief of police, city superintendent, or a duly authorized representative, at any time when by reason of emergency, disaster, calamity, disorder, riot, extreme traffic conditions, violation of this article or any permit conditions, or undue burden on public services, he determines that the health, safety, tranquility, morals or welfare of the public where the safety of any property requires such revocation. Notice of revocation of the permit shall be delivered in writing to at least one person named upon the permit by personal service or by certified mail, or if the closure has commenced, orally, or in writing, by personal contact or service, or by telephone. Continuance after such notice has been delivered is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 1997-05,  1, 2-17-97) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290, MSA 12.541; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq., MSA 28.244 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Livestock running at-large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any cattle, horses or other animals to run at-large in any public street, lane, alley, park, place or highway within the limits of the city. The term "running at-large" shall include all animals running at large; all animals feeding along the streets, lanes or parks of the city, whether at-large or not; and all animals tied out by the owner or other person in charge of them and having the control thereof in any street, lane, park, place or highway or in front of or adjacent to any private residence, lawn or premises, whether with or without the consent of the owner or occupant of such private residence, lawn or premises. 
(Code 1975,  3-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit animals running at large, MCL 102.14, MSA 5.1819. 
Sec. 10-2. - Fowl running at-large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or harboring any domestic fowl to permit such fowl to run at-large in any street, alley, square, commons or any public place within the city. 
(b)  Any person allowing any domestic fowl habitually to remain and be fed within his house, store, building, coop, enclosure or premises shall be considered as keeping or harboring such fowl within the meaning of this section. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof for each offense, shall be fined in accordance with section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  3-4) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit fowl running at-large, MCL 102.14, MSA 5.1819. 
Sec. 10-3. - Dangerous animals prohibited. 
    No person shall own, possess or harbor any dangerous animals in the city. For purposes of this section, the term "dangerous animal" means any nondomesticated animal not normally or customarily kept as a household pet in an urban area, which, because of its size, disposition, demeanor or nature, has a propensity for harm, injury or danger to persons or property. 
(Code 1975,  3-5) 
Sec. 10-4. - Limitation on numbers of dogs. 
(a)  No person who resides within the city shall own, possess, shelter, harbor, keep, or have custody of more than three dogs, which are over six months old on the same premises, except where a person has obtained a kennel license from the state as provided for in Act. No. 339 of Public Acts of 1919, as amended, and conforms to all applicable zoning regulations of the city. 
(b)  Enforcement of subsection (a) shall not apply to any animals registered pursuant to section 10-29 on, or before, October 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10,  1, 9-6-16) 
Secs. 10-5-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq., MSA 12.511 et seq. 

Sec. 10-26. - Keeping or harboring dog, interpretation. 
    Any person allowing any dog habitually to remain and to be lodged or fed at his house, store building, enclosure or premises shall be considered as harboring or keeping the dog within the meaning of this article. 
(Code 1975,  3-15) 
Sec. 10-27. - Officers designated for enforcement of article; investigation of complaints. 
    All members of the city police force and sworn officers, are charged with the enforcement of this article. It shall be the duty of the police officers to investigate complaints made and to determine whether or not such complaints are founded upon fact. 
(Code 1975,  3-16) 
Sec. 10-28. - Penalty for violations of article. 
    A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor as set forth by section 1-12(b) of the City Code; however, in the discretion of the investigating officer, a first offense under this article may be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  3-17; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2016-03,  1, 2-15-16) 
Sec. 10-29. - License. 
    All persons owning or keeping dogs six months old or older shall be required to purchase licenses for such dogs. 
(Code 1975,  3-18) 
Sec. 10-30. - Running at-large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog to allow or permit such dog to run at-large within the limits of the city. Dogs on a leash shall not be deemed to be running at-large. 
(b)  No owner of, or person harboring or keeping, a fierce or vicious dog, or a bitch in heat, shall allow such dog to run at-large at any time within the city limits. 
(Code 1975,  3-19) 
Sec. 10-31. - Barking dogs. 
    No person shall harbor or keep any dog which, by loud and frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, shall cause serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to passersby upon the streets. 
(Code 1975,  3-20) 
Sec. 10-32. - Dangerous dogs. 
    No person shall keep a dangerous dog within the city. "Dangerous dog" means: 
(1)  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals; 
(2)  Any dog which attacks a human or other domestic animal without provocation; or 
(3)  As otherwise defined by Act No. 426 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1988 (MCL 287.301 et seq., MSA 12.545(21) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1975,  3-21) 
Sec. 10-33. - Certain duties imposed on owner. 
(a)  No person owning or having custody or control of a dog shall knowingly, or through failure to exercise due care or control, permit the dog to defecate on public property or on private property without the consent of the property owner or occupant thereof. 
(b)  A person owning or having custody or control of a dog shall be responsible for the removal of any excrement (dog feces) eliminated by such dog on public property or private property of another without consent of the property owner or occupant thereof, and it shall be a violation of this section for the person owning or having custody or control of the dog to fail to remove or provide for the removal in a sanitary manner of such excrement (dog feces) before taking the dog from the immediate area where such excretion occurred. 
(Code 1975,  3-24) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; subdivisions, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- State construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Building inspector and building commission generally. 
    The building inspector shall be appointed by the city superintendent. The building commission shall be appointed as provided by the city Charter. The building commission shall be composed of six members, representing as much as possible the building trades, the public and the police and fire departments. 
(Code 1975,  5-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Meetings, rules, records and quorum of building commission. 
(a)  The building commission shall meet at such times as it may determine, at a fixed place of meeting, which meetings shall be open to the public. 
(b)  The building commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings, showing the action of the commission, a finding of fact, and the vote of each member upon each question considered. 
(c)  The presence of four members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum of the building commission. 
(Code 1975,  5-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Garbage grinder required for certain buildings. 
(a)  All new buildings which are: 
(1)  Designed, equipped and used for storing or sheltering food or foodstuffs for human consumption, including fruits, vegetables and meats which are to be sold either at retail at stores, clubs, hotels, restaurants, schools or other food establishments, or at wholesale, or which are prepared at food manufacturing or processing plants, whether such places of business are licensed under the provisions of any city ordinance or not; and 
(2)  All buildings, including residences, where foods for human consumption are prepared, sold, handled, stored or served in any manner whatsoever; 
shall be equipped with an appropriate type garbage grinder, properly connected to the kitchen sink or sewer drain. 
(b)  The grinder and connections required by this section shall be of sufficient size to grind all garbage and food processing wastes produced in the building, and shall be suitably located so as to discharge such ground material by flushing it with water through the drainpipes into the sewer. 
(c)  In operating any business described in this section, if packaged or canned foods are not opened on the premises, a garbage grinder for such canned or packaged food shall not be required. 
(d)  In operating any business or other food establishment which sells, prepares or handles food for human consumption, if all garbage and food processing wastes in connection with such establishment are disposed of by incineration, the city superintendent may determine, in writing, that such business or premises does not need to have a garbage grinder installed therein, and when such determination has been made the foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply. 
(Code 1975,  5-4) 
Sec. 14-4. - Designation of building official and enforcement officer. 
    The city administrator of planning, zoning and building is hereby designated as the building official and enforcement officer for the Building Code (article II of this chapter), the Electrical Code (article III of this chapter), the Plumbing Code (article IV of this chapter), the Mechanical Code (article V of this chapter), the Dangerous Buildings Ordinance (article VII of this chapter) and the Zoning Ordinances of the City of St. Clair. 
(Ord. No. 1996-01,  1, 3-4-96) 
Sec. 14-5. - Issuance of appearance tickets for violations. 
    The city administrator of planning, zoning and building is hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets for violations of the Building Code, the Electrical Code, the Plumbing Code, the Mechanical Code, the Dangerous Buildings Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of St. Clair and chapter 62 of this Code as authorized by MCL 765.9c as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1996-01,  1, 3-4-96; Ord. No. 1997-07,  1, 7-7-97) 
Secs. 14-6-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 14-26. - Code adopted; purpose; copies on file. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code Act (MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1) et seq.), the Uniform Building Code, Volumes 1, 2, and 3, as promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, 1997 edition, is hereby adopted by reference. The purpose of such code is to provide uniform building regulations and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. A complete copy of such code is available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1992-03,  1, 5-4-92; Ord. No. 1995-01,  1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1998-04,  1, 7-6-98) 
Sec. 14-27. - Interpretations. 
    References in the building code to "state" and "(name of state)" shall mean the State of Michigan; references to "municipality" and "(name of municipality)" shall mean the City of St. Clair; references to the "municipal charter" shall mean the St. Clair City Charter; and references to "local ordinances" shall mean the St. Clair city ordinances. 
(Code 1975,  5-12) 
Sec. 14-28. - Enforcement. 
    The building department is hereby constituted the agency with enforcement and administrative powers and duties under this article. 
(Code 1975,  5-13) 
Sec. 14-29. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any violation of the provisions of said code shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Editor's note- Prior to the reenactment of  14-29 by Ord. No. 1999-09, Ord. No. 1998-04,  1, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed said section, which pertained to amendments to the building code and derived from Code 1975,  5-14; Ord. No. 1992-03,  2, adopted May 4, 1992; and Ord. No. 1995-01,  2, adopted June 19, 1995. 
Secs. 14-30-14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-04,  1, adopted July 16, 2001, repealed art. III, divisions 1 and 2, and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Formerly, art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1993-05,  1(5-14.5), 1(5-16-5-30), adopted December 6, 1993; Ord. No. 1993-06,  1(5-15), adopted December 20, 1993; Ord. No. 1997-10,  1, adopted November 3, 1997; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, adopted September 7, 1999. 

Sec. 14-51. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Electrical Code, in accordance with Section 8B(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building official of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under Act 230, of the Public acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 2001-04,  1, 7-16-01) 
Secs. 14-52-14-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 14-101. - Enforcement; purpose; availability of copies. 
(a)  Notice is hereby given that pursuant to the provisions of the state plumbing code, in accordance with Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1) et seq.), as amended, the building official of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under such act. 
(b)  The purpose of the state plumbing code is for safeguarding life and property by regulating and providing for the inspection of the installation, alteration, repairing, servicing and maintenance of plumbing equipment within the city; to provide for the licensing and registration of plumbing contractors; and to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof. 
(c)  Printed copies of the state plumbing code shall be kept in the office of the city clerk for public use, inspection and distribution at cost. 
(d)  The city hereby assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the state plumbing code within its boundary. 
(e)  A violation of the provisions of this code shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1992-09,  1(5-55), 12-21-92; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 14-102-14-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 14-121. - Enforcement; purpose; availability of copies. 
(a)  Notice is hereby given that pursuant to the provisions of the state mechanical code, in accordance with Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1) et seq.), as amended, the building official of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under such act. 
(b)  The purpose of the state mechanical code is for safeguarding life and property by regulating and providing for the inspection of the installation, alteration, repairing, servicing and maintenance of mechanical equipment within the city; to provide for the licensing and registration of mechanical contractors; and to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof. 
(c)  Printed copies of the state mechanical code shall be kept in the office of the city clerk for public use, inspection and distribution at cost. 
(d)  The city hereby assumes responsibility for administration and enforcement of the state mechanical code within its boundary. 
(Ord. No. 1992-09,  1(5-68), 12-21-92) 
Sec. 14-122. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    A violation of the provision of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. Each day of violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1975,  5-73; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 14-123-14-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 14-151. - Permit and bond generally. 
(a)  No person shall move through or within the city any house or building without first filing an application therefor with the city superintendent and obtaining a permit to do so. The application shall be accompanied by a performance bond in the sum of $25,000.00, indemnifying the city against all loss, damage, expense or claims by any public utility or property owner which might arise during the course of the moving of such building. 
(b)  The application to the city superintendent shall set forth the streets, alleys and other public places upon which the building shall be moved, and shall be accompanied with a copy of a liability insurance policy naming the city as additional insured with a policy coverage of $1,000,000.00 minimum. All applications to move buildings through or within the city shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of city council from time to time, which fee shall be based upon the reasonable expenses incurred by the city in the administrative review process provided by the city superintendent, police chief, zoning administrator, planning commission and other agencies of the city involved therein. 
(c)  The application to the city superintendent must contain the written permit of the chief of police or his duly authorized representative, issued pursuant to section 14-152 and containing the diagram of the proposed route of travel and time of travel. 
(d)  The $25,000.00 performance bond required by this section shall not be refunded to the permittee until more than 15 days have elapsed after the completion date of the move and until written approval of such refund has been received by the city superintendent from the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. If any damage has occurred as the result of such a move, the bond shall not be refunded until the owner of the damaged property has indicated in writing that the damage has been repaired or a settlement has been made to his satisfaction. 
(Code 1975,  5-214; Ord. No. 1996-05,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 14-152. - Permit from chief of police. 
(a)  The applicant for a permit required by section 14-151 shall present a proposed moving schedule and route to the chief of police or his duly authorized representative along with evidence of review by all utility companies having equipment or facilities along the proposed route at least 14 days prior to the proposed moving date and he shall receive from the chief of police or his duly authorized representative a written permit to move such building or structure during certain hours on a definite date and along certain designated streets. 
(b)  The chief of police or his duly authorized representative shall not issue a permit as set forth in this section in the event of any of the following: 
(1)  The building is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the city. 
(2)  The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property in the city. 
(3)  The applicant's equipment is unsafe and persons or property would be endangered by its use. 
(4)  For any other reason, persons or property in the city would be endangered by the moving of the building. 
(c)  The person moving a building shall post on such building, while being moved, in a conspicuous place, a copy of the permit issued under this section. 
(Code 1975,  5-215) 
Sec. 14-153. - Conditions to issuance of permit when building to be relocated within city. 
    The city superintendent shall refuse to issue the final permit for the movement of any building along or through any street or alley in the city wherein such building or structure is to be moved to a location within the city, until the following conditions have been complied with: 
(1)  All permits required by the building, electrical and plumbing codes for the city shall have been secured, and they shall not be issued until such building has been inspected by the building inspector, electrical inspector and plumbing inspector and they have made a determination that such building complies and will comply, when relocated, with all requirements of the city's building code. 
(2)  The foundation upon which such building is to be located has been completed to grade level and approved by the building inspector. 
(3)  A site plan when required meeting the requirements of the city's zoning ordinance has been filed and approved by the city council as provided in the zoning ordinance. Upon receipt of the site plan, the city clerk shall forward such site plan to the planning commission for review as provided in the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Pictures of the home or building to be moved in the city and completion plans showing conformity to the surrounding neighborhood, have been submitted. 
(5)  Proof has been produced showing that the applicant is the owner thereof. 
(6)  A $100,000.00 performance bond has been deposited to assure completion of the move and of the outside of the building within six months and compliance with the building, electric and plumbing codes and all provisions of this article. Such sum shall be forfeited to the city for failure to so comply, or returned to the applicant upon final inspection. This provision is not to be construed as waiving the city's right to proceed under the penalty provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975,  5-216) 
Sec. 14-154. - Compliance with ordinances, statutes, etc.; warning lights. 
    Any person who receives a permit to move a building or structure through or within the city must abide by all regulations set forth by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative, by all city ordinances and all state statutes, and, if any building being so moved shall at any time block a street or a part of a street or alley or other public property, sufficient colored lights shall be placed thereon for the protection of the public. 
(Code 1975,  5-217) 
Sec. 14-155. - Changing prescribed moving date or hours. 
    No change shall be made in the moving date or hours prescribed in the permit issued under section 14-152 without written approval from the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1975,  5-218) 
Sec. 14-156. - Procedure when contact will be made with utility lines or other property. 
    When a building or structure is to be moved in such manner that contact would be made with any telegraph, telephone, electric light or power line, fire or police alarm or crossarms or other property, the permittee shall give to the person owning or controlling such wires, crossarms or other property at least one week's notice and such person shall move and adjust such wires, crossarms or other property in such manner that such building or structure being moved may pass by or under such wires, crossarms or other property, and the cost of such moving and adjusting of utility lines or other property shall be borne by the permittee. 
(Code 1975,  5-219) 
Sec. 14-157. - Notice of damage to property. 
    If any damage is caused to any public or private property as the result of any moving pursuant to a permit issued under this article, the permittee shall immediately notify the city superintendent, in writing, and the owner of such property, of the extent of such damage. 
(Code 1975,  5-220) 
Sec. 14-158. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. Each day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1975,  5-221) 
Secs. 14-159-14-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

Sec. 14-181. - Defined. 
    All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed "dangerous buildings": 
(1)  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the floors or roofs are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose for which they are used. 
(4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
(5)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, insanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(6)  Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication. 
(8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, insanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this city. 
(10)  Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the housing regulations, building code or any other ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1975,  5-232) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 14-182. - Declared to be nuisances. 
    All dangerous buildings within the terms of section 14-181 are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided in this article. 
(Code 1975,  5-233) 
Sec. 14-183. - Standards to be followed in ordering repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building inspector and the building commission in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of dangerous buildings: 
(1)  If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  If the dangerous building is 50 percent damaged, decayed or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished; and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article or any city ordinance or state statute, it shall be demolished. 
(Code 1975,  5-234) 
Sec. 14-184. - Powers and duties of building inspector. 
    The building inspector shall: 
(1)  Make inspection of or cause to be inspected all buildings and structures for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render such places a dangerous building within the terms of section 14-181 of this article. 
(2)  Have the authority according to law to enter, examine and survey, at all reasonable times, all buildings and structures. 
(3)  Make inspection of, or cause to be inspected annually, each and every multiple dwelling and the premises connected therewith, and make inspections of or cause to be inspected other buildings at such intervals as may be necessary. 
(4)  Report in writing to the building commission any dangerous building within the standards set forth in section 14-181. Such report shall include: 
a.  The name of the owner, his agent, and all other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the latest city tax assessment roll, and by the possession of the premises in question; 
b.  The legal description of the premises, a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, and a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building; and 
c.  A recommendation that such building be repaired, vacated or demolished. 
(5)  Appear at all hearings conducted by the building commission and testify as to the condition of the dangerous building. 
(6)  Post such notices as the building commission may direct. 
(Code 1975,  5-235) 
Sec. 14-185. - Powers and duties of building commission. 
    The building commission shall: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a report of the building inspector as provided for in section 14-184(4), give written notice, in the manner set forth in section 14-186, to the owner, his agent and all other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the latest city tax assessment roll, and the possession of the premises in question, to appear before the commission on the date specified in the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the building inspector's notice to the commission. 
(2)  Hold a public hearing and hear such testimony of the building inspector or of the owner, his agent and any other persons having an interest in such building as aforesaid. 
(3)  Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to subsection (2) of this section as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the terms of section 14-181. 
(4)  Issue an order, based upon the findings of fact made pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, which shall dispose of the matter and which shall contain at least: 
a.  A dismissal of the matter; or 
b.  A statement of the conditions that constitute violations of the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state, and what must be done to correct such conditions, in accordance with the standards provided for in section 14-183, and a time limit which shall be a reasonable time for the correction of the violations. 
(5)  Direct the building inspector and the city attorney to take such action as may be necessary for the repairing, vacating or demolishing of the building or structure under the standards provided for in section 14-183 and for causing the costs on such repair, vacation or demolition to be charged against the land on which the building existed as a municipal lien, or cause such costs to be added to the tax duplicate as an assessment or be levied as a special tax against the land upon which the building stands or did stand, or to be recovered in a suit at law against the owner, if the owner, his agent or other person having an interest in such building shall fail to comply with the order provided in subsection (4) of this section. 
(6)  Direct the building inspector to post notices upon the building found to be unsafe, which shall read substantially as follows: 
"This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the building commission. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the order which has been given by the building commission regarding this building. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such order is complied with." 
(7)  Adopt rules and regulations regarding the time and place of meetings, which shall be open to the public, and keep a record of the proceedings showing the action of the commission and the vote of each member upon each question considered. The presence of four members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. The rules and regulations of the building commission shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1975,  5-236) 
Sec. 14-186. - Service of notice. 
    In all cases, service of notice of hearing and all other orders and notices of the building commission given under this article shall be made by U.S. Postal certified mail, with restricted delivery, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property. 
(Code 1975,  5-237; Ord. No. 1996-06,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 14-187. - Procedure in emergency cases. 
    In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the building inspector shall report such facts to the building commission, and the building commission shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in section 14-185(5). 
(Code 1975,  5-238) 
Sec. 14-188. - Failure to comply with order to repair, vacate or demolish. 
(a)  The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any order to repair, vacate or demolish such building given by the commission under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(b)  The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any order to vacate or who fails to repair such building in accordance with any order given as provided for in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  5-239) 
Sec. 14-189. - Unauthorized removal of posted notices. 
    Any unauthorized person removing the notice provided for in section 14-185(6), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined in accordance with section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  5-240) 
Sec. 14-190. - City officials not personally liable for damages resulting from enforcement of article. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Code 1975,  5-241) 
Secs. 14-191-14-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DISCRIMINATION IN HOUSING 

Sec. 14-211. - Intent. 
    It is hereby found that discrimination in housing violates the public policy of the city and that such discrimination is injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare of the city and the people thereof, and adversely affects the continued development, renewal, growth and progress of the people of the city and of the city. 
(Code 1975,  5-251) 
Sec. 14-212. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Age means chronological age. 
    Builders or suppliers of building materials means building contractors, members of building trades and owners, operators and agents of firms or companies engaged in the supplying of materials necessary to the construction of housing units or accommodations. 
    Discriminate or discrimination means any difference in treatment of individuals or groups in the sale, lease, rental, building or supplying of building materials, or financing of housing units or real estate or housing accommodations because of race, color, religion, ancestry, national or sectional origin, sex, marital status, age or handicap. 
    Financial institution means any person regularly engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans on real property. 
    Handicap means a determinable physical or mental condition of an individual, or a history of such condition, which may result from disease, accident, condition of birth, or functional disorder and which constitutes a physical or mental limitation which is unrelated to any individual's ability to acquire, rent or maintain property. 
    Owner means the lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent or other person having the right of ownership or possession or the right to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodations or any part thereof. 
    Person means an association, partnership or corporation, as well as a natural person. The term, as applied to a partnership or association, includes the members thereof, and as applied to corporations, includes their officers. 
    Real estate broker or salesman means a person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration: 
(1)  Lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property; 
(2)  Negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of those activities; 
(3)  Act as an agent engaged in those activities; 
(4)  Negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance upon real property; 
(5)  Is engaged in the business of listing real property in a publication; or 
(6)  A person employed by or acting on behalf of a real estate broker or salesman. 
    Real estate transaction means to sell, rent, lease, sublease, exchange or assign real property, and includes the furnishings or facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(Code 1975,  5-252) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 14-213. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  A person engaging in a real estate transaction, real estate broker or salesman, builder or supplier of building materials, lender, financial institution, advertiser or agent of any of the foregoing shall not discriminate against any other person because of the religion, race, color, national origin or sectional origin of such other person, or because of the religion, race, color, national or sectional origin of the friends or associates of such other person in regard to the sale, rental of, or other transaction or dealings concerning real property located in the city. 
(b)  A person engaging in a real estate transaction, real estate broker or salesman, builder or supplier of building materials, lender, financial institution, advertiser or agent of the foregoing shall not discriminate against any other person because of any handicap of such other person in regard to the sale, rental of, or other transaction or dealing concerning real property located in the city. 
(c)  A real estate broker or salesman shall not solicit for sale a listing for sale of any real estate by telephone, mail or personally, after the owner of such real estate has expressly requested such person, or the company such person represents, to cease such solicitations. 
(Code 1975,  5-253) 
Sec. 14-214. - Persons engaging in real estate transactions, brokers, salespersons. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. A person engaging in a real estate transaction, or a real estate broker or salesman, shall not on the basis of religion, race, color, national origin, handicap, age, sex, or marital status of a person or a person residing with that person: 
(1)  Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person. 
(2)  Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(3)  Refuse to receive from a person or transmit to a person a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction. 
(4)  Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person. 
(5)  Represent to a person that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or knowingly fail to bring a property listing to a person's attention, or refuse to permit a person to inspect real property. 
(6)  Print, circulate, post, mail or otherwise cause to be published a statement, advertisement, notice or sign, or use a form of application for a real estate transaction, or make a record of inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which indicates, directly or indirectly, an intent to make a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination with respect thereto. 
(7)  Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other if the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family resides in one of the housing accommodations, or to the rental of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling by a person if the lessor or a member of the lessor's immediate family resides therein. "Immediate family" as used in this subsection means a spouse, parent, child or sibling. 
(2)  The rental of a housing accommodation for not more than 12 months by the owner or lessor where it was occupied by him and maintained as his home for at least three months immediately preceding occupancy by the tenant and is temporarily vacated while maintaining legal residence. 
(3)  With respect to the age provision only, to the sale, rental or lease of housing accommodations meeting the requirements of federal, state or local housing programs for senior citizens, or accommodations otherwise intended, advertised, designed or operated, bona fide, for the purpose of providing housing accommodations for persons 50 years of age or older. 
(c)  Marital status information. Information relative to the marital status of an individual may be obtained when necessary for the preparation of a deed or other instrument of conveyance. 
(Code 1975,  5-254, 5-255) 
Sec. 14-215. - Financial institution; discrimination; exemption. 
(a)  A person to whom application is made for financial assistance or financing in connection with a real estate transaction or in connection with the construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance, or improvement of real property, or a representative of that person, shall not: 
(1)  Discriminate against the applicant because of the religion, handicap, race, color, national origin, age, sex or marital status of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
(2)  Use a form of application for financial assistance or financing or make or keep a record or inquiry in connection with an application for financial assistance or financing which indicates, directly or indirectly, a preference, limitation, specification or discrimination as to the religion, handicap, race, color, national origin, age, sex or marital status of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
(b)  Subsection (a)(2) of this section shall not apply to a form of application for financial assistance prescribed for the use of a lender regulated as a mortgagee under the National Housing Act, as amended, being 12 USC, sections 1701 to 1750g (Supp. 1973), or by a regulatory board or officer acting under the statutory authority of this state or the United States. 
(Code 1975,  5-256) 
Sec. 14-216. - Inducing sale of real property by representing future change in neighborhood composition; property values; behavior; schools. 
    A person who may benefit financially from a real estate transaction shall not: 
(1)  Induce, directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce directly or indirectly, the sale or listing for sale of real property by representing that a change has occurred or will or may occur with respect to the racial, color, national origin, sex, marital status, age, handicap, religious or ethnic composition of the block, neighborhood or area in which property is located. 
(2)  Induce, directly or indirectly, the sale or listing for sale of real property by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race, color, national origin, sex, marital status, age, handicap or religion in the area will or may result in: 
a.  The lowering of property values; 
b.  An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior; or 
c.  A decline in the quality of the schools in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located. 
(Code 1975,  5-257) 
Sec. 14-217. - Limitations. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective buyers or tenants for any reason other than religion, race, color, sex, marital status, age, handicap, or national or sectional origin. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as to limit the right of access by an individual to remedies before the civil rights commission of this state or before the courts of this state on an individual basis or to prohibit the cooperation between the city and the civil rights commission of this state. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall require an owner to offer property to the public at large before selling or renting it. 
(Code 1975,  5-258) 
Sec. 14-218. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any person convicted thereof may be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  5-259) 
Secs. 14-219-14-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 14-241. - Code adopted; purpose; copies on file. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, is adopted by reference as the property maintenance code in the city. The purpose of this code is to regulate and govern the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures in the City of St. Clair, providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore. A complete copy of such code is available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. The regulations set forth in the adopted code shall apply to all property, structures and buildings in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1997-02,  1, 2-3-97; Ord. No. 2011-08,  1, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 14-242. - Amendments. 
    The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code adopted in this article are hereby amended as set forth in this section. The following chapter and section numbers refer to like sections and subsections of the International Property Maintenance Code and are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of St. Clair. 
Section 103.5. Insert: City of St. Clair Fee Schedule. 
Section 112.4. Insert: One hundred Dollars ($100.00)-Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). 
Section 302.4. Insert: Six Inches (6"). 
Section 304.14. Insert: April 1-November 1. 
Section 602.3. Insert: October 1-May 1. 
Section 602.4. Insert: October 1 and May 1. 
(Ord. No. 1997-02,  2, 2-3-97; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2011-08,  1, 8-15-11) 
Secs. 14-243-14-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESIDENTIAL RENTAL DWELLINGS AND RENTAL UNITS 

Sec. 14-271. - Purpose. 
    To help protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens by attempting to prevent blight, avoid the creation and maintenance of nuisance and insure minimum maintenance of residential rental dwellings and rental units recognizing how the conditions set forth in this article can affect the general well-being and property values of residents, and identifying procedures for enforcement and providing penalties for violation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-272. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Certificate of compliance means a certificate issued by the building department, which certificate certifies compliance with these codified ordinances. 
    Common utility areas means all areas of a rental dwelling other than the dwelling units themselves, including, but not limited to, all mechanical rooms, utility rooms, storage areas, exit facilities, recreational areas and other public spaces within or connected to the building. 
    Lease means any written or oral agreement that sets forth conditions concerning the use and occupancy of rental dwellings or rental units. 
    Notice of violation means a notice issued to the owner or registered agent stating that there has been a violation of this chapter or any other applicable code, ordinance, rule or regulation concerning the premises. 
    Occupancy includes all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a rental dwelling or rental unit. 
    Owner means any person having a legal or equitable interest in the premises. 
    Premises means any lot or piece of land, inclusive of the rental dwellings, rental units, common utility areas and all other improvements or any part thereof. 
    Rental dwelling means any structure, building or other facility promised and/or leased in whole or in part to a residential tenant for use as a home, residence or sleeping unit, regardless of the type, form or amount of remuneration received as a result of any such lease or other arrangement. "Rental dwelling" includes, but is not limited to, all two-family dwellings, multiple dwellings, apartment buildings, boarding houses, rooming houses, hotels, motels and flats, and all single-family houses (excluding those houses which are owner-occupied and are not rented in whole or in part). "Owner-occupied" shall only include the following: The actual owner of record, surviving spouse, children, parents or grandparents. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-273. - Compliance required. 
    Every owner of a rental dwelling or rental shall comply with each of the various requirements of this chapter so as to obtain and keep current a certificate of compliance for the premises of each rental dwelling and all dwelling units therein. The building official may revoke a certificate of compliance for any violation of this Code, the codified ordinances, rules and regulations of the city or any state-mandated codes or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-274. - Registration of rental dwelling and units. 
(a)  The owner of a rental dwelling, occupied or unoccupied, shall register with the building department his or her name and business address, the location of each dwelling and the number of rental units within such dwelling. Notification of change in ownership or use of any rental dwelling shall be officially provided within 30 days after such change for the purpose of maintaining an accurate registry of such information. This requirement does not relieve the registered owner of any such property of the responsibility to fully comply with the inspection, maintenance and code compliance requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  A registry of owners and premises shall be maintained by the building department. Such registry shall be kept as a public record and shall be available for public inspection. Owners who do not reside within a 25-mile radius of the city shall appoint a resident agent or other responsible party who will act as emergency contact on behalf of the owner when necessary. 
(c)  If rental dwellings are managed or operated by an agent or representative, the agent or representative's name and business address shall be provided to the department, and shall be placed with the owner's name and business address in the registry. If the owner is a corporation, the names and addresses of its officers shall be provided and recorded in the registry. A post office box shall not be used as a legal address for the owner/agent. An actual property address shall be listed. 
(d)  Any change in address of the owner, agent or representative shall be provided by such owner, agent or representative to the department within 30 days of such change. 
(e)  If any rental dwelling is sold, it shall be the obligation of the seller or his or her agent to provide the purchaser with a current certificate of compliance for such dwelling and to also notify the department, within 30 days, of the name and address of the purchaser. If the certificate of compliance was last issued more than 12 months prior to the date of the sale, then the premises must be inspected prior to the sale. Correction of identified violations may be assumed by the purchaser if the department is provided with an affidavit of such assumption from the purchaser. This requirement shall not relieve any owner of a rental dwelling of the responsibility to keep registrations current and to comply with every provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-275. - Registration forms and fees. 
(a)  There shall be an initial registration fee for each rental dwelling. Such fees shall be paid by the owner or his or her agent or representative at the time of registration. A schedule of fees will be adopted by resolution of the city council. A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be made available at the city clerk's office. 
(b)  A late fee of $100.00 shall be added to the registration fee for every registration which, within 30 days of the transfer of ownership interest, has not been re-registered. 
(c)  Any change in address of the owner, agent or representative shall be provided by such owner, agent or representative to the building department within 30 days of such change. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-276. - Inspections: Right of entry. 
(a)  The building official and such other code enforcement officials as the superintendent may designate are hereby authorized to make inspections of rental dwellings, occupied or unoccupied, as follows: 
(1)  Prior to the sale thereof, if a certificate of compliance has not been issued within the 12 months preceding such sale; 
(2)  Prior to being removed from the registry for the purpose of becoming an owner-occupied single-family dwelling, if a certificate of compliance has not been issued within the 12 months preceding such change in occupancy; 
(3)  Upon identification of external violations documented by the superintendent or upon receipt of a written and signed complaint registered by a tenant, resident and/or neighborhood association if, after investigation, the superintendent determines that such inspections are reasonably required to accomplish the intent of this chapter; and 
(b)  All owners, agents, representatives and tenants shall comply with inspection requests of the superintendent and such other code enforcement officials as are provided for in subsection (a) hereof. 
    A request for inspection shall read in part: 
    NOTICE: PURSUANT TO CHAPTER 14, Article X OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF ST. CLAIR, A RENTAL INSPECTION IS REQUIRED. YOU MAY REFUSE ENTRY TO AN INSPECTOR WHO DOES NOT HAVE A SEARCH WARRANT. SHOULD AN OWNER, AGENT, REPRESENTATIVE OR TENANT REFUSE TO CONSENT TO AN INSPECTION, A SEARCH WARRANT SHALL BE REQUIRED AND MAY BE OBTAINED TO CONDUCT AN INSPECTION. 
    The owner of such property shall pay the prescribed fees and schedule the required inspections within ten days of the date of the notice of inspection. The owner shall inform all tenants of the scheduled inspection and assure entry into each unit and access to all areas at the time of inspection. The superintendent or his or her representative shall provide seven days notice of inspection for the premises, and every owner, agent, representative and tenant shall provide unrestricted access to the premises for the purpose of making such inspections. In the event of an emergency or life threatening situation, the owner, agent, representative or tenant shall allow immediate inspection. Refusal to grant access for inspection will not preclude the superintendent from obtaining a search warrant to allow inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-277. - Records of violation; notice to correct. 
(a)  If, upon inspection of a rental dwelling and premises, any unit or any part thereof is found to be in violation of this chapter or any applicable building code, zoning regulation or other code relating to the maintenance or conditions of said property, such violation shall be recorded by the building department. Notice thereof, by regular mail, shall be given to the owner, agent or representative as such appears in the registry. 
(b)  It shall be the property owner's responsibility to correct all life-safety code violations immediately and to maintain such property in a safe and compliant manner at all times. All violations shall be corrected within 60 days. 
(c)  Correction of maintenance violations which can be performed without obtaining a permit must be verified and documented by an inspector; this will be done without additional cost provided that the owner corrects all violations and request verification within the prescribed time. 
(d)  Correction of violations which must be performed by an appropriately licensed or qualified person shall be done in compliance with the permit requirements specified in these codified ordinances. Every such permit shall be additionally identified as a "correctional permit." 
(e)  A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the building department for each rental dwelling when it is established that such dwelling or facility is in compliance with all of the code requirements applicable to existing structures or residential occupancies. Said certificate shall remain in effect until the sale, transfer or change in ownership for said premises. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-278. - Inspection fees. 
    Each unit in a rental dwelling shall be inspected as required by this chapter. The fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. The applicable fees shall be paid within ten days of the date of the notice. Accounting of the inspection fees collected and the distribution thereof shall be made through the rental ordinance accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-279. - Enforcement. 
    The building official and/or his or her authorized representative shall serve as ordinance officers for purposes of enforcement of this chapter and shall be authorized to issue notices, orders, violations and court appearance tickets relative to violations of this chapter. 
(1)  If any owner of any rental dwelling fails to comply with the registration requirements specified herein, a final notice and order to comply shall be issued. Failure to comply with the order shall result in the addition of an administrative fee of $100.00 and the total of the unpaid fees shall then be assessed as a lien against the real property containing such rental dwelling. 
(2)  If any owner of any rental dwelling fails to comply with the inspection requirements specified herein after being properly notified, a final notice and order to comply shall be issued. If the order is not promptly complied with, each dwelling unit contained therein shall be posted with a notice requiring that the occupant of the unit provide entry for inspection purposes at a specified date and time, and an administrative fee of $100.00 per unit shall be added to the prescribed inspection fees and assessed as a lien against the real property containing such units. 
(3)  If any owner of any rental dwelling fails to correct the violations identified in the inspection report, as required by this chapter, a final notice and order to comply shall be issued. If the order is not promptly complied with, each dwelling unit which is in violation of the applicable codes shall be posted with a notice that said unit is substandard and in violation of these codified ordinances. An administrative fee of $100.00 per noncomplying unit shall be charged to the owner of the substandard rental property and court action to force compliance will be initiated. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-280. - Conflict of laws. 
    In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any provision of any state statute or any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the city, the provision which established the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public shall prevail. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impair the rights of the city under any ordinance or code relating to condemnation of structures or under any related code or ordinance regarding the maintenance, condition or safety of structures. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-281. - Appeals. 
    Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of this chapter may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the hearing board on dangerous buildings and code appeals provided that such person files, in the office of the building department, a written petition requesting such hearing and containing a statement of the grounds of the appeal within 20 days after the day the notice was served. 
    The hearing board on dangerous buildings and code appeals shall serve as the code appeals board, with all the powers and duties afforded to it under chapter 14 of these codified ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-282. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to have all rental dwellings maintained according to the minimum codes governing existing buildings and residential occupancies. It is not intended to have such rental dwellings brought up to the current code requirements for new buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Sec. 14-283. - Penalty and sanction-Misdemeanor. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated under it for which a penalty is not specifically prescribed shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided for in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 4-16-12) 
Secs. 14-284-14-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 14-301. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Historic District Ordinance of the City of St. Clair." 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-302. - Statement of purpose. 
    Historic preservation is hereby declared to be a public purpose and the city council of the City of St. Clair may hereby regulate the construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, and demolition of resources in historic districts within the city limits. The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Safeguard the heritage of the City of St. Clair by preserving districts which reflect elements of its history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
(2)  Stabilize and improve property values in each district and surrounding areas. 
(3)  Foster civic beauty. 
(4)  Strengthen the local economy. 
(5)  Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the City of St. Clair and of the State of Michigan. 
    The City of St. Clair may by ordinance establish one or more historic districts. The historic district or districts shall be administered by the historic district commission pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-303. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Alteration means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its basic size or shape. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and does not adversely affect a resource. 
    Commission means the historic district commission of the City of St. Clair. 
    Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect. 
    Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
    Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
    Fire alarm system means a system designed to detect and annunciate the presence of fire or by-products of fire. Fire alarm system includes smoke alarms. 
    Historic district means an area, or group of areas, not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
    Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment, and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
    Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of the City of St. Clair, State of Michigan, or the United States. 
    Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding under Section 399.205(6) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended. 
    Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or manmade landscaped area that provides a connective link or buffer between other resources. 
    Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for the purposes of this article. 
    Proposed historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an established historic district. 
    Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for the purposes of this article. 
    Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or non-historic buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces located within a historic district. 
    Smoke alarm means a single-station or multiple-station alarm responsive to smoke and not connected to a system. As used in this subsection, "single-station alarm" means an assembly incorporating a detector, the control equipment, and the alarm sounding device into a single unit, operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation. "Multiple-station alarm" means two or more single-station alarms that are capable of interconnection such that actuation of one alarm causes all integrated separate audible alarms to operate. 
    "Work" means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-304. - Historic district study committee and the study committee report. 
    Before establishing a historic district, the city council shall appoint a historic district study committee. A majority of the persons appointed to the study committee shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. The study committee shall contain representation of at least one member appointed from one or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations. The study committee shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district following procedures established by the state historic preservation office of the Michigan Historical Center. 
(2)  Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and historic resources located within that district. 
(3)  Determine the total number of historic and non-historic resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 CFR part 60, and criteria established or approved by the state historic preservation office of the Michigan Historical Center. 
(4)  Prepare a preliminary historic district study committee report that addresses at a minimum all of the following: 
a.  The charge of the committee. 
b.  The composition of committee membership. 
c.  The historic district(s) studied. 
d.  The boundaries of each proposed historic district in writing and on maps. 
e.  The history of each proposed historic district. 
f.  The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria. 
g.  Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and recommendations to the local planning body, the state historic preservation office of the Michigan Historical Center, the Michigan Historical Commission, and the state historic preservation review board. 
h.  Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public pursuant to Section 399.203(4) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended. 
(5)  Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the historic district study committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with public Act 267 of 1976, as amended. Public notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by Public Act 267. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail not less than 14 calendar days prior to the hearing to the owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the most current tax rolls. The report shall be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended. 
(6)  After the date of the public hearing, the committee and the city council have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the city council, to take the following actions: 
a.  The committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the local planning body to the city council as to the establishment of a historic district(s). If the recommendation is to establish a historic district(s), the final report shall include a draft of the proposed ordinance(s). 
b.  After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of a historic district(s), the city council, at its discretion, may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance(s). If the city council passes an ordinance(s) establishing one or more historic districts, the city shall file a copy of the ordinance(s), including a legal description of the property or properties located within the historic district(s) with the register of deeds. The city council shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the local unit, have approved the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a written petition. 
(7)  A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a committee in the performance of an official function of the historic district commission should be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-305. - Establishing additional, modifying, or eliminating historic districts. 
(a)  The city council may at any time establish by ordinance additional historic districts, including proposed districts previously considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district, or may eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing, modifying, or eliminating a historic district, a historic district study committee appointed by the city council shall follow the procedures as stated in Section 399.203(1-3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended. To conduct these activities, the city council may retain the initial committee, establish a standing committee, or establish a committee to consider only specific proposed districts and then be dissolved. The committee shall consider any previously written committee reports pertinent to the proposed action. 
(b)  In considering elimination of a historic district, a committee shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 399.203(1-3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended for the issuance of a preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of showing one or more of the following: 
(1)  The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled the establishment of the district. 
(2)  The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined. 
(3)  The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures. 
(c)  At its discretion, the historic district commission may recommend allowing structures within a historic district to be significantly altered, demolished, removed, and/or relocated. Within 21 days upon receiving such a recommendation from the historic district commission, the city council shall both consider it and determine whether to adopt it. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14; Ord. No. 2017-02,  1, 4-3-17) 
Sec. 14-306. - The historic district commission. 
    The city council may establish by ordinance a commission to be called a historic district commission. The commission may be established at any time, but not later than the time the first historic district is established. Each member of the commission shall reside within the city limits. The commission shall consist of seven members. Members shall be appointed by the city council. A majority of the members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. Members shall be appointed for a term of three years, except the initial appointments of three members for a term of two years and two members for a term of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be for three-year terms. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. In the event of a vacancy on the commission, interim appointments shall be made by the city council within 60 calendar days to complete the unexpired term of such position. Two members shall be appointed from a list submitted by duly organized local historic preservation organizations. If such a person is available for appointment, one member shall be an architect who has two years of architectural experience or who is duly registered in the State of Michigan. 
    The city council may prescribe powers and duties of the commission, in addition to those prescribed in this article, that foster historic preservation activities, projects, and programs in the local unit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-307. - Historic district commission meetings, recordkeeping and rules of procedure. 
(a)  The historic district commission shall meet at least quarterly or more frequently at the call of the commission. 
(b)  The business that the commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended. Public notice of the date, time, and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by Public Act 267. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the commission. 
(c)  The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information, Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended. 
(d)  The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall adopt design review standards and guidelines to carry out its duties under this act. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-308. - Delegation of minor classes of work. 
    The commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to its staff, or to another delegated authority. The commission shall provide to its delegated authority specific written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness under this section. The commission shall review the certificates of appropriateness issued by the delegate on at least a quarterly basis to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should be continued. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-309. - Ordinary maintenance. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district or to prevent work on any resource under a permit issued by the inspector of buildings or other duly delegated authority before the ordinance [from which this article derives] was enacted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-310. - Review by the commission. 
    The commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a resource and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless specifically authorized to do so by the city council or unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not prescribed in Section 399.205(3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-311. - Design review standards and guidelines. 
(a)  In reviewing plans, the commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 67. Design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic districts administered by the commission may be followed if they are equivalent in guidance to the Secretary of Interior's standards and guidelines and are established or approved by the state historic preservation office of the Michigan Historical Center. 
(b)  In reviewing plans, the commission shall also consider all of the following: 
(1)  The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area. 
(2)  The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area. 
(3)  The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used. 
(4)  Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the commission finds relevant. 
(5)  Whether the applicant has certified in the application that the property where the work will be undertaken has, or will have before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1501 to 125.1531. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-312. - Permit applications. 
(a)  A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the exterior appearance of a resource is performed within a historic district. The person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government proposing to do that work shall file an application for a permit with the inspector of buildings. Upon receipt of a complete application, the inspector of buildings shall immediately refer the application, along with all required supporting materials that make the application complete to the commission. A permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the commission has acted on the application by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed as prescribed in this article. A commission shall not issue a certificate of appropriateness unless the applicant certifies in the application that the property where work will be undertaken has, or will have before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1501 to 125.1531. 
(b)  The commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices to proceed, and denials of applications for permits with the inspector of buildings. A permit shall not be issued until the commission has acted as prescribed by this article. 
(c)  If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a resource the commission considers valuable to the City of St. Clair, the State of Michigan, or the nation, and the commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the city, state, or nation, the commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for the preservation of the resource. 
(d)  The failure of the commission to act on an application within 60 calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the commission, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the commission, shall be considered to constitute approval. 
(e)  The commission may charge a reasonable fee to process a permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-313. - Denials. 
    If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the inspector or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied by a written explanation by the commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for commission review when the suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also include the notification of the applicant's right to appeal to the state historic preservation review board and to the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-314. - Notice to proceeed. 
    Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a notice to proceed by the commission if any of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the structure's occupants. 
(2)  The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing, and environmental clearances. 
(3)  Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner. 
(4)  Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-315. - Appeal of a commission decision. 
(a)  An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the state historic preservation review board. The appeal shall be filed within 60 calendar days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The appellant may submit all or part of the appellant's evidence and arguments in written form. The state historic preservation review board shall consider an appeal at its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the state historic preservation review board may appeal the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction over the historic district commission whose decision was appealed to the state historic preservation review board. 
(b)  Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the City of St. Clair, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission may appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision rendered under this article may not appeal to the court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the state historic preservation review board. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-316. - Work without a permit. 
    When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission may require an owner to restore the resource to the condition that the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the commission may seek an order from the circuit court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court, the commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The costs of the work done shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the City of St. Clair as a special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to an order of the circuit court, the commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-317. - Demolition by neglect. 
    Upon a finding by the commission that a historic resource within a historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the commission may do either of the following: 
(1)  Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect. 
(2)  If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the City of St. Clair as a special assessment against the property. The commission or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-318. - Review of work in proposed districts. 
    Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic, architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the city council may, at its discretion, adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed historic district be referred to the historic district commission as prescribed in section 14-312 of the article. The historic district commission shall review permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic district was an established historic district. The review may continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one year, or until such time as the city council approves or rejects the establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-319. - Emergency moratorium. 
    If the city council determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to resources located within an established or proposed historic district, the city council may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium on all such wok for a period not to exceed six months. The city council may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six months, upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-320. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this act is responsible for a civil violation and may be fined not more than $5,000.00. 
(b)  A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this act may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-321. - Acceptance of gifts or grants. 
    The city council may accept state or federal grants for historic preservation purposes; may participate in state and federal programs that benefit historic preservation, and may accept public or private gifts for historic preservation purposes. The city council may appoint the historic district commission to accept and administer grants, gifts, and program responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 14-322. - Acquisition of historic resources. 
    If all efforts by the commission to preserve a resource fail, or if it is determined by the city council that public ownership is most suitable, the city council, if considered to be the public interest, may acquire the resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation of the commission. The commission is responsible for maintaining publicly owned resources using its own funds, if not specifically designated for other purposes, or public funds committed for that use by the city council. Upon recommendation of the commission, the city may sell resources acquired under this section with protective easements included in the property transfer documents, if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03,  1, 5-19-14) 
Secs. 14-323-14-349. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-350. - Establishment of museum historic district. 
    The boundaries of the museum historic district are as shown on the map on file in the office of the city clerk which is incorporated into and made a part of this chapter, and is comprised of the following described areas: 
(1)  ENTIRE BLOCK BOUNDED N BY TRUMBULL ST, S BY CASS ST, E BY 4TH ST & W BY 5TH ST EXC S 60' OF E 90' THEREOF MAP OF ST CLAIR EXEMPT 
Commonly known as 411 Trumbull Street; Parcel ID No. 74-07-049-0040-000 and 
(2)  S 60' OF E 90' OF THE BLOCK BOUNDED N BY TRUMBULL ST, S BY CASS ST, E BY 4TH ST & W BY 5TH ST MAP OF ST CLAIR EXEMPT 
Commonly known as 314 S. Fourth Street; Parcel ID No. 74-07-049-0040-100 
(Ord. No. 2016-01,  1, 2-1-16) 
Secs. 14-351-14-354. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-355. - Establishment of St. Clair Inn historic district. 
    The boundaries of the St. Clair Inn historic district are as shown on the map on file in the office of the city clerk, which is incorporated into and made a part of this chapter, and is comprised of the following described areas: 
(1)  LOTS 1 & 6 BLK 80 MAP OF ST. CLAIR 
Commonly known as 511 N. Riverside Ave.; Parcel ID No. 74-07-049-0353-000; 
(2)  LOTS 2, 5 & N 1/2 OF LOTS 3 & 4 BLK 80 MAP OF ST. CLAIR 
Commonly known as 507 N. Riverside Ave,; Parcel ID No. 74-07-049-0354-000; 
(3)  S 1/2 OF LOT 3 BLK 80 MAP OF ST. CLAIR 
Commonly known as 118 Vine Street; Parcel ID No. 74-07-049-355-000; 
(4)  S 1/2 OF LOT 4 BLK 80 MAP OF ST. CLAIR 
Commonly known as 503 N. Riverside Ave.; Parcel ID No. 74-07-049-356-000; 
(5)  LOT 13 ASSESSORS MOORE-ST. CLAIR PLAT ALSO LOT 18 ST. CLAIR URBAN RENEWAL REPLAT NO. 1 OWNED & OCC AS PARCEL 1 
Commonly known as 500 N. Riverside Ave.; Parcel ID No. 74-07-700-0019-000; and 
(6)  THAT PART OF LOTS 5 & 9 HODGSONS SUBD OF 5 A LOT 40 & THAT PART OF 5 A LOT 41, MAP OF PC 304 & 305, THAT LIES N OF BLK 80 MAP OF ST. CLAIR & S OF A LINE BEG ON E LINE OF SAID LOT 5, 10' NLY FROM ITS SE COR, TH RUNG WLY TO A PTE ON E LINE OF 2 ND ST 3.12' SLY FROM SW COR OF SAID LOT 9 OWNED & OCC AS ONE PARCEL 
Commonly known as Parking Lot; Parcel ID No. 74-07-053-0169-000 
The above-described Parcels 1-6 are collectively known as the St. Clair Inn Planned Unit Development ("SCIPUD") by operation of City of St. Clair Ordinance No. 1994-01, recorded at Liber 1639, Page 397 of the St. Clair County Records on August 14, 1997, which legally describes the SCIPUD as follows: 
BEGINNING AT THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 13 ASSESSORS MOORE-ST. CLAIR PLAT WITH A LINE RUNNING SOUTHWEST ALONG THE NORTH BANK OF THE ST. CLAIR RIVER TO THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF LOT 18 ST. CLAIR URBAN RENEWAL REPLAT NO. 1; THENCE WEST TO THE CENTERLINE OF THE M-29 RIGHT-OF-WAY; THENCE NORTH ALONG THE CENTERLINE OF THE M-29 RIGHT-OF-WAY TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE CENTERLINE OF THE VINE STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY EXTENDED; THENCE WEST ALONG THE CENTERLINE OF THE VINE STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE CENTERLINE OF THE SECOND STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY EXTENDED; THENCE NORTH ALONG THE CENTERLINE OF THE SECOND STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE SOUTH PROPERTY LINE OF LOT 5 HODGSONS SUBDIVISION 5A LOT 40 MAP OF PC 304 & 305 TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE M-29 RIGHT-OF-WAY AND SAID LINE EXTENDED; THENCE RUNNING NORTH ALONG THE M-29 ROW CENTERLINE TO THE INTERSECTION OF THE NORTH PROPERTY LINE OF LOT 13 ASSESSORS MOORE-ST. CLAIR PLAT EXTENDED; THENCE RUNNING SOUTHEAST TO THE POINT OF THE BEGINNING. THE HEREIN DESCRIBED PARCEL CONTAINS LOT 13 ASSESSORS MOORE-ST. CLAIR PLAT, LOT 18 ST. CLAIR URBAN RENEWAL REPLAT NO. 1, LOTS 1-6, BLOCK 80 MAP OF ST. CLAIR, A PORTION OF LOTS 5 & 9 HODGSONS SUBDIVISION OF 5A LOT 40 AND A PART OF 5A LOT 41 MAP OF PC 304 & 305, ALL OF THE SAME LOCATED IN THE CITY OF ST. CLAIR, ST. CLAIR COUNTY, MICHIGAN. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02,  1, 2-1-16) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-25. - License required. 
    No person shall, directly or indirectly, operate, conduct, maintain or manage any business, trade, occupation or premises without first procuring the license in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(Code 1975,  11-12) 
Sec. 18-26. - Evidence of doing business. 
    The fact that any person represents himself as being engaged in any business, trade or occupation for the transaction of which a license is required, or that such person exhibited a sign or advertisement indicating that he is engaged in such business, trade or occupation, shall be prima facie evidence of the liability of such person to pay the required license fee. 
Sec. 18-27. - State license or permit not exemption. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct, maintenance or management of any business, trade, occupation or premises shall not exempt such person from the necessity of procuring a license from the city. 
Sec. 18-28. - Application procedure. 
    An applicant for a license shall make an application for the license to the city clerk in the form and manner prescribed by the city clerk and shall state, under oath, such facts as shall be relevant to the granting of such license, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The names, business and residential addresses of all owners, partners, officers and managers at the applicant's business. 
(2)  The location of the business establishment. 
(3)  The nature and character of the business which is conducted at the business establishment. 
(4)  A list of all assumed trade or firm names under which the applicant will conduct business. 
(5)  Whether or not the applicant or the person conducting the business has during the past five years ever been convicted of a crime, excluding motor vehicular traffic offenses, and if so, the circumstances thereof. 
(6)  Whether application is for the renewal of a license previously granted under the terms of this article. 
(7)  Whether the applicant has ever been adjudicated a bankrupt. 
(Code 1975,  11-13) 
Sec. 18-29. - Hearing on original application. 
(a)  All applications completed as required in this article requesting a business license for any business establishment which has not previously been licensed under the terms of this article, and all applications for a license for any business establishment in which the information given on the original application has changed, shall be issued by the city clerk provided that, in the opinion of the city clerk: 
(1)  The application is free from any fraud, misrepresentation or other materially false statement of fact; and 
(2)  The business for which the application is being made will not be operated in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or other danger to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
(3)  The applicant does not have outstanding, ongoing, or uncorrected violations of any city code and does not owe a debt to the city, including, but not limited to, outstanding tax liability or unpaid utility bills. 
(b)  If the city clerk rejects the application, the applicant may make request in writing before the city council to review the application. The applicant shall be notified at least ten days prior to such hearing of the date, time and place of the hearing and shall be given the opportunity to appear and be heard. The city council shall at the conclusion of the hearing, or within 20 days thereafter, either grant or deny the license. 
(c)  The city council shall grant a license for any lawful business for which an application is made as provided in this article, if it is determined that: 
(1)  The application is free from any fraud, misrepresentation or other materially false statement of fact; and 
(2)  The business for which the application is being made will not be operated in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or other danger to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
(3)  The applicant does not have outstanding, ongoing, or uncorrected violations of any city code and does not owe a debt to the city, including, but not limited to, outstanding tax liability or unpaid utility bills. 
(Code 1975,  11-14; Ord. No. 2011-13,  1, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 18-30. - Terms of license. 
    Each license granted under this article shall expire on the first Monday in January of each year. 
(Code 1975,  11-16) 
Sec. 18-31. - Application for renewal of license. 
    Any application for renewal of a license previously granted under the provisions of this article and in which it appears that there has been no major change in the information given in the last previous application shall be granted by the city clerk upon receipt of a properly completed application as required in this article along with the required fee; provided that the applicant seeking renewal does not have ongoing, or uncorrected violations of any city code and does not owe a debt to the city, including, but not limited to outstanding tax liability or unpaid utility bills. If the city clerk determines such circumstances to exist. then renewal of the business license shall not be granted until those circumstances cease to exist. 
(Code 1975,  11-15; Ord. No. 2011-13,  1, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 18-32. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  A license granted under this article may be suspended by the city clerk or police chief for not more than 15 days when the city clerk or police chief has probable cause to believe that: 
(1)  A licensee has made a materially false statement on an application for a license. 
(2)  A licensee has conducted, or is conducting, a business in an unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace. 
(3)  A licensee has outstanding, ongoing, or uncorrected violations of any city code; or, owes a debt to the city, including, but not limited to, outstanding tax liability or unpaid utility bills. 
(b)  The city council shall review the action of the city clerk or the police chief before the expiration of the suspension period. The licensee shall be notified reasonably of the time and place of the hearing and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The city council may reinstate or revoke the license, as the facts may warrant, but such action shall be taken within ten days of such hearing. 
(Code 1975,  11-17; Ord. No. 2011-13,  1, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 18-33. - License fees. 
    The annual fee for a license shall be set forth from time to time by resolution of the city council. Any person licensed under this article who fails to renew such license as required by section 18-25 prior to the last effective date of the current license shall pay double the amount of the applicable fees established by the city council as aforesaid, at the time such license is renewed. 
(Code 1975,  11-18) 
Sec. 18-34. - Display of license. 
    Any licensee under this article shall prominently display a license obtained pursuant to this article in the business establishment for which it was granted. 
(Code 1975,  11-19) 
Sec. 18-35. - Transferability. 
    No license granted under this article shall be transferable. 
(Code 1975,  11-20) 
Sec. 18-36. - Enforcement; notice required; exception. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the police department of the city, and all violations of this article, or any part or provision of any such violation, shall be reported to the city clerk within three days of the discovery of the violation. The city clerk shall send ten days' written notice of the violation to the person who is causing the same, advising such person of the substance of the applicable requirements of this chapter, and that enforcement proceedings will be commenced unless the violation is corrected within ten days of the date of the notice. The notice required under this section shall not be construed to prohibit a peace officer from exercising jurisdiction over a violation of this article as in the case of any other misdemeanor committed in the officer's presence. 
(Code 1975,  11-21) 
Sec. 18-37. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated under it for which a penalty is not specifically prescribed shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided for in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  11-22; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2011-10,  1, 10-3-11) 
Secs. 18-38-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Taxicab means and includes all motor vehicles, except motor buses, engaged in the transportation of passengers for hire in the city. 
(Code 1975,  19-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-62. - Vehicle equipment. 
    Any taxicab for which a license is issued by the city under the provisions of this article shall be equipped with all the devices, equipment, and other requirements set forth in the motor vehicle act of the state as being necessary on vehicles used for hire, and any failure to properly attach and maintain on any taxicab licensed under the provisions of this article, any of the equipment or devices required by the laws of the state to be carried on a motor vehicle used for hire, shall be considered a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-63. - Vehicle condition. 
    All taxicabs licensed under the provisions of this article shall be kept and maintained in a safe condition of repair meeting all requirements of the state motor vehicle code, and the interior thereof shall be kept at all times in a clean, neat and sanitary condition. The vehicle licensed shall be inspected annually by a Michigan Certified Automobile Mechanic and a certificate signed by the mechanic certifying that the vehicle is safe for the transportation of passengers shall be provided to the city. This certification shall be submitted with the license application and annually thereafter. 
(Code 1975,  19-3; Ord. No. 2009-03,  1, 5-18-09) 
Sec. 18-64. - Rates of fare. 
    The city council may, by resolution, establish the rates of fare to be charged by taxicabs engaged in the transportation of passengers, and no greater rate of fare shall, at any time, be charged by the operators thereof than fixed by the council. A printed schedule of such rates, if adopted, shall be conspicuously posted in each taxicab. 
(Code 1975,  19-4) 
Sec. 18-65. - Limitations as to passengers. 
    No taxicab shall carry more passengers than its licensed seating capacity and not more than one passenger shall ride in the front seat with the driver. It shall be unlawful to drive or operate any taxicab while any person is riding thereon outside of the body thereof, and it shall be unlawful for any person to ride outside of the body of such taxicab. 
(Code 1975,  19-5) 
Sec. 18-66. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Licenses granted under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons in addition to any other reasons set forth in article III of this chapter: 
(1)  If the information contained in the application was false or misleading; 
(2)  If the owner, operator or any driver in his employ repeatedly has failed to operate the taxicab in accordance with the provisions of this article, the traffic ordinance of the city, the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States; 
(3)  For any immoral conduct on the part of the taxicab licensee or the licensed driver of any taxicab; 
(4)  If the owner or operator shall cease to operate the taxicab for a period of 30 consecutive days without having obtained permission for cessation from the city superintendent. 
(Code 1975,  19-6; Ord. No. 2009-03,  1, 5-18-09) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2009-03, adopted May 18, 2009, changed the title of  18-66 from "Revocation of licenses" to "Suspension or revocation." 
Sec. 18-67. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, in addition to all other penalties provided herein, be subject to a fine of not to exceed $500.00, or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
Secs. 18-68-18-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE LICENSE 

Sec. 18-81. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab upon the streets of the city without having first obtained a license therefor for each of such taxicabs from the city council as provided in this division. Application for license will be made in writing on all forms supplied by the city. The application shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, residence address, business address and date of birth; 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, association or corporation, the names and addresses of all partners, managers, officers and directors; 
(3)  The make, body style, year, vehicle identification number, state license plate number and the seating capacity of each taxicab; 
(4)  The number of taxicabs to be operated; 
(5)  Whether the applicant is the owner of the vehicles, and if not, the name and address of the owner; 
(6)  Such other information as the council may require. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03,  1, 5-18-09) 
State Law reference- Authority to license vehicles for hire, MCL 81.1, MSA 5.1740. 
Sec. 18-82. - Applicant's insurance. 
    No license shall be issued under this division until and unless the applicant for the license deposits with the city clerk a prepaid policy or certificate of liability insurance for each taxicab or motor vehicle for hire for which a license is sought. Such policy is to indemnify the applicant against claims for injury to persons and property arising out of the operation of each taxicab in the sum of at least $100,000.00 for injury or death to a single person, $300,000.00 for injury or death of more than one person resulting from a single accident, and $100,000.00 property damage. Policies of insurance so deposited shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the same to give ten days' written notice to the city clerk before such policy may be canceled. When such policy has been canceled and the ten-day period above provided has elapsed, the licensee shall cease to operate or permit to be operated within the city such taxicab, and the license issued therefor shall be automatically revoked. 
(Code 1975,  19-21; Ord. No. 2009-03,  1, 5-18-09) 
Sec. 18-83. - License fee. 
    The annual fee for each taxicab shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1975,  19-23) 
Sec. 18-84. - Issuance. 
    Taxicab licenses shall be issued by the city clerk's office when all requirements of this article and other applicable provisions of this Code have been met. 
(Code 1975,  19-24) 
Sec. 18-85. - Transfer. 
(a)  When the ownership of any taxicab shall change, whether by operation of law or otherwise, the taxicab license pertaining to such taxicab shall be automatically revoked. Any transfer of, or attempt to transfer, a taxicab license to any other person shall automatically revoke the license. 
(b)  The owner of any licensed taxicab who desires to transfer such license to another vehicle owned by him shall make application to the police department on forms provided therefor, and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for, or applicable to, such transfer. Upon approval of the chief of police, such transfer shall be granted. 
Secs. 18-86-18-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - QUALIFICATIONS FOR TAXICAB DRIVERS 

Sec. 18-102. - Chauffeur's license required. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab in the city without first having obtained a valid chauffeur's license issued by the state. 
(Code 1975,  18-101) 
Sec. 18-103. - Information to be filed with police department. 
    The holder of any taxicab vehicle license as required in this article shall deposit with the police department a list including the names and addresses of all individuals employed by them to operate taxicabs pursuant to such license along with photocopies of the current state chauffeur's licenses issued for such individual. 
Secs. 18-104-18-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TAXIMETER 

Sec. 18-121. - Required; inspection and approval. 
(a)  No license for a taxicab shall be issued until a taximeter has been installed in the taxicab to be licensed and such taximeter has been inspected, tested and approved by a police department. After issuance of any license, the taximeter shall be inspected, tested and approved at least once annually by a police department. A record of inspections shall be maintained by the city police department. 
(b)  Upon any rate change made pursuant to this article, every taximeter shall be reinspected and tested and approved. No such rate change shall be effective until approval and resealing of the taximeter of such taxicab by the police department. 
(c)  The chief of police may accept the inspection and approval of such taximeter by any other police department that has inspected and approved such taxicab for operation within that police department's city. 
Sec. 18-122. - Certification; maintenance in proper working order. 
    Every taximeter shall be certified by or under the direction of the chief of police. No person shall remove or tamper with any taximeter. No person shall engage in business with any taxicab when the taximeter affixed thereto is not in proper working order. The chief of police may accept the seal or certification of any other police department when the taxicab is licensed to operate in that other city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03,  1, 5-18-09) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2009-03, adopted May 18, 2009, changed the title of  18-122 from "Seal; maintenance in proper working order" to "Certification; maintenance in proper working order." 
Sec. 18-123. - Visibility; illumination. 
    Every taximeter shall be so affixed that the amount of the fare is plainly visible to the passengers, and after sundown such taximeter shall be clearly illuminated. 
Secs. 18-124-18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-151. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article shall be to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by regulating solicitors, transient merchants, door-to-door salesmen, roadside stands, street vendors, auctioneers, peddlers and other temporary businesses. 
Sec. 18-152. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Auctioneer means any person selling, or offering for sale, any goods, wares, merchandise, or services at public auction. 
    Peddler means and includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who without traveling from place to place shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, motor vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
    Roadside stand or temporary business means any place at which goods, wares, merchandise, or services are sold or offered for sale, other than from a permanent structure duly approved for such use. 
    Solicitor, canvasser, or door-to-door salesman means any person who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, or services by traveling about the city and, in the course of his business, enters upon privately owned property. 
    Transient merchant means any person who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, or services from a permanent structure duly approved for such use for a period not to exceed six months. 
    Vendor means any person who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, or services from any vehicle, pushcart, or carriage which is propelled by human power, self-propelled, or propelled by other means. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02,  1, 5-21-01) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-153. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage in peddling or soliciting with the city between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer, or unless extended hours are approved by the city council for special events. 
(Ord. No. 1996-04,  1, 5-6-96) 
Sec. 18-154. - Misrepresentation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality of nature of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
Sec. 18-155. - Refusing to leave. 
    Any peddler or solicitor who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or his agent, to leave the same and not return to such premises, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 18-156. - Entrance to premises restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to enter upon any private premises when the same are posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitations Allowed" or other words to such effect. 
Secs. 18-157-18-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-176. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler, transient merchant or canvasser to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided. 
Sec. 18-177. - Application. 
    The chief of police shall cause to be prepared an application form to contain all information said officer shall deem relevant to the issuance of a license under this article. All applicants desiring to obtain a license under this article shall complete said application and return same to the chief of police not later than 14 working days before the first date upon which the licensed activity is to commence. 
    The city shall have the right to assign the administration of the application process as well as collection of the appropriate fees to a responsible third party in the case of large scale special events. The responsible third party shall provide to the city, the original application form for each transient merchant, required support documentation such as insurance and permits, applicable transient merchant permit fee and a comprehensive list of all special event transient merchants a minimum of five working days prior to the special event. Upon final review by the chief of police, a blanket permit shall be issued covering the transient merchants in compliance with applicable sections of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02,  1, 5-21-01; Ord. No. 2009-04,  1, 6-15-09) 
Sec. 18-178. - Issuance. 
    Upon receipt of an application for issuance of a license under this article and the payment of the license fee as set by resolution of the city council, the chief of police shall issue to the applicant the license applied for unless it shall appear to the chief of police that the criminal record of the applicant indicates a danger to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police may appeal to the city council as set forth in section 18-180. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02,  1, 5-21-01) 
Sec. 18-179. - Expiration. 
    All licenses issued under this article shall be valid only for the specific dates provided for on said license and shall expire as indicated thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02,  1, 5-21-01) 
Sec. 18-180. - Revocation; appeal. 
(a)  The licenses issued pursuant to this article may be revoked at any time by the city superintendent or the chief of police, or their duly authorized representatives, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentations or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in connection with the selling of goods, wares, merchandise or services; 
(3)  Any violation of a city ordinance; 
(4)  Conviction of the applicant or other persons acting under the authority of the applicant's license for any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting the business permitted under this chapter in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Within three working days of the revocation of a license, the city clerk shall send to the person whose license has been revoked, notice setting forth specifically the grounds of the revocation. Such notice shall be mailed to the person to whom the license was issued at the address shown on the license application. 
(c)  The person whose license has been revoked shall have the right to appeal to the city council within 14 days of such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02,  1, 5-21-01) 
Sec. 18-181. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following persons shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this article, but shall be subject to the other provisions herein: 
(1)  Persons engaged in the occupation of newspaper distribution. 
(2)  Persons engaged in solicitation within three miles from their residence for an educational, charitable, religious or youth organization holding certification as a nonprofit entity. 
(3)  Veterans. As used in this section, "veteran" shall mean any veteran qualifying for a state peddler's license issued by the county clerk pursuant to Public Act No. 359 of 1921 as amended (MCL 35.441 et seq.) who has provided a copy of said state license to the city clerk. 
(b)  Nonprofit organizations not exempted by way of the provisions of subsections 181(1) and (2) herein shall be required to obtain a license as provided herein; however, such organizations shall be exempt from fees as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. 1995-05,  1, 11-6-95; Ord. No. 2001-02,  1, 5-21-01; Ord. No. 2013-03,  1, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 18-182. - Prohibited activities. 
    The following acts or activities shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Street and curb solicitation prohibited. No solicitor shall solicit and/or operate or maintain any place of solicitation on any street, road, highway and/or lane and/or be permitted to use the sidewalks, curbs, road's edge, alleys and/or driveways for soliciting in any manner that requires the person wishing to respond to the solicitor, when engaged in the transaction, to stand within the limits of the street, roads, highways, and/or lanes of the city. 
(2)  Prohibition of harassment or creation of nuisance. No solicitor shall threaten or harass any resident of the city in the course of their solicitation or in any way engage in any conduct which is or would tend to create a nuisance. 
(3)  Prohibition of entry upon private property expressly requesting no solicitation. No solicitor shall enter upon and/or call upon a place of residence or business within the city after having been expressly notified by the occupant of the place of residence or business or by a sign posted on the door facing the street of the residence or business that no solicitation is desired. 
(Ord. 1995-05,  1, 11-6-95; Ord. No. 2001-02,  1, 5-21-01) 
Sec. 18-183. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-02,  1, adopted May 21, 2001, repealed  18-183. Formerly,  18-183 pertained to list of persons not wanting to be solicited and derived from Ord. No. 1995-05,  1, adopted November 6, 2001. 
Secs. 18-184-18-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADULT BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-201. - Determination of necessity. 
    The city council hereby determines that the operation of certain businesses, which, because of their very nature, and when concentrated under certain circumstances, have such an affect upon the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants thereof that licensing and regulation of such business is required. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-202. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Adult book store means an establishment having as a portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities, or specific anatomical areas, (as defined below), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an establishment used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual activities, or specific anatomical areas, (as defined below), for observation by patrons therein. 
    Massage means a method of treating external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting or tapping with the hand or any instrument, electric, magnetic or otherwise, with or without supplementary aids. 
    Massage parlor means any turkish bath, steam bath, sauna bath, magnetic healing institute, or any room, place, establishment or institution where treatment of any nature for the human body is given by means of massage and where a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, physiotherapy, manipulation of the body or similar treatment is given. 
    Massage school means a school which is recognized by the state board of massage, which requires for admission students with a tenth grade education or its equivalent, which employs one or more competent licensed massagists as instructors, and which has minimum requirements for a continuous course of study and training and consisting of study in physiology, anatomy, massage theory, hydrotherapy, hygiene, ethics and practical massage. For the purposes of this article, a correspondence school shall not be construed to be a recognized school. 
    Massagist means any person, male or female, who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. 
    Nude modeling studio means an establishment used for housing and exhibiting persons in the nude acting as models for other persons to paint, photograph, or draw or sketch. 
    Persons means every natural person, firm, partnership, association, co-operative or corporation and their legal successors. 
    Premises for nude entertainment means an establishment which is used for housing and exhibiting persons in the nude or specific anatomical areas, (as defined below) of the human body. 
    Specified anatomical area means less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(1)  Human genitals and pubic region; 
(2)  Buttocks, and; 
(3)  Postpubertal female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specific sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, sodomy, bestiality or flagellation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genital pubic region, buttocks, or postpubertal female breast. 
    Student means any person who, under the guidance of an instructor in a massage school, is being trained or instructed in the theory, method or practice of massage. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-203. - Advertising. 
    No adult business granted a license under this article shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any products or services. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-204. - Locational standards for adult businesses. 
    All adult businesses located in the city shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  They shall not be located within 500 feet in any direction from the boundaries of any public, private or parochial school building or church building or residential use or zoning district within the city limits. 
(2)  They shall not be located within 500 feet of each other. 
(3)  They shall conform in all respects with the requirements of applicable city and state building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical, zoning, fire and other safety codes. 
(4)  They shall not be located in any zoning districts established by the city zoning ordinance except as permitted by special use approval in the C-2 general commercial district. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-205. - Operational standards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person receiving a license under this article or employed at any adult business regulated by this article to permit any of the following: 
(1)  Operate or cause to be open or conduct or maintain any adult business or furnish its products or services to any person under the age of 18 with the exceptions noted in this article; 
(2)  Operate or cause to be open or conduct or maintain any adult business or furnish its products or services to any person between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; 
(3)  To massage any other person or give or administer any bath or baths, or to give or administer any of the other things mentioned in this article for illegal purposes. It is unlawful for any person, for monetary gain or profit, to have any contact with a person's breasts, genital area or buttocks in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person's lust, passions or sexual desire; 
(4)  The sale, giving away, or use of intoxicating liquor or narcotics; 
(5)  Any disorderly conduct or the use of any immoral, profane or indecent language; 
(6)  Any violation of any provision of this article or any of the codes or ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-206. - Violations. 
    Any violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the adult business license. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Secs. 18-207-18-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-221. - Licenses for operation of adult businesses. 
    No person shall establish or operate an adult business in the city unless a license has been issued and is conspicuously displayed at all times on the premises. No person shall be granted a license to operate an adult business unless they are at least 21 years of age. No such license shall be granted except upon certification by the chief of police and the zoning administrator. 
(1)  No person shall practice, engage in, carry on or operate the business of a massagist or conduct, operate and carry on a massage parlor, massage school or similar business within the city without first having applied for and obtained the required license and complying with all requirements of this article. No person shall employ as a massagist any person who does not hold a current unrevoked license as required by this article. No person shall practice massage for compensation without obtaining and maintaining in effect a license as a massagist as required by this article. 
(2)  All licenses issued are non-transferable; provided, however, a change of location of an adult business may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of the zoning ordinance and this article. 
Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in an adult business, massage parlor, massage school or similar business, the license shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate the massage parlor, massage school or similar business. The provisions of this article shall apply to any person applying for an adult business or massage establishment license for premises previously used as such an establishment. 
Any sale or transfer of any interest in an existing massage establishment or any application or expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment shall require inspection and compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(3)  The license to operate an adult business shall be renewed annually. The license shall be renewed if the applicant submits a sworn affidavit that the matters contained in the original application are correct and indicates any changes necessary. In addition to the affidavit, a signed statement from a doctor stating that the applicant for a massagist's license has been examined within the preceding 90 days and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease which is likely to be communicated during the administration of a massage must be presented. 
(4)  No person licensed under this article shall operate under any name or conduct his or her business under any designation not specified in the license. 
(5)  Every person to whom or for which a license shall have been granted under this article shall display the license in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-222. - Duties of owner, operator, etc., regarding employee licenses. 
    It shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage parlor, massage school or similar business to ensure that each person employed or engaged as a massagist in such business shall have first obtained a valid massagist license as required by this article. All other employees who work closely with the massage activities shall provide annually the medical certificate as required in this article. Any owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, who employs a person performing as a massagist, who is not in possession of a valid massagist license, or allows such an employee to perform, operate or practice within a massage parlor, shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-223. - Fees. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate an adult business shall make application to the city clerk. The city clerk shall refer all such applications to the police chief for an investigation. The fee for each license for an adult business shall be prescribed from time to time by resolution of the city council as designated in this Code. The fee for seizure and safekeeping of any and all equipment, for violations of the ordinances, shall be the actual cost to the city including a ten percent administrative fee. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-224. - Application contents. 
(a)  Any applicant for licenses required in this article shall submit the following information: 
(1)  The full name and present address of the applicant or applicants; 
(2)  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and dates of such residence; 
(3)  A description of service to be provided; 
(4)  The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment; 
(5)  If applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation, and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the corporation; 
(6)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners including limited partners; 
(7)  Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(8)  Individual applicant's height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair; 
(9)  One portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches and a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints, which shall be taken to the police chief or the chief's agent; 
(10)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(11)  A certificate from a medical or osteopathic doctor stating that the applicant has, within 90 days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease; 
(12)  The history of an applicant in the operation of a massage parlor or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person has previously operated in this city or another municipality or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(13)  All criminal convictions other than traffic violations and the reasons therefor; 
(14)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(b)  The following additional information shall be contained in an application for a license to conduct a massage parlor: the number of employees and names and qualifications of all persons who are intended to give massages in the proposed parlor. 
(c)  The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-225. - Investigation. 
(a)  Any applicant for a license under this article shall present to the city clerk the application containing the required information. The application shall be referred to the police chief, who shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Based on such investigation, the police chief or the police chief's representative shall render a recommendation to the city clerk as to the approval or denial of the license. 
(b)  The police chief shall recommend denial of an application for a license if the character, reputation, moral integrity or physical or mental condition of the applicant or his or her employees is found to be inimical to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. The police chief's recommendation shall be based on appropriate and competent evidence available to the police chief. In making such determination, the police chief shall consider: 
(1)  Penal history. All the applicant's convictions, the reasons therefor and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to the applicant's release; 
(2)  License and permit history. This license and permit history of the applicant, whether such person has previously operated in this city or state or in another municipality or state under a license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action. 
(c)  The city building department and fire department as well as the county health officer shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the adult business, massage parlor, massage school or similar business and shall, within a reasonable time, make separate recommendations to the city clerk concerning compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable city laws. 
(d)  The city clerk, or his or her designee, after receiving these recommendations, shall issue a license to the establishment if the recommendations received are positive and in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-226. - Consent to inspect by licensee. 
    Any person obtaining a license under this division, as a condition of that license, consents to inspection by duly authorized agents of the city during the business hours of any licensed premises. Failure to allow any such inspection shall be grounds for revocation of a license. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-227. - Revocation of license. 
    The city clerk, after written notice to a licensee, shall revoke any license issued under this division when it is determined that any licensee or his agents, servants or employees has violated any of the provisions of this division, other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. Such notice shall specify the violation complained of and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail. A licensee under this division may appeal such revocation to the city council within ten days of the revocation on a form to be provided by the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-228. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Administration of division. The provisions of this division shall be enforced by the city superintendent who shall, in his discretion, delegate such enforcement to such of the administrative personnel of the city as he deems proper. 
(b)  Fines and imprisonment. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall be punished as prescribed in this Code. 
(c)  Authority of city police. Police officers of the city shall have the power to issue citations for any violation of any requirements of this article. Upon the issuance of a citation for a violation of this article, the police officer may obtain a warrant authorizing the seizure of any equipment and/or products related to such adult business. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Secs. 18-229-18-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MASSAGE PARLORS AND SCHOOLS 

Sec. 18-241. - Massagists' apparel. 
    Uniforms or garments covering the torso shall be worn by massagists or employees while attending patrons. Such uniforms or garments shall be of washable material and shall be kept in a clean condition. The sleeves of the uniform or garment shall not reach below the elbow. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-242. - Restrictions. 
    No person licensed as a massagist shall massage or treat any person under the age of 18 upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed medical doctor, doctor of osteopathic medicine or physical therapist. Such order shall be dated and in the possession of the massagist giving the massage or treatment. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-243. - Exemptions. 
    This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Medical doctors, doctors of osteopathic medicine, doctors of chiropractic medicine, physical therapists, psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers and family counselors who are licensed to practice their respective professions in the state, or who are permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices of an associate or establishment duly licensed in the state, clergymen, certified members of the American Massage and Therapy Association, and certified members of the International Myomassethics Federation; 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of nursing duties; 
(3)  A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team who administers a massage in normal course of duties; 
(4)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of their duties; 
(5)  Participants in growth seminars or sensitivity sessions provided such seminars or sessions are conducted by a member of one of the exempted professions defined in subsection (1) of this section; 
(6)  Any duly licensed establishment in which the above-described persons only exclusively practice their respective professions. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-244. - Minimum requirements for facilities. 
    No license to conduct a massage parlor, massage school or similar business shall be issued unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage parlor or massage school; all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the city. 
(2)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city building and electrical codes. 
(3)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the city building code. 
(4)  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(5)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(6)  Closed cabinets shall be provided, which shall be utilized for the storage of clean linens. 
(7)  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower, one dressing room containing a separate locker with lock for each person to be served, as well as a minimum of one toilet and one washbasin, shall be provided by every massage parlor; provided, however, that if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate bathing, a separate massage room or rooms, separate dressing and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. 
(8)  All walls, ceiling, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and/or showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(9)  Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(10)  A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each massage parlor for the use of the employees of any such establishment. The basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practical to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
(11)  No massage shall be performed in a massage parlor or a massage school in a private room which is completely closed to the view of other person; however, reasonable measures may be used to offer privacy to patrons such as partitions, stalls, curtains and the like. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Sec. 18-245. - Emergency employees. 
    If the holder of a license to operate a massage parlor is required to use an emergency employee because of the illness or incapacity of a regular licensed employee, same shall be permitted, provided that such emergency employee shall be required to make application for a valid license as required in this article within three days from the date of beginning work. "Emergency employee" shall be defined to mean an individual who possesses a valid medical certificate per this article and works no more than three days per year in the city, and does not possess a valid city license. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07,  1, 7-1-96) 
Secs. 18-246-18-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 18-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Garage sale shall mean any sale of a quantity of tangible personal property of any description whatsoever and shall include all such sales commonly known as attic, lawn or rummage sales. The term shall not include business or trade sales that are regulated by any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02,  1, 5-18-09) 
Sec. 18-302. - Permit required. 
    No person shall conduct what is known as a garage sale within the city limits without having first procured from the city clerk a permit therefor, for which no fee shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02,  1, 5-18-09) 
Sec. 18-303. - Limit on number and duration 
    No person shall be allowed more than two garage sale permits within any 12-month period, provided that this section shall not apply to duly constituted nonprofit or religious organizations which shall have registered as such with the county clerk and, in which event, the permit as specified in section 18-302 shall be issued to such nonprofit or organizations for a one year period. In no instance, with the exception of qualified nonprofit or religious organizations, shall more than two garage sales be held at any one location within a 12-month period. No sale shall exceed four consecutive days in duration. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02,  1, 5-18-09) 
Sec. 18-304. - Conducting sale without permit. 
    Any person who shall conduct a garage sale or rummage sale without having procured a permit from the city clerk for such sale shall be considered guilty of violating this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02,  1, 5-18-09) 
Sec. 18-305. - Distance from lot line; posting permit; outside storage of goods. 
    All garage or rummage sales shall be held no closer than 25 feet from the front lot line of the premises covered in the permit. Such permit shall be posted at the location of the sale so as to be visible to the public. There shall be no overnight outside storage of the goods or merchandise held for purchase in such garage sale. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02,  1, 5-18-09) 
Sec. 18-306. - Advertising signs. 
    No signs advertising a garage sale shall be placed upon any public property. Two signs advertising a garage or rummage sale are permitted to be placed upon private property with the consent of the owner of such property. Within 24 hours of the conclusion of a garage sale, all such advertising signs shall be moved. 
    The owner, tenant or person in control of residential property where such sale is being conducted as advertised by signs posted in violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be prima facie the person responsible for the installation or placement of any temporary sign advertising a garage, yard or rummage sale held at such residential property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02,  1, 5-18-09) 
Sec. 18-307. - Parking of vehicles during sale. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner, tenant or person in control of the residential property where the sale is being held to regulate, control and insure that the parking regulations under city ordinance are abided by during the sale. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02,  1, 5-18-09) 
Sec. 18-308. - Penalty. 
    A violation of any provision of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02,  1, 5-18-09) 
Chapters 19, 20 - RESERVED 
Chapter 21 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS 
  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Associated equipment means all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR 76.923; and an "increase" in rates shall mean an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services. All other words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined in the Act and FCC Rules. 
    Basic cable service means "basic service" as defined in the FCC Rules, and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the Act and the FCC Rules. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    FCC rules means all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-1), 10-4-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 21-2. - Purpose; interpretation. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Adopt regulations consistent with the Act and FCC rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation, and 
(2)  Prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the city. This article shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-2), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-3. - Rate regulations promulgated by FCC. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the city shall follow all FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-3), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-4. - Filing; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment of a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the Act and the FCC rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that it schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and FCC rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the city clerk. For purposes of this article, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten copies have been received by the city clerk. The city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase. 
(b)  In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the city pursuant to section 21-4(1), a cable operator shall provide all information requested by the city superintendent in connection with the city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The city superintendent may establish deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the Act and FCC rules including, without limitation, 47 USC 543 and 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03(22-4),  1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-6. - Public notice; initial review of rates. 
    Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to section 21-4(a), the city clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall state that: 
(1)  The filing has been received by the city clerk and (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying, and 
(2)  Interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the city clerk not later than seven days after the public notice is published. The city clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first-class mail at least three days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration of the city council, then the city clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first-class mail to the cable operator at least three days before the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-6), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-7. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of filing under section 21-4(a) unless the city council (or other properly authorized body or official) tolls the 30-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of filing. The city council may toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-7), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-8. - Public notice; hearing on basic cable service rates following tolling of 30-day deadline. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 21-7 and 47 CFR 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information required or requested pursuant to section 21-4. In addition, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case may be. The city clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall state: 
(1)  The date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be held, 
(2)  That interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or by the proposed increase in rates, and 
(3)  That copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. 
The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall mail by first-class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15 days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-8), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-9. - Staff or consultant report; written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the city superintendent shall cause a report to be prepared for the city council which shall (based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review, and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the decision of the city council pursuant to section 21-10. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first-class mail not less than 20 days before the city council acts under section 21-10. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the city clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the city clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the city clerk shall forward it to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-9), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-10. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The city council shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC rules. If the city council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling order under section 21-7 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150 days after the tolling order under section 21-7 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-10), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-11. - Refunds; notice. 
    The city council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR 76.942. Before the city council orders any refund to subscribers, the city shall give at least seven days' written notice to the cable operator by first-class mail of the date, time, and place at which the city council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-11), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-12. - Written decisions; public notice. 
    Any order of the city council pursuant to section 21-10 or 21-11 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the city council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall: 
(1)  Summarize the written decision, and 
(2)  State that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. 
In addition, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first-class mail. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-12), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-13. - Rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 21-4, the city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-13), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-14. - Failure to give notice. 
    The failure of the city clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this article shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-14), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-15. - Additional hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this article, the city council may hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the city council, in its sole discretion, shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-15), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-16. - Additional powers. 
    The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, FCC rules, the cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, FCC rules, and this article shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any action not prohibited by the Act and FCC rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic service rate regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-16), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-17. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In the event of a conflict between this article and a cable television franchise, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  1(22-17), 10-4-93) 
Sec. 21-18. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1993-03,  4, 10-4-93) 
Secs. 21-19-21-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROVIDERS USING PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 21-31. - Legislative findings. 
    The city has the authority to grant permits and franchises for telecommunication systems offering public or private line video, data or voice services using or crossing a street, highway, rights-of-way or easements in the city. This article is intended to minimize the disruption to the streets, highways, rights-of-way and easements and to require those who seek to construct a telecommunication system to cooperate in the construction and the restoration of streets, highways, rights-of-way and easements of both overhead and underground lines. The city finds that it has too many unsightly overhead lines and poles in some sections of the city. They are proliferating, adversely affecting the public safety, detracting from property values and reaching maximum safe capacity of poles and underground spaces. The city further finds that public health, safety and welfare is better served by requiring installation of new utility lines and wires in underground conduit wherever practical. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the access to and ongoing use of public ways by telecommunications providers to ensure and protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to exercise reasonable control of the public ways pursuant to the City Charter and Article 7, Section 23 of 1963 Michigan Constitution by: 
(1)  Minimizing disruption of the public ways, regulating the use of public ways by telecommunications providers and the construction, installation, operation, and use of facilities of telecommunications providers in the public ways; 
(2)  Ensuring that the city and the public are protected from liability for use of the public ways by telecommunications providers; 
(3)  Establishing reasonable classifications of telecommunications providers; 
(4)  Protecting the substantial investment of city taxpayers in public ways by providing for the payment of fees which do not exceed the fixed and variable costs of granting permits or franchises and maintaining the public ways used by telecommunications providers; and 
(5)  Assisting telecommunications providers in understanding the city's requirements for use of the public ways and providing a fair and nondiscriminatory policy and permitting the use of the public ways by such providers. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-33. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    City means the City of St. Clair, Michigan. 
    Franchise means a non-exclusive, limited authorization to transact local business for the construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunication system in the city awarded by ordinance in the form of a contract and accepted by the grantee. 
    Grantee means any holder of a telecommunication system permit or franchise granted pursuant to this article. 
    Permit means a written agreement granted by resolution for a telecommunication system to use the rights-of-way, easements, highways, streets, alleys and other places in the city for wires, poles, pipes, conduits or other public utility facilities, but not to transact local business with another person. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity as the context may indicate. 
    Public ways means certain public rights-of-way, streets, highways, sidewalks and alleys within the city dedicated for public use. 
    Subscriber means a person who pays an installation charge and/or monthly fee to a cable system operator for connections to the system and for programs and services carried on the cable. 
    Telecommunication services include regulated and unregulated services offered to customers for the transmission of two-way interactive communication and associated usage, but does not include one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services and subscriber interaction for the selection or use of video programming or other programming services. 
    Telecommunication system means facilities used or to be used to provide telecommunication service including public or private line video, data or voice service to another person, using or crossing a street, highway, rights-of-way or easements in the city other than cable television service offered pursuant to a franchise granted under chapter 63 of this Code, as amended. 
    Telecommunications provider means a person who provides one or more telecommunications services. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-34. - City approval required. 
(a)  No person shall install, construct, maintain or otherwise operate a telecommunication system in the city without a telecommunication permit and no person shall transact local business on a telecommunication system in the city without a franchise. 
(b)  This article shall apply to any existing cable television system operating pursuant to a franchise awarded by the city which the franchisee uses to transact local business operating a telecommunication system. However, this article exempts any existing institutional network operated by Harron Communications of Southeast Michigan, until the original term of the Harron Communications Franchise expires, except to the extent that Harron Communications or any other entity uses such network for commercial non-cable services. 
(c)  Before offering or providing any telecommunication service, the grantee shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, or authorizations for the offering or provision of such telecommunication services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to the city, upon the written request of the city, evidence of all such approvals, permits, or authorizations. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of any codes, ordinances or regulations of the city or the city's right to require grantee or persons utilizing the telecommunication service to secure appropriate permits or authorizations for such use. No fee or charge may be imposed upon a grantee for any such permit or authorization, other than the standard fees or charges generally applicable to all persons for such permits or authorizations. Such standard fee or charge shall not be offset against the annual permit fee or franchise fee a grantee is required to pay to the city under section 21-38. 
(e)  A telecommunications provider shall apply for a permit pursuant to this article. The application shall be made on an application form provided by the city. Five copies of the application shall be filed with the city superintendent. In addition to other information required by the application form or otherwise required by the city or this article, the application shall include, without limitation, the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and, if the applicant is not a natural person, each of its officers, directors, stockholders beneficially holding more than five percent of its outstanding voting shares, general partners, members and limited partners holding an equity interest of more than five percent; 
(2)  Copies of the most recent financial statements of the applicant; 
(3)  A description of (i) the telecommunications services to be provided, (ii) the types of wires and other facilities to be used or located in the public ways, and (iii) a statement whether such facilities are owned by the applicant, or if not owned by the applicant, a copy of the agreement or legal instrument granting the applicant the right to use such facilities; 
(4)  A map setting forth the specific public ways in which the applicant proposes to locate its facilities or which the applicant otherwise proposes to use. The map shall identify where facilities are proposed to be located aboveground, where facilities are proposed to be located underground, and the side or portion of the public ways (north side, south side, under sidewalk, etc.) on which they are proposed to be located. 
(f)  The application will be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in an amount established by subsection 21-35(d) or by resolution of the city council. The non-refundable application fee shall be designed to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing an application for a permit, including staff time and attorney fees. 
(g)  An application shall not be deemed to be filed for purposes of the 90-day permit application review period in Section 253 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act of 1995 unless and until the application is determined by the city superintendent to be administratively complete. A determination of whether the application is administratively complete shall be made by the city superintendent within 30 days after the application is received by the city superintendent. If the city superintendent determines that the application is not administratively complete, the city superintendent shall so advise the applicant in writing and shall identify the items which must be furnished by the applicant for an administratively complete application. 
(h)  The city superintendent or its designee, including legal counsel, may request an applicant to submit additional information pertinent to the application and the proposed use of the public ways which the city superintendent or its designee deems reasonably necessary or relevant to review the application. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city superintendent or its designee. If the applicant fails to provide the requested additional information by the deadline established by the city superintendent or its designee, the 90-day period for reviewing the application for administrative completeness pursuant to (g), above, shall be extended by the number of days after the deadline the information was provided to the city superintendent or its designee. 
(i)  Within the 90-day period the city council may hold a hearing on the application giving the applicant appropriate public notice. The applicant and any other interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on the application. 
(j)  Within the 90-day period the city council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The city council shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. The failure of the city to comply strictly with the procedural requirements of this section for the review of permit applications shall not invalidate the decision or proceedings of the city. 
(k)  The city council may impose conditions on a permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Without limitation, these conditions may include the posting of a bond by the telecommunications provider in an amount which shall not exceed the reasonable cost to insure that the public ways are returned to their original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-35. - Issuance. 
(a)  The city may grant one or more permits and franchises for a telecommunication system in the city subject to this article. 
(b)  The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional permits and franchises for a telecommunication system as it deems appropriate. Additional permits and franchises shall not be deemed to modify, revoke, terminate or damage any rights previously granted to any other grantee. 
(c)  In the event a permit application is filed proposing to install facilities within a franchise territory which overlaps in whole or in part an existing area, a copy shall be served by the applicant by certified mail upon the current grantee(s). The applicant shall notify the grantee of existing overlapping territory. Proof that a copy of the application has been served upon the current grantee(s) shall be provided to the city. No application for overlapping territory shall be processed until proof of service has been furnished to the city. It is not the intent of this article to either require or prohibit overbuilding. 
(d)  Applications for new, renewed or amended franchises shall be made in such form as the city may prescribe by resolution. New, renewed or amended franchises which expand the scope of service shall be accompanied by a non-refundable $5,000.00 partial prepayment of the franchise formation fee. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-36. - Duration. 
(a)  Any permit or franchise and the rights, privileges, authority, and responsibilities established shall take effect and be in force from and after final acceptance. It shall continue in force and effect for a period established by the permit or franchise not exceeding 15 years, provided within 30 days after the date of the city's final acceptance of a permit or franchise, the grantee files with the city clerk its unconditional acceptance of the permit or franchise, all required letters of credit, construction surety and insurance certificates, and pays to the city clerk all reasonable costs actually incurred by the city in preparing, considering and awarding the permit or franchise, including legal, engineering, technical, publication and other expenses, to-wit: the franchise formation fee described in section 21-38. 
(b)  If a grantee fails to timely comply with this section, it shall acquire no rights, privileges, or authority whatsoever from the city. The city superintendent may extend the term of a permit or franchise for a period not exceeding one year by written agreement with a grantee on reasonable and necessary terms. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-37. - Penalty. 
    Violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 or 90 days in jail or both, not excluding (in addition to) civil damages. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-38. - Franchise formation and annual fee payments by grantee. 
(a)  For the reason that the public ways to be used by a grantee in the operation of its telecommunication system within the boundaries of the city are valuable public properties, some of which are acquired and maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers, and that the grant to the grantee of the use of said public ways is a valuable property right without which the grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, a grantee shall pay: 
(1)  A franchise formation fee for franchises of $10,000.00, or a permit application fee of $2,000.00; and 
(2)  An annual fee determined as set forth in (b), below. 
(b)  In addition to the non-refundable formation fee and application fee set forth above in subsection (a)(1), and any other fees for other permits or authorizations required by the city code, the grantee shall pay an annual fee in an amount established from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the city council. The amount of the annual fee shall not exceed the fixed and variable costs to the city in maintaining the public ways used by a grantee unless otherwise permitted by law. The annual fee shall be payable quarterly as follows: 
First quarter 
(July 1 through September 30) November 15 Second quarter 
(October 1 through December 31) February 15 Third quarter 
(January 1 through March 31) May 15 Fourth quarter 
(April 1 through June 30) August 15  
(c)  When a permit is issued during a calendar year, the annual fee shall be prorated for the balance of the calendar year. In the event that a quarterly payment is not paid when due, the grantee shall pay a late payment charge of two percent over the prime rate from time to time announced by National Bank of Detroit or its successor. 
(1)  The initial annual fee shall be $0.40 per lineal foot of underground and $0.25 per lineal foot of overhead lines, wires, cables, poles, conduits and like structures, erections and fixtures upon, over, across, or under the public ways. 
(2)  The non-refundable application fees and the annual fees established pursuant to this article shall be in addition to any other tax, charge, fee assessment, fee or payment due, or to become due, to the city by a grantee under the applicable ordinance to the city or the laws of the state. 
(d)  Miscellaneous fee considerations: 
(1)  Grantees sharing the same conduit shall each pay a full fee. 
(2)  Grantees sending signals over another grantee's existing line or a line that is leased to another and upon which fees are already paid are not subject to additional fees. 
(3)  Grantees using the same line to provide cable television service and to provide telecommunications services shall be subject to both a cable television franchise fee and all fees set by this chapter. 
(e)  A grantee shall pay to the city for each quarter an amount equal to one-fourth of the minimum annual fee, calculated on the basis of a 12-month compensation year. The grantee shall forward by check or money order an amount equal to the quarterly payment by noon of the 25th day of the calendar month immediately following the close of the calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated. Any necessary prorations shall be made. 
(f)  In the event any quarterly payment is made after noon on the date due, the grantee shall pay a late payment penalty of the greater of $100.00, or simple interest at ten percent annual percentage rate of the total amount past due. Acceptance of money under this section shall not in any way limit or inhibit any of the privileges or rights of the city, whether under this article or otherwise. 
(g)  Permit and franchise fees shall be in addition to any other tax, charge, fee, or payment due the city by a grantee. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-39. - New developments. 
(a)  A grantee may, from time to time, implement new services and developments allowed by law. A grantee may not provide cable television services as defined by the U.S. Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984. A grantee may not provide cable television services as defined by the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, in the city, without a cable television franchise granted by the city. 
(b)  In addition to those matters required in a franchise, grantees make the following express acknowledgements: 
(1)  That the city has the right to make reasonable amendments to this article which do not materially increase any financial, economic or performance burden to the detriment of a grantee during the term of the permit or franchise upon 90 days notice to the grantee, or without notice with respect to an emergency amendment. It further recognizes and agrees that the city shall in no way be bound to renew or extend the permit or franchise at the end of any permit or franchise term and that it may be deemed a mere licensee at the expiration thereof. 
(2)  That a grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all or any part of a permit or franchise. A grantee expressly acknowledges that on accepting a permit or franchise it did so relying on its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city. 
(3)  By acceptance of a permit or franchise a grantee acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into a permit or franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the city or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of a permit or franchise not expressed in this article. 
(4)  The grantee further acknowledges by the acceptance of a permit or franchise that it has carefully read its terms and conditions, and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions. 
(c)  However, if any such state or federal law or regulation shall require a grantee to perform any service, or shall allow a grantee to perform any service, or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of the permit or franchise or of any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible, a grantee shall notify the city of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws and regulations of the city or the permit and franchise. Notwithstanding such conflict, the grantee shall comply with the terms of the permit or franchise unless released by the city. 
(d)  If any provision of a permit or franchise is held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any law, rule or regulation, said provision may be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of the permit or franchise, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions if the city so determines. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rule or regulation, said provision shall return to full force and effect and shall be binding on the parties. 
(e)  If the parties determine that a material provision of a permit or franchise is affected by action of a court or of the state or federal government, the parties shall have the right to modify any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of the permit and franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-40. - Liability. 
    A grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city as set forth in the permit or franchise at all times during the life of a permit or franchise and will pay all damages and penalties which the city may be required to pay as a result of granting a permit or franchise to grantee. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-41. - General capability. 
(a)  The grantee of a franchise shall allow the city to access the telecommunication system from any city buildings, police stations, fire stations, other public buildings, each school licensed by the state, and each public library within 500 feet of the telecommunication system on fees, terms and conditions set forth in the franchise. 
(b)  Only in the event of a state or national emergency or other urgent community need, a grantee of a franchise shall, upon request of the city, make available its facilities to the city for the duration of the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-42. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
    A grantee shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the roads, bridges, streets, rights-of-way or easements in the city without first obtaining a construction permit as required under chapter 33 of this Code, as amended, which shall apply to the construction of a telecommunication system. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-43. - Technical and construction standards. 
(a)  Each grantee shall construct, install and maintain its telecommunication system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and technical standards established by the Federal Communications Commission or state agency. 
(b)  In any event, the telecommunication system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property within the city or other areas where the grantee may have equipment located. 
(c)  All working facilities, conditions, and procedures, used or occurring during construction of the system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(d)  Construction, installation and maintenance of a telecommunication system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close coordination with public and private utilities serving the city following accepted industry construction procedures and practices and working through existing committees and organizations. 
(e)  All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering consideration. 
(f)  A grantee shall join the Miss Dig program. 
(g)  When grantee meets recognized engineering standards and the city, at its option, requests additional linear line footage, then the grantee shall not be subject to the linear foot fee for such additional footage. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-44. - Maps, records and reports. 
(a)  A grantee shall annually provide the city with current maps of its existing and proposed installations in a standardized format for use with the city's records and maps unless no changes have occurred in the previously submitted map. 
(b)  The grantee of a franchise shall annually file with the city clerk 15 copies of its annual financial reports, including its annual income statement, a balance sheet, and a statement of its properties devoted to telecommunication system operations. A grantee shall submit such reasonable information as may be requested by the city with respect to its property and revenues, expenses or operations within the city. All information provided to the city shall be maintained by the city as proprietary and confidential. 
(c)  An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by a franchise grantee of all subscriber and user complaints regarding the telecommunication system. A procedure shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation of the system to quickly and reasonably remedy complaints to the satisfaction of the city. Complete records of grantee's actions in response to all complaints shall be kept. These files and records shall remain open to the public during normal business hours. 
(d)  The grantee shall submit to the city such other reasonable information or reports in such form and at such times as the city may request. 
(e)  Subject to the privacy rights of the grantee, this article, federal and state laws and regulations, a grantee shall keep open books and records relating to the financial operations of the telecommunication system provided to the city. The city shall have the right to inspect, during normal business hours, upon a two-day notice, all books, records, maps, plans, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the financial operation of the telecommunication system. Access to the aforementioned records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that the records contain proprietary information, provided that the city maintains such information as proprietary and confidential. 
(f)  (1) 
Subject to the privacy rights of the grantee and this article and to federal and state laws and regulations, a franchise grantee shall keep open all non-financial books and records relating to the operations of the telecommunication system provided to the city. The city shall have the right to inspect, during normal business hours, upon a two-day notice, all books, records, maps, plans, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the telecommunication system. Access to the aforementioned records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that the records contain proprietary information, provided that the city maintains such information as proprietary and confidential. 
(2)  A grantee shall allow the city to make inspections of any of the grantee's telecommunication systems within the city's boundaries at any time upon one day notice or, in case of emergency, upon demand without notice. 
(g)  The refusal of the grantee to file any of the records or reports and inspections required to be provided to the city under this section shall be deemed a material breach, and shall subject the grantee to all penalties and remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city. 
(h)  Any material, false, misleading statement, or representation knowingly made by the grantee in any report shall be deemed a material breach of the permit or franchise, and shall subject the grantee to all penalties and remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-45. - Waiver. 
    A grantee agrees not to oppose intervention by the city in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is a party relating to the city's franchise or permit. A grantee agrees to abide by all provisions of this article and its permit and franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-46. - Sale or transfer of rights of franchises. 
(a)  Neither the franchise nor any of a grantee's interest therein or in the facilities shall be sold, assigned, transferred, pledged, leased, sublet, hypothecated or mortgaged in any manner, in whole or in part, to any person or entity, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein, or any property or assets relating to this franchise or the facilities, pass to or vest in any person or entity, without the prior written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. A grantee shall not otherwise provide service to a person or entity who the city contends is required to obtain a franchise from the city and who lacks such franchise. Nothing in this article shall prevent the grantee from assigning its rights and obligations to an affiliate (defined as any entity directly owned by the grantee or a parent entity of the grantee) or subsidiary of the grantee upon notice to the city. Any assignment or transfer to a subsidiary or affiliate of the grantee shall not relieve the grantee of its liability hereunder. However, notwithstanding anything in the foregoing to the contrary, a grantee may grant a security interest in its rights under a franchise or permit in favor of a third party without first obtaining the consent of the city. The exclusion in the preceding sentence does not include the realization on the collateral by any person or entity which was granted a security interest or mortgage. The grant or waiver of any one or more of said consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or consents, nor shall the grant of any said consent constitute a waiver of any other rights of the city. In the event of a foreclosure proceeding pursuant to the enforcement of a security interest granted by a grantee, or any parent or subsidiary of the grantee, the city shall have the right to approve the purchaser of the franchise and/or the facilities at a foreclosure sale, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or unduly delayed. The prohibition against sales, assignments, transfers and similar actions shall also fully apply to any transfer of control of the grantee ("control") and such transfer of control shall also require the prior written approval of the city, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or unduly delayed. 
(b)  No franchise nor any part or portion of its interest in the franchise may be sold, transferred or assigned until the facilities, equipment and personnel which the grantee has proposed in the current franchise application to provide and install pursuant to the franchise are 100 percent completed and operational for a minimum period of three years except to the grantee's parent, affiliate or subsidiary. 
(c)  Any attempted transfer of the franchise, facilities, control or similar action by a grantee in violation of this section shall be ineffective and void and shall constitute a material event of default by the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-47. - Conditions. 
    The city council may impose conditions on a permit or franchise to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Without limitation, these conditions may include the posting of a bond by the grantee in an amount which shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure the public ways are returned to their original condition during and after such telecommunication provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-48. - Insurance. 
(a)  During the term of a permit or franchise, a grantee shall, as a condition of its permit or franchise, maintain, or cause to be maintained, in full force and effect and at its sole cost and expense, the following types and limits of insurance: 
(1)  Worker's compensation insurance with state statutory limits and employers' liability insurance with minimum limits of $100,000.00 each accident. 
(2)  Comprehensive general liability insurance with minimum limits of $5,000,000.00 as the combined single limit for each occurrence of bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. The policy shall provide blanket contractual liability insurance for all written contracts, and shall include coverage for products and completed operations liability, independent contractor's liability, and coverage for property damage from explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage. 
(3)  Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles in use by a grantee, its employees and agents, with personal protection insurance and property protection insurance to comply with the provisions of the state no-fault insurance law, including residual liability insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 as the combined single limit for each occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
(b)  All policies, except for workers' compensation policies, shall name the "City of St. Clair, a municipal corporation of the State of Michigan, all associated, affiliated, allied and subsidiary entities of the City of St. Clair now existing or hereafter created, and their respective officers, boards, commissions, employees, agents, attorneys and contractors, as their respective interests may appear" as additional insureds (referred to in this section as the "additional insureds"). Each policy which is to be endorsed to add additional insureds under this section, shall contain cross-liability wording, as follows: 
"In the event of a claim being made hereunder by one insured for which another insured is or may be liable, then this policy shall cover such insured against whom a claim is or may be made in the same manner as if separate policies had been issued to each insured hereunder." 
(c)  Certified copies of each insurance policy required to be obtained by a grantee in compliance with this section, along with written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the city during the term of permit or franchise. A grantee shall immediately advise the city superintendent of any claim or litigation that may result in liability to the city. 
(d)  All insurance policies maintained pursuant to the applicable ordinance shall contain the following endorsement: 
"At least sixty (60) days' prior written notice shall be given to the City of St. Clair by the insurer of any intention not to renew such policy or to cancel, replace or materially alter same, such notice to be given by registered mail to the city superintendent." 
(e)  The city may annually review the insurance coverage to be carried by a grantee. If the city determines that additional or other insurance is necessary to protect the interests of the city or the additional insureds, a grantee shall be so notified and shall obtain the additional types and limits of insurance, at its sole cost and expense. All insurance shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, insured by insurers licensed to do business by the state or by surplus line carriers on the state insurance commissioner's approved list of the companies qualified to do business in the state. All insurance carries and surplus line carries shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company. 
(f)  All insurance policies may be written with deductions and exceptions comparable for businesses of like character and size if consistent with this section and approved by the city upon the recommendation of the city superintendent and/or city attorney. As a condition of a permit or franchise, a grantee agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city, the indemnities and additional insureds from and against the payment of any deductible and from the payment of any premium on any insurance policy required to be furnished by this article. 
(g)  A grantee shall require that each and every one of its contractors and their subcontractors carry, in full force and effect, workers' compensation, comprehensive public liability and automobile liability insurance coverage of the type which a grantee is required to obtain under the terms of this section with appropriate limits of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-49. - Termination. 
    In addition to all other rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct remedy the right to terminate a permit or franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A grantee fails after 30 days prior written notice to comply with any of the provisions of the permit or franchise or has, by act or omission, violated any term or condition; 
(2)  A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt; 
(3)  All or part of a grantee's facilities are sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by the grantee within 90 days from such sale; 
(4)  A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations with the city under the permit or franchise; or 
(5)  The city condemns all of the property of a grantee within the city by the lawful exercise of eminent domain. 
(6)  The grantee abandons the telecommunication system or fails to seek renewal of its permit or franchise. 
(7)  No termination, except for reason of condemnation, shall be effective unless or until the city shall have adopted a resolution setting forth the cause and reason for the revocation and the effective date, which resolution shall not be adopted without 30 days prior notice to grantee and an opportunity for grantee to be heard on the proposed resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 22-50. - Removal. 
(a)  Upon expiration or termination of a permit or franchise, if the permit or franchise is not renewed, the grantee may remove any underground cable from the streets which has been installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed. Except as otherwise provided, the grantee shall not remove any underground cable or conduit which requires trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed. The grantee shall remove, at its sole cost and expense, any underground cable or conduit by trenching or opening of the streets along the extension or otherwise which is ordered to be removed by the city based upon a determination, in the sole discretion of the city, that removal is required in order to eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the streets for public purposes. Any order by the city to remove cable or conduit shall be mailed to the grantee not later than 30 calendar days following the date of expiration of the permit or franchise. A grantee shall file written notice with the city clerk not later than 30 calendar days following the date of expiration or termination of the permit or franchise of its intention to remove cable and a schedule for removal by location. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval and regulation by the city. Removal shall be completed not later than 12 months following the date of expiration of the permit or franchise. Underground cable and conduit in the streets and rights-of-way which is not removed shall be deemed abandoned and title shall be vested in the city. 
(b)  Upon expiration, termination or revocation of a permit or franchise, if the permit or franchise is not renewed, a grantee, at its sole expense, shall, unless relieved of the obligation by the city, remove from the streets all above ground elements of the telecommunication system, including, but not limited to, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and lines attached to or suspended from poles. 
(c)  A grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits, permits, authorizations or other approvals and pay such fees and deposit such security as required by applicable law or ordinance of the city, shall conduct and complete the work of removal in compliance with all such applicable law or ordinances, and shall restore the streets and rights-of-way to the same condition they were in before the work or removal commenced. The work of removal shall be completed in no later than 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-51. - Continuity of service. 
    It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee of a franchise are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the telecommunication system or the city terminates, the grantee shall do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. In the event of a change of grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the new grantee in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. In the event that interruption of service is required by a grantee for modification, repairs or the like, the interruption shall be as brief as possible and at times when the impact on subscribers is at a minimum. Records of such interruption shall be kept. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-52. - Acceptance of agreement and incorporation of application and ordinance by reference. 
    Upon execution of a permit or franchise by a grantee, the grantee agrees to be bound by all of its terms and conditions and accepts unconditionally the franchise and promises to comply with and abide by all of their terms, provisions and conditions. A grantee also agrees to provide all services set forth in its application and proposal, and, by its acceptance of the permit or franchise, a grantee specifically grants and agrees that its application and proposal is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the permit or franchise. In addition, a grantee specifically agrees that this article is incorporated by reference and made a part of the permit or franchise. In the event of a conflict between the application and proposal of the grantee, this article, and the permit or franchise, this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-53. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of the permit or franchise is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not render invalid nor terminate the permit or franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-54. - Tampering and fraudulent connections or sales. 
(a)  No person, whether or not a subscriber or user to the telecommunication system, may intentionally or knowingly remove or damage or cause to be damaged any wire, cable, conduit, equipment, or apparatus of the grantee, or to commit any act with an intent to cause such removal or damage, or tap, tamper with, or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit, equipment and apparatus, or appurtenances of the grantee with the intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the telecommunication system without authorization from or compensation to the grantee, or obtain telecommunications service, or sell, rent, offer or advertise for sale, rental or use any instrument, apparatus, device or plans, specifications, or instructions for making or assembling the same to connect to the grantee's telecommunication system with intent to cheat or defraud the grantee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled. 
(b)  The prohibitions, penalties and remedies set forth in this section are in addition to any prohibitions, penalties and remedies for theft of service provided by state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-55. - Equal application. 
    The provisions of this article shall be imposed upon and enforced against all telecommunication systems in the city requiring a permit or franchise under state law from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 21-56. - Compliance with laws. 
    All grantees and the city shall comply with all laws, rules, regulations and orders in the exercise and performance of their rights and obligations under this article and under any franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1997-09,  1, 8-18-97) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; offenses, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Municipal control and perpetual maintenance of cemetery lots, MCL 128.1 et seq., MSA 5.3165. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Cemeteries declared to be public burial grounds. 
    All cemeteries now owned, or which may be acquired by the city, wherever situated, are hereby declared to be public burial grounds, and no person or society shall establish or locate any other burial ground within the limits of the city, and no interment of the body of any person shall be made in any other place within the city except where otherwise provided by state law. 
(Code 1975,  6-12) 
Sec. 22-2. - Trespass; desecration. 
    No person shall trespass on any lot or burial space within any city cemetery, nor pick or cut flowers or shrubs except on his own burial space, or cut down, injure or disturb any tree or shrub or otherwise commit any desecration within any city cemetery. 
(Code 1975,  6-19) 
Sec. 22-3. - Perpetual improvement fund. 
(a)  A fund known as the cemetery perpetual improvement fund is hereby created, established and continued. There shall be added to such fund all sums paid to the city in accordance with the terms and conditions of perpetual care contracts. The fund shall be administered by the city treasurer who shall have custody of all money, credits and securities constituting such fund. 
(b)  Any part of the principal of the cemetery perpetual improvement fund may be invested as authorized by state law. 
(Code 1975,  6-13) 
Sec. 22-4. - Leasing of lots and record thereof. 
(a)  All leases for lots shall be executed on behalf of the city by the mayor and city clerk. Any person desiring to lease a burial space in any city cemetery shall make a selection and pay the required amount for the lot selected to the city clerk. Upon the purchase of any burial space, the city clerk shall prepare and deliver to the purchaser a duly executed lease and perpetual care certificate for such burial space. Such lease shall convey to the purchaser the right of interment only, and shall be held subject to the provisions of this chapter, existing rules and regulations and such ordinances, rules and regulations as may be adopted by the city council or board of cemetery trustees, as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(b)  The city clerk shall keep proper records in which the leases to all burial spaces shall be recorded at length. In connection with all such records, the city clerk shall also keep a general index in which shall be noted alphabetically the name of the parties to every such instrument of conveyance. 
(Code 1975,  6-14) 
Sec. 22-5. - Restriction on use of lots; transfer of burial rights. 
    The lessors of any burial space in any city cemetery shall have the right of burial of human remains only and shall allow no interments for remuneration. All interments in burial spaces shall be restricted to members of the family and immediate relatives of the owner thereof, unless special permission by the owner has been filed in writing in the office of the city clerk, with the consent of the board of cemetery trustees endorsed thereon. No transfer of burial rights, other than by inheritance, shall be recognized. 
(Code 1975,  6-15) 
Sec. 22-6. - Fees for and supervision of work. 
    The city clerk shall charge and cause to be collected on behalf of the city such fees for work performed in the city cemeteries as may be from time to time fixed by the board of cemetery trustees. No person, other than an employee of the city acting under the direction of the city superintendent, shall dig or open any graves nor shall any person grade or fill in a burial space or otherwise do any work in connection therewith, unless such work is done under the supervision of the city employee in charge of such cemetery. 
(Code 1975,  6-17) 
Sec. 22-7. - Interment register. 
    The city clerk shall cause to be kept a register of all interments made in any city cemetery, in which shall appear the name of the deceased, the date and place of interment and such other information as may be required. 
(Code 1975,  6-16) 
Sec. 22-8. - Reopening graves; disinterments. 
    No grave in any cemetery shall be reopened nor shall any body or remains be removed therefrom unless a permit authorizing such removal shall have been issued by the county health department. 
(Code 1975,  6-18) 
Sec. 22-9. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    All persons doing anything forbidden by this chapter, or failing to do anything required of them by this chapter, or failing to obey the lawful directions and orders of the city superintendent while in any city cemetery, or violating any rule or regulation adopted by the board of cemetery trustees, shall be deemed to have violated this chapter. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  6-21; Ord. No. 2004-02,  1, 12-20-04) 
Secs. 22-10-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES 

Sec. 22-31. - Creation. 
    The city hereby creates and establishes, pursuant to section 4.07 of the Charter, the board of cemetery trustees of the city. 
(Code 1975,  6-1) 
Sec. 22-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose for which the board of cemetery trustees is created and established is to provide an administrative agency to perform the duties, obligations and responsibilities attendant to the management, supervision and care of all city cemeteries. 
(Code 1975,  6-2) 
Sec. 22-33. - Powers and authority conferred. 
    The board of cemetery trustees shall have the power and authority to perform the acts enumerated in this section, together with such other powers as are necessarily incident thereto, including the following: 
(1)  To cause, if necessary, such cemeteries to be laid out in lots, drives and walks and to cause such lots to be numbered, and the drives and walks therein given names, and plots made thereof; 
(2)  To fix the price of lots and other services necessary thereto; 
(3)  From time to time, to make such rules and regulations for the burial of the dead and the care, improvement and protection of the grounds, monuments and appurtenances of the cemeteries and orderly conduct of the persons visiting such cemeteries as may be necessary; 
(4)  To make such additional rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be deemed by such board to be necessary for the operation and control of the city cemeteries. 
(Code 1975,  6-3) 
Sec. 22-34. - Rules of procedure; bylaws required. 
    Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the parliamentary procedure of the board of cemetery trustees except in the event a state statute expressly requires a different procedure. The board shall develop a complete set of bylaws governing its internal affairs and operations, which bylaws shall not be effective until approved by the city council, which may also, at any time, revoke, modify or amend any such bylaws. 
(Code 1975,  6-4) 
Sec. 22-35. - Requirements of bylaws. 
    The bylaws of the board of cemetery trustees shall, at a minimum, provide for the following: 
(1)  The procedure for calling special and regular meetings, which procedure shall comply with applicable state statutes. 
(2)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, giving notices of board meetings, which complies with applicable state statutes. 
(3)  Designation of a person responsible for, and the procedure to be followed in, preparing and maintaining a record of official proceedings of the board, which shall comply with applicable statutes. 
(4)  An enumeration and designation of the officers of the board together with the term of office, powers, duties and procedure for election thereof. 
(5)  A procedure for the appointment of advisory committees, to serve such purposes as the board deems necessary. 
(6)  An enumeration of the members of the board together with the terms of office which shall be staggered in accordance with the Charter or in accordance with state law where provided. 
(7)  The conditions for eligibility of nonvoting members of the board if there are any. 
(8)  A registered address at which the board will receive mail and other official communications. 
(9)  A fiscal year, if different from the city's. 
(10)  Such other matters as may be deemed to be advisable by the city council or the board of cemetery trustees to be set forth therein. 
(Code 1975,  6-5) 
Sec. 22-36. - Membership. 
(a)  Qualifications and eligibility. All members of the board of cemetery trustees shall be resident electors for the prescribed term of office. The residency requirement may be waived as provided in the Charter. Any member of the council, employee of the city or officer thereof may serve on the board. 
(b)  Removal. Members of the board may be removed by the city council, for cause, as provided in the Charter. 
(c)  Appointment. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, or the council acting on its own motion, may appoint members to staggered terms of office of the board of cemetery trustees as provided by the bylaws thereof. 
(d)  Compensation. No member of the board of cemetery trustees shall receive compensation as such, but the city council may authorize payment of reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by any such member in the performance of authorized business of the board. 
(Code 1975,  6-6, 6-8, 6-9) 
Sec. 22-37. - City clerk is clerk of the board of trustees. 
    The office of the city clerk shall also be the office of the board of cemetery trustees and the city clerk shall be the clerk of such board. The clerk shall perform in this office all of the duties which may be prescribed of him in the Charter, this chapter or the bylaws of the board of cemetery trustees. 
(Code 1975,  6-7) 
Sec. 22-38. - Budgets and reports. 
    The board of cemetery trustees shall prepare and submit a proposed budget to the city council as required by the Charter. The board shall also prepare and file any reports at such time and in the form required by the city council, the Charter or state statute. 
(Code 1975,  6-10) 
Sec. 22-39. - Public hearing; decisions. 
    If the board of cemetery trustees holds any public hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of any applicable state statute. Decisions shall be made in accordance with principles of due process of law, and the reasons and facts relied upon in making the decision shall be set forth in the record of the proceeding. 
(Code 1975,  6-11) 
Chapter 23 - RESERVED 
Chapter 24 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 24-26. - Title of article. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Downtown Development Authority Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2003-02,  1, 3-17-03) 
Sec. 24-27. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in the article shall have the same meaning as given to them in Act 197, as amended, or as hereafter in this section unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this article: 
    Act means Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975, as amended. 
    Authority means the St. Clair Downtown Development Authority created by this article. 
    Board or board of directors means the board of directors of the authority, the governing body of the authority. 
    Chief executive officer means the mayor of the city. 
    City means the City of St. Clair, Michigan. 
    Council or city council means the city council of the City of St. Clair. 
    Downtown development tax means the tax authorized by this article pursuant to Act 197 to be imposed by the authority in the downtown district. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district designated by this article as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02,  2, 3-17-03) 
Sec. 24-29. - Creation of authority. 
    There is hereby created, pursuant to Act 197, a downtown development authority for the city. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of "St. Clair Downtown Development Authority." The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this article and Act 197. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02,  4, 3-17-03) 
Sec. 24-30. - Description of downtown district. 
    The downtown district in which the authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Act 197 shall consist of the territory described on the map attached to Ordinance No. 2003-02 in the City of St. Clair, Michigan, subject to such changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this article and Act 197. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02,  5, 3-17-03) 
Sec. 24-31. - Board of directors. 
    The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board of directors consisting of the chief executive officer of the city and eight to 12 members, as determined from time to time by the city council, as provided in Act 197. The members shall be appointed by the chief executive officer subject to approval by the city council and shall hold office for the terms provided in Act 197. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02,  6, 3-17-03) 
Sec. 24-32. - Powers of authority. 
    The authority shall have all of the powers enumerated in Act 197 subject to the limitations contained therein. No ad valorem property tax shall be levied by the authority without the express approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02,  7, 3-17-03) 
Sec. 24-33. - Fiscal year, adoption of budget. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on October 1 of each year and end on September 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the city. 
(b)  The board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the city council on the same date that the proposed budget for the city is required by the City Charter to be submitted to the city council. The board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the city council. The board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which may have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c)  The authority shall submit financial reports to the city at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02,  8, 3-17-03) 
Chapter 25 - RESERVED 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; subdivisions, ch. 54; vegetation, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BLIGHT 

Sec. 26-26. - Legislative finding. 
    It is hereby found and declared that certain areas in the city have become blighted, with the consequent impairment of taxable values upon which, in large part, municipal revenues depend; that such blighted areas are detrimental or inimical to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens, and to the economic welfare, of the city; that in order to improve and maintain the general character of the city, it is necessary to rehabilitate such blighted areas; and that the conditions found in blighted areas cannot be remedied by the ordinary operations of private enterprise with due regard to the general welfare of the public. 
(Code 1975,  7-1) 
Sec. 26-27. - Prohibitions of causes and factors. 
    No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained the following blighting causes and factors: 
(1)  The storage upon any property of junk vehicles or watercraft, except in a completely enclosed building. For the purpose of this section, the term "junk vehicle or watercraft" shall include any vehicle or watercraft which is not licensed for the use upon the highways of the state for a period in excess of 60 days, and shall also include, whether licensed or not, any motor vehicle or watercraft which is inoperative for any reason for a period in excess of 90 days, excluding operative motor vehicles and watercraft and/or machinery used seasonally. 
(2)  The storage upon any property of building materials unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon such property and such materials are intended for use in connection with such construction. Building materials shall include but shall not be limited to lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structures. 
(3)  The storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance for a period not to exceed 30 days. The term "junk" shall include inoperative machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of wood, metal or any other material or other cast-off material of any kind, whether or not such material could be put to any reasonable use, excluding motor vehicles and/or machinery used seasonally. 
(4)  The existence of any structure or part of any structure which, because of fire, wind, natural disaster, or physical deterioration is no longer habitable, if a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(5)  The existence of any vacant dwelling, garage or other outbuilding unless such buildings are kept secured, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals. 
(6)  The existence of any partially completed structure unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time. 
(7)  Any existing residential building, structure and any nonconforming use located within the city shall not be used except in conformity with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1975,  7-2) 
Sec. 26-29. - Removal of solid waste, junk, or debris-Responsibility of property owner. 
(1)  The owner of real property, as reflected in the city assessment roll, shall cause solid waste, junk or debris that accumulates on said property, the sidewalk or right-of-way in front of said property, or in the alley in the rear thereof, to be removed forthwith upon receipt of notice to remove from the building and zoning administrator or a member of the police department. Notice shall be provided by personally serving a written copy of said notice upon the owner or, alternatively, by mailing a copy of said notice by first class mail to the last address for the owner as appears on the assessment roll and by posting a copy of said notice in a prominent location upon said property. If said solid waste, junk or debris is not removed within 48 hours of said notice, the city superintendent or his/her designee shall cause same to be removed and disposed of by city personnel or by independent contractor. The city shall mail an invoice for the expense of said removal to the owner of said property as appears on said assessment roll. If said invoice is not paid within 30 days of mailing thereof, the same shall become a lien against the property in the manner provided in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Any expenses incurred by the city in the enforcement of subsection (1) above shall become a debt to the city from the owner of said property and, until paid, shall be and remain a lien upon said property and such lien shall be enforced in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens and the city may commence an action in any court of competent jurisdiction for collection thereof, or resort to any other lawful procedure for collection, satisfaction, or enforcement of such lien. 
(3)  If the police chief, city superintendent or his/her designee, or the building and zoning administrator determines that such solid waste, junk, or debris presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the city superintendent shall cause the solid waste, junk or debris to be removed forthwith using reasonable means to effectuate such removal, the cost of such inspections, notices, removal and disposal shall be paid by the property owner. In the event of failure to pay, any amounts due shall become a lien against the property which may be enforced in the manner provided above. 
(Ord. No. 1999-03,  1, 6-21-99) 
Secs. 26-30-26-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATION, RECLAMATION OR FILLING OF LAND 

Sec. 26-76. - Statement of purpose. 
    The removal of earthen materials from the land and the filling or reclamation of land in the city shall be regulated to preserve the public health, safety and welfare by the prevention of nuisances resulting from the creation of hazardous or noxious conditions. 
(Code 1975,  17-115) 
Sec. 26-77. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Earthen materials means any material, including sand, clay, stone, soil or other materials, which are normally found in the earth in its natural state. For purposes of this definition, the term shall also include brick, concrete or like materials, as long as those materials do not constitute more than 15 percent of the contents of any individual truckload of any earth materials being brought to a site for filling or reclamation purposes. 
    Existing grade means the various elevations of the surface of the land as it actually exists upon the site. 
    Filling or reclamation means depositing or placing any earthen materials on the surface of any land, lot or parcel in the city for the purpose, or with the intention or design, of leveling, raising, contouring or elevating any hole, excavation, depression or other area thereon which is of lower elevation than the existing grade, or of raising the mean grade. 
    Finish grade means those earth elevations established and delineated on the plot plan that will result upon completion of the proposed operation for which the permit is issued. 
    Mean grade means the arithmetic average of elevations of points on the boundary lines of the property uniformly spaced and not more than 100 feet apart. In no event shall such elevation points be determined below the surface elevation of any boundary waters. 
    Pit means excavation of earthen materials below the mean grade. 
    Shipping means the removal of earthen materials from above the mean grade. 
(Code 1975,  17-116) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 26-78. - Administration and enforcement. 
    This article shall be administered and enforced by the city superintendent or by any duly authorized representative of the city, who may commence proceedings for the enforcement of this article by use of an appearance ticket, as permitted by law. 
(Code 1975,  17-117) 
Sec. 26-79. - Exclusions. 
    Nothing in the article shall prohibit any of the following, nor shall it be construed or interpreted to prohibit the following: 
(1)  Onsite development. Any balancing, reclamation, excavation or filling of land in connection with an onsite development for which a building permit has been issued, or a site plan approved, if the balancing, reclamation, excavation or filling otherwise complies with this article. Provided, however, that not more than ten cubic yards of excavated earthen materials may be removed or taken beyond the boundaries of any site in the city without a permit being issued under this article. 
(2)  Any other lawful use. Any balancing, excavation, reclamation or filling of land in connection with any immediate lawful use of the land, including routine lawn and yard maintenance or improvement, general residential husbandry needs or similar activities, not involving more than five cubic yards of earthen materials, may be conducted without a permit under this article. 
(Code 1975,  17-118) 
Sec. 26-80. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to remove any earthen materials from any lands in the city, or to reclaim or refill any such lands without a permit granted by the building official to do so as provided in this section. 
(b)  Permit application. The application for a permit to remove, reclaim or refill any land within the city shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Completed form. Written application shall be made on forms provided therefor by the building official. 
(2)  Plot plan. Such application shall be accompanied by a plot plan of the proposed site drawn in accordance with the following requirements and showing the information required: 
a.  Drawn to a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch; 
b.  Showing the location of the land involved and all existing and proposed structures thereon; 
c.  All existing grade elevations shall be indicated at the intersection of perpendicular parallel lines not more than 100 feet apart and expressed to the nearest tenth of a foot; 
d.  Location of existing and proposed streets, roadways, parking areas, entrances and exits; 
e.  Location of all public facilities and services; 
f.  Finish grading plan showing proposed elevations upon completion at five-foot intervals; 
g.  Mean grade elevations at five-foot intervals; and 
h.  Such additional information as the applicant deems necessary and/or pertinent to the application of proposed operation. 
(3)  Statement of purpose. The application shall contain or be accompanied by a written statement of the extent, development, improvement and general purpose of the proposed earth removal, excavation, filling or reclamation of land and the program therefor. 
(4)  Fee. The application and all plans and supplemental statements or information required therewith shall be filed in triplicate with the building official, together with the fee therefor as shall be established by resolution of the city council, and which shall be sufficient to cover the expenses of hearing, the cost of publication of notice as required in this section, and the reasonable expenses incurred by and for inspections. 
(c)  Public hearing by planning commission. 
(1)  Published notice. The city clerk, upon receipt of the application and fee as provided in this section, shall refer the application to the planning commission, which shall cause a notice of a public hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city containing the time, date, place and purpose of such hearing. Such notice shall be published not less than 20 days before the date of the public hearing. 
(2)  Regular or special meeting. The public hearing shall be held by the planning commission at any regular meeting thereof at no cost to the applicant, or at any special meeting called for that purpose when requested by the applicant, which special meeting shall be at the applicant's expense for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council. 
(3)  Standards to be considered. The planning commission shall consider in connection therewith: 
a.  The effect of the proposed use on the general vicinity where it is located; 
b.  The character and use of adjoining lands and structures; 
c.  The depth of the water table; 
d.  Availability and adequacy of surface water drainage facilities; 
e.  The period of time the operation will continue if it is not proposed to be permanent; 
f.  Avenues of ingress and egress and the effect of vehicular traffic; 
g.  The proposed hours of operation; 
h.  Whether or not perimeter fencing should be required; and 
i.  Such other factors as may be necessary and appropriate for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Determination by city council. Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the city council shall determine whether the permit shall be granted or denied. 
(e)  Issuance of permit. 
(1)  Performance bond. If granted, the city clerk shall issue the permit upon the posting of a performance bond in an amount to be determined by the city council. 
(2)  Annual renewal. Such permit shall be valid for one year only, unless renewed thereafter by the city council for like periods in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Suspension and revocation. 
(1)  Suspension. Any permit may be suspended by the enforcing authority for a period of not more than 21 days whenever: 
a.  Any provision of this article is being violated; 
b.  Any condition of the permit is not being observed; or 
c.  It is necessary to preserve or protect public health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  Action reported. The enforcing authority shall forthwith report his act of suspension and the reasons therefor to the city council. 
(3)  Review and revocation. The city clerk shall notify the permit holder that the city council will review the action of the enforcing authority at its regular meeting to determine whether the permit shall be reinstated, suspended for a further period of time or permanently revoked. 
(Code 1975,  17-119) 
Sec. 26-81. - Earth removal operational regulations. 
(a)  Pit operations. 
(1)  Site fenced. Any excavation in excess of five feet in depth will not be allowed unless the site is enclosed by a fence not less than five feet in height around the entire perimeter of the site. All gates within such fence shall be closed and locked or guarded; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to the excavation of a manmade lake or lagoon in accordance with a recorded subdivision plat for the development thereof. 
(2)  Dust control. All earth removal shall be done in such manner as to accomplish reasonable dust control. 
(3)  Banks sloped. The slope of the banks of such excavation shall not exceed 12 degrees horizontally either above or below any water line. 
(4)  Location on site. No excavation shall be allowed within 200 feet of the centerline of any adjoining streets, roads or highways nor within 50 feet of the boundary line of the site. 
(5)  Hours of removal. The hours of operation shall be limited both as to equipment and vehicles. Operations shall be allowed only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and are prohibited entirely on Sunday and legal holidays. 
(6)  Inspection required. All public access roads must be available to reasonable inspection by duly authorized city representatives without prior notice. 
(b)  Strip operations. 
(1)  Allowable depth. Strip operations shall not be allowed more than four inches below the mean grade. 
(2)  Adequate drainage. The site must be maintained and balanced for adequate drainage to prevent the collection of standing water. 
(3)  Final topsoil cover. Sufficient topsoil must be stockpiled on the site prior to the removal of any materials to provide a cover of four inches of topsoil in connection with the finished grade, which shall be spread and completed within 30 days of the completion of the stripped area. 
(4)  Performance bond posted. A performance bond must be posted in an amount established by the city council, if one is required. 
(Code 1975,  17-120) 
Sec. 26-82. - Filling or reclamation regulations. 
    The filling or reclamation of any lands in the city shall be done only during daylight hours between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and shall be done so that no noise resulting therefrom, either directly or indirectly, creates a disturbance of the public peace. Such activities shall also comply with the following: 
(1)  Site grading. The premises must be regularly graded to prevent the collection of standing water, problems with blowing dust, or the like. 
(2)  Inspection. The owners and/or operators must consent to reasonable inspection by duly authorized city representatives without prior notice. 
(3)  Performance bond. A performance bond must be posted in an amount established by the city council, if any is required. 
(4)  Finish grade. Upon completion of the fill, the finished grade shall be composed of materials of such quality as to be capable of growing turf or vegetation. 
(5)  Regulatory requirements. Such other reasonable regulatory requirements as may be necessary to preserve the public health, safety or welfare, as the particular permit may require, or as may be imposed thereon by the city council. 
(Code 1975,  17-121) 
Secs. 26-83-26-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 26-101. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to enable the city to require reimbursement of costs of abatement, containment, cleanup, disposal and restoration from property owners or those responsible for the leaking, spilling or otherwise allowing certain dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to escape containment. 
(Ord. 1994-04,  1, 9-6-94) 
Sec. 26-102. - Dangerous, hazardous substances or materials. 
    Dangerous, hazardous substances or materials is defined as any substance which is spilled, leaked or otherwise released from its container, which in the determination of the fire chief or his authorized representative, is dangerous or harmful to the environment or human or animal life, health, safety, or is obnoxious by reason of odor, or is a threat to public health, safety or welfare, this shall include, but not be limited to, such substances as chemical and gases, explosive, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiological (biological) agents, flammables or corrosives. 
(Ord. 1994-04,  2, 9-6-94) 
Sec. 26-103. - Duty to remove and cleanup. 
    It shall be the duty of any property owner or any person or any other entity which causes or controls leakage, spillage, or any other dissemination of dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to immediately remove such and cleanup the area of such spillage in such a manner that the area involved is fully restored to its condition prior to such happening. 
(Ord. 1994-04,  3, 9-6-94) 
Sec. 26-104. - Failure to remove and cleanup. 
    Any property owner of the area involved or any such person or entity which fails to comply with subsection 26-103 shall be liable to and shall pay the city for its costs and expenses, including the cost incurred by the city to any party which it engages for the complete abatement, containment, cleanup, disposal and restoration of the affected area. Costs incurred by the city shall include: actual labor costs of city personnel (including workers compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administration overhead, cost of equipment operation), cost of material obtained directly by the city; and the cost of any contract labor and materials. Costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the city. 
(Ord. 1994-04,  4, 9-6-94) 
Sec. 26-105. - Enforcement. 
    If any person or entity fails to reimburse the city as provided and such person or entity is the owner of the affected property, the city shall have the right and power to add any and all costs of cleanup and restoration to the tax roll as to such property and to levy and collect such costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real property taxes against said property. The city shall also have the right to confiscate any vehicle and its contents where such costs cannot be added to the tax roll. The city shall also have the right to bring an action in the appropriate court to collect such costs if it deems such action to be necessary. 
(Ord. 1994-04,  5, 9-6-94) 
Sec. 26-106. - Equipment operation costs. 
    A schedule of equipment operation costs shall be on file in the city clerk's office as public record. 
(Ord. 1994-04,  6, 9-6-94) 
Secs. 26-107-26-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 26-125. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the City of St. Clair is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of St. Clair under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The Floodplain Manager of the City of St. Clair is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the City of St. Clair for floodplain management unrelated to the State Construction Code, including, but not necessarily limited to, zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance), and other applications of police power that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. The City of St. Clair assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout the corporate limits of the community adopting this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03,  1, 4-19-10) 
Sec. 26-126. - Code appendix enforced. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of St. Clair. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03,  1, 4-19-10) 
Sec. 26-127. - Designation of regulated floodprone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled St. Clair County, Michigan (all jurisdictions), effective May 3, 2010, and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) panel numbers 0434D, 0442D,0451D, 0453D, and 0461D dated May 3, 2010, are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of Floodplain Management and administration of the Michigan Construction Code; and declared to be part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03,  1, 4-19-10) 
Chapters 27-29 - RESERVED 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- State fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.,; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Hazardous growths of brush and accumulations of refuse. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or parcel of land, or any person in possession or control of any lot or parcel of land within the city, to allow or maintain upon any portion of such lot or land any growth of brush, or to permit the deposit or accumulation upon any portion of such lot or land of any debris, rubbish, refuse, trash, dead vegetation or garbage, so as to create an unhealthy or unsafe condition or fire hazard. 
(b)  Order to cut or remove. Upon complaint of a violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to investigate such complaint and the premises complained of, and after such investigation, if he shall determine that the condition of the premises is such as to be in violation of subsection (a) of this section, he shall issue an order directing the owner or person in possession or control of the land upon which such violation is committed, requiring the cutting of such brush or removal of such debris, rubbish, refuse, trash, dead vegetation or garbage, within ten days after receipt of such order. 
(c)  Failure to cut or remove. If any owner of any lot or land, or any person having charge of any lot or land in the city shall violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, and fail to comply with the order described in subsection (b) of this section, within ten days from the receipt thereof, he shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1975,  8-1-8-3) 
Sec. 30-2. - Kindling of fires on streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
    No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or other fire or knowingly furnish the material for any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any concrete or asphalt pavement or sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1975,  8-4) 
Sec. 30-3. - Investigation of fires. 
    The chief of the fire department shall investigate or cause to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Any person having knowledge or presumed to have knowledge of its cause, or circumstances leading to its probable cause, may be summoned to appear before the chief of police for interrogation. 
(Code 1975,  8-5) 
Sec. 30-4. - Restricting entrance on premises while fire in progress. 
    Whenever any fire is in progress and it may be deemed desirable for the purpose of the investigation or protection to exclude persons from such premises, the senior officer in charge of such fire may cause guards to be posted forbidding entrance by any person, whether owner, tenant or otherwise, to such premises or part thereof. 
(Code 1975,  8-6) 
Sec. 30-6. - False fire alarms; interfering with fire alarm system. 
(a)  No person shall make, or cause to be made, or aid, encourage or assist in making or spreading, any false alarm of fire by means of the fire alarm system now in use by the city, knowing the same to be false. 
(b)  Any person guilty of a violation of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  8-8) 
Sec. 30-7. - Obedience to orders of commanding officer at scene of fire. 
    All persons who may be present at any fire shall obey the orders of the chief of the department, or other officer in command, in the extinguishment of fires and the rescue of property. Any person refusing to obey all such orders of the chief, or other officer in charge, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  8-9) 
Sec. 30-8. - Destruction of building to arrest spread of fire. 
    Members of the fire department, and any other person at the scene of a fire ordered by the commanding officer of the fire department to give aid under section 30-7, shall cause any building to be removed, pulled or torn down, or demolished, in whole or in part, so as to arrest the spread of fire therefrom. 
(Code 1975,  8-10) 
Sec. 30-9. - Damaging or removing department property. 
    No person shall ride or drive any truck, automobile, motorcycle, motor vehicle, wagon or other vehicle upon or across any hose used by the fire department of the city in any street, lane, alley or other place in the city, except as expressly directed by a member of the fire department. Any person who shall enter any place where engines, hoses, carriages, hook and ladder trucks, or other fire apparatus may be kept, with intent to injure such fire apparatus, or who shall injure any such engine, hose, carriage, hook and ladder, truck or fire apparatus or any article or fixture, furniture or ornament, or shall remove any portion thereof, or otherwise mutilate or disable the same, or who shall do any damage to any engine, house, hose, station, or other place where fire apparatus is kept or stored, or to any article or fixture, furniture or ornament in or about any such house or place, or who shall remove from any engine or carriage house, any engine, hose, carriage or fire apparatus or any article or fixture, furniture or ornament without permission from the chief, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  8-11) 
Sec. 30-10. - [Regulations for ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks.] 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
    APA standard 87-1 means 2001 APA standards 87-1, standard for the construction and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties and theatrical pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, MD. 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Protection Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation. 
    Low impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8 and 3.5. 
    Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years of age. 
    National holiday means the following legal, public holidays: 
(1)  New Years Day, January 1. 
(2)  Martin Luther King Jr's Birthday, the third Monday in January. 
(3)  President's Day, the third Monday in February. 
(4)  Memorial Day, the last Monday in May. 
(5)  Independence Day, July 4. 
(6)  Labor Day, the first Monday in September. 
(7)  Columbus Day, the second Monday in October. 
(8)  Veterans Day, November 11. 
(9)  Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November. 
(10)  Christmas Day, December 25. 
(b)  Ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks. A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks except on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday. 
(c)  Possession of consumer fireworks by minor. A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks. 
(d)  Determination of violation: Seizure. If a police officer determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the officer may seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of the violation. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Municipal civil infraction. A violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of $500.00 plus the costs of prosecution. 
(2)  Disposal of evidence. Following the final disposition of a finding of responsibility for violating this section, the city may dispose of, or destroy, any consumer fireworks retained as evidence in that prosecution. 
(3)  Costs of storage and disposal. In addition to any other penalty, a person found responsible for a violation of this section shall be required to reimburse the city for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying consumer fireworks that were confiscated for a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04,  3-7, 6-18-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-04,  3-7, adopted June 18, 2012, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as  30-10 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 30-11-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-01,  1, adopted March 3, 2003, repealed art. II,  30-31-30-38, which pertained to the fire department and derived from  8-19-8-28 of the 1975 Code. 

Secs. 30-31-30-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 30-61. - Code adopted; purpose; copies on file. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 3(k) of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.3)(k), MSA 5.2073(k), as amended, there is hereby adopted by reference by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding, to a reasonable degree, of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and the use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use for occupancy of buildings or premises, that certain code known as the 1997 Uniform Fire Code including all appendix chapters except Appendix I-A, Appendix I-B and Appendix VI-A, recommended by the International Conference of Building Officials and the Western Fire Chiefs Association, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, 90601, being particularly the 1997 Edition thereof and the whole thereof save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended in subsequent sections of this article, of which code printed copies thereof are on file in the office of the city clerk available for public use and inspection at all times, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provision thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1998-01,  1, 6-1-98) 
Sec. 30-62. - Definitions. 
    Whenever the following terms are used in the Uniform Fire Code adopted by this article they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Chief of the bureau of fire prevention means the fire inspector of the city. 
    Corporation counsel means the attorney for the city. 
    Municipality means the City of St. Clair, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 1998-01,  2, 6-1-98) 
Sec. 30-63. - Amendments. 
    The following chapters, sections and subsections of the Uniform Fire Code adopted in this article are hereby amended or deleted as set forth in this section, and additional chapters, sections and subsections are added as indicated. The following chapter and section numbers refer to like number of chapters and sections of the Uniform Fire Code: 
    Section 103.1.4. Appeals. The Appeals Board shall be the existing Building Commission of the City of St. Clair. 
Article 79 shall be amended by adding a new section reading as follows: 
    Section 7901.1.3. State flammable liquid laws. Pursuant to the provisions of section 3(k) of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k)), as amended, the state fire safety board, rules for Storage and Transportation of Flammable and Combustible Liquids 1992, as amended, as prescribed and authorized in Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1941 (MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference by the city for the purpose of providing rules for the preservation of fire and protection of persons and property in the transportation, storage, handling, offering for sale, sale and use of flammable liquids. Copies of such regulations areon file in the office of the city clerk, available for public use and inspections at all times. Where any section or part of Article 79 of the Uniform Fire Code is in conflict with the State Fire Safety Board, rules for Storage and Transportation of Flammable and Combustible Liquids 1992, it is intended that the State Fire Safety Board, rules for Storage and Transportation of Flammable and Combustible Liquids 1992, shall prevail. 
    Section 1102.1.1. Open burning. Where any section of [or] part of Section 1102 of the Uniform Fire Code is in conflict with City of St. Clair Code of Ordinance Chapter 30 Article IV Open Burning, it is intended that the City of St. Clair Code of Ordinance Chapter 30 Article IV Open Burning, shall prevail. 
Section 901.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    Section 901.4.2.1. Fire lanes. The marking of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, shall be approved by the chief of the bureau of fire prevention and the chief of police. 
Section 901.5 is hereby amended to include the following: 
    Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be prohibited at all times. Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove motor vehicles and/or vehicles in the designated fire lanes. 
Appendix VI-C, Section 2.4 is hereby amended as follows: 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code or any rule, regulation or order adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and cost of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation, and every day upon which any such violations shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(c)  The penalty set out in this section shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition, any injunctive relief, or revocation or [of] any permit or license. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to the failure of officers and employees of the city to perform municipal duties required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1998-01,  2, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 2012-04,  9, 6-18-12) 
Charter reference- Limitation on penalties, 11.07. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 1174i. 
Secs. 30-64-30-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPEN BURNING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted April 5, 2010, repealed the former art. IV,  30-81-30-84, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1975; and Ord. No. 1999-09, adopted Sept. 7, 1999. 

Sec. 30-81. - Purpose. 
    This article is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of St. Clair by regulating the air pollution and fire hazards of open burning and outdoor burning. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-82. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to all outdoor burning and open burning within the City of St. Clair. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-83. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Campfire means a small outdoor fire intended for recreation or cooking but not including a fire intended for disposal of waste wood or refuse. 
    Clean wood means natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with preservatives; and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products. 
    Construction and demolition waste means building waste materials including, but not limited to, waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated wood, painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a house, commercial or industrial building, or other structure. 
    Fire chief means the Chief of the St. Clair Area Fire Authority or other person designated by the fire chief. 
    Municipality means a county, township, city, or village. 
    Open burning means kindling or maintaining a fire where the products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or a chimney. This includes burning in a burn barrel. 
    Outdoor wood-fired boiler means a wood-fired boiler, stove or furnace that is not located within a building intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals. 
    Patio wood-burning unit means a chiminea, patio warmer, or other portable wood-burning device used for outdoor recreation and/or heating. 
    Refuse means any waste material except trees, logs, brush, stumps leaves, grass clippings, and other vegetative matter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-84. - General prohibition on outdoor burning and open burning. 
    Open burning and outdoor burning are prohibited in the City of St. Clair unless the burning is specifically permitted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-85. - Open burning of refuse. 
    Open burning of refuse is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-86. - Burning of trees, logs, brush, stumps, and leaves. 
(a)  Open burning of construction materials is prohibited: 
(b)  Open burning of trees, logs, brush, stumps, and leaves, is allowed only in accordance with all of the following provisions: 
(1)  Except for campfires, a permit issued in accordance with Section 30-90 of this ordinance must be obtained prior to open burning under this section when the ground is not snow covered. 
(2)  Open burning of trees, logs, brush, and stumps must be conducted at least 50 feet from any structure. 
(3)  Except for barbecue, gas, and charcoal grills, no open burning shall be undertaken during periods when the Governor of Michigan has issued a burning ban applicable to the area. 
(4)  All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free manner, when wind and weather conditions minimize adverse effect and do not create a health hazard or a visibility hazard on roadways, railroads or airfields. Open burning shall be conducted in conformance with all local and state fire protection regulations. 
(5)  Outdoor campfires and small bonfires for cooking, ceremonies, or recreation are allowed provided they do not cause a nuisance. 
(6)  Except for campfires, open burning shall only be conducted within the months of April, May, October and November between the hours of 12:00 noon and 8:00 o'clock p.m. 
(7)  Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent person of at least 18 years of age until the fire is extinguished and is cold. The person shall have readily available for use such fire extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for the total control of the fire. 
(8)  No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk or on the ice of a lake, pond, stream or waterbody. 
(9)  Except for barbecue, gas, and charcoal grills, no burning shall be undertaken within 25 feet from any combustible material, combustible wall or partition, exterior window opening, exit access or exit unless authorize by the fire chief. 
(10)  No open burning may be conducted on days when the Department of Environmental Quality has declared an "air quality action day" applicable to St. Clair County. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-87. - Outdoor wood-fired boilers. 
    No person shall install, use, or maintain an outdoor wood-fired boiler within the City of St. Clair. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-88. - Patio wood-burning units. 
    A patio wood-burning unit may be installed and used in the City of St. Clair only in accordance with all of the following provisions: 
(1)  The patio wood-burning unit shall not be used to burn refuse. 
(2)  The patio wood-burning unit shall burn only clean wood. 
(3)  The patio wood-burning unit shall be located a reasonable distance from the nearest structure which is not on the same property as the patio wood-burning unit. 
(4)  The patio wood-burning unit shall not cause an unreasonable nuisance to neighbors. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-89. - Fire suppression training. 
    Notwithstanding sections 30-84 and 30-85 of this article, structures and other materials may be burned for fire prevention training only in accordance with all of the following provisions: 
(1)  The burn must be exclusively for fire prevention training. The burning shall not be used as a means to dispose of waste material including tires and other hazardous materials. 
(2)  Any standing structure that will be used in a fire suppression training must be inspected and should be inspected by a licensed asbestos inspector. A notification of this inspection must be submitted to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Air Quality Division at least ten business days prior to burning a standing structure. The notification must be submitted using Form EQP 5661 "Notification of Intent to Renovate/Demolish." 
(3)  All asbestos must be removed prior to conducting the fire suppression training. If the structure is a residential dwelling, the owner may remove the asbestos or have it removed by a licensed abatement contractor. If it is a commercial building, all asbestos must be removed by a licensed abatement contractor. 
(4)  All ash shall be disposed of in an approved landfill or at an alternate location approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(5)  Asphalt shingles and asphalt or plastic siding shall be removed prior to the practice burn unless the Fire Chief determines that they are necessary for the fire practice. 
(6)  At least ten days before a planned practice burn, residents within 500 feet of the site of the proposed burn shall be notified. 
(7)  All fire suppression training should conform to the guidelines established by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard on Live Fire Training Evolutions (NFPA 1403). 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-90. - Burning permits. 
(a)  No person shall start or maintain any outdoor burning or open burning covered under this Article without a burning permit issued by the St. Clair Area Fire Authority. 
(b)  Any person responsible for burning leaves, brush, clean wood or other vegetative debris under Section 30-86 of this ordinance shall obtain a no fee burning permit before starting the fire. 
(c)  An outdoor campfire does not require a permit provided that the fire complies with all other applicable provisions of this article. 
(d)  When weather conditions warrant, the fire chief may temporarily suspend issuing burning permits and may temporarily suspend previously issued burning permits for open burning. 
(e)  A burning permit issued under this section shall require compliance with all applicable provisions of this article and any additional special restrictions deemed necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(f)  Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit shall be deemed a violation of this article. Any violation of this article or the burning permit shall void the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-91. - Liability. 
    A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-92. - Right of entry and inspection. 
    The fire chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of the St. Clair Area Fire Authority who presents credentials may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 30-93. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The fire chief, city superintendent, member of the St. Clair Police Department or Zoning/Building Enforcement Officer is authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or governmental entity who violates any of the provisions of this article or fails to comply with a duly authorized order issued pursuant to this article shall be deemed to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by Michigan Statute which shall be punishable by civil fine determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Fine Maximum Fine 1st Offense $75.00 $500.00 2nd Offense 150.00 500.00 3rd Offense 325.00 500.00 4th or Subsequent Offense 500.00 500.00  
(c)  The violator shall pay costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, which the City of St. Clair has incurred in connection with the municipal infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less than $75.00 or more than $500.00 be ordered. In addition, the City of St. Clair shall have the right to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restraining order, or other appropriate remedy to compel compliance with this article. Each day that a violation of this article exists shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01,  1, 4-5-10) 
Chapters 31-33 - RESERVED 
Chapter 34 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 10; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; offenses, ch. 38. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Minimum employment standards adopted. 
(a)  The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers, as established and adopted by the state law enforcement officers training council in accordance with Act No. 203 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1965 (MCL 28.601 et seq., MSA 4.450(1) et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted. 
(b)  The standards of the state law enforcement officers training council are recognized as minimum standards, and higher standards are recommended by the training council when qualified applicants are available. Any portion of any ordinance not meeting the minimum standards is hereby repealed. Any portion of any ordinance which meets the minimum standards or exceeds those standards shall remain in effect. 
(Code 1975,  15-1) 
Secs. 34-2-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL POLICE 

Sec. 34-26. - Established. 
    A police reserve unit, referred to in this article as the special police, is hereby established as a voluntary organization to serve gratuitously, composed of persons appointed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1975,  15-12) 
Sec. 34-27. - Appointment. 
    The police chief shall have operational authority and control over the special police. With the approval of the city superintendent, the chief may appoint as a member thereof any person determined to be qualified and may reject any application for membership. Membership is open to qualified persons not less than 18 years of age who reside in the City of St. Clair or adjacent townships. Current members not living in this area may continue membership. 
(Code 1975,  15-13) 
Sec. 34-29. - Scope of duties and authority. 
(a)  The special police is not intended to replace or supplant the duly sworn members of the city police department, but will supplement their efforts in time of emergency or danger. It is intended that the special police shall be available for such duties as directing traffic, service-type calls and similar noncritical tasks. In time of dire emergency, as determined by the police chief or city superintendent, special police officers may augment regular police officers for police assignments in less critical areas. 
(b)  When on official duty and while under the direction of the police department, members of the special police shall have powers as authorized by the police chief. When any member of the special police is off duty, he shall have no such power. No member of the special police shall be deemed to be on official duty until such member shall have been specifically ordered to such duty by the city superintendent, chief of police or a designee acting pursuant to a direct command from the chief of police or city superintendent. 
(Code 1975,  15-15) 
Sec. 34-30. - Organization. 
    All rules and regulations of the police department shall apply to all special officers as applicable and, in addition, all special officers must comply with all bylaws of the special police organization. Failure to obey such rules, regulations or bylaws shall result in discipline or discharge. 
(Code 1975,  15-16) 
Sec. 34-31. - Compensation and funding. 
    Special police officers shall receive no compensation from the city for their services; however, a yearly stipend may be provided to the organization by the city council to be utilized as they determine necessary. 
(Code 1975,  15-17) 
Sec. 34-32. - Equipment, uniforms and weapons. 
(a)  Facilities, including public utilities, will be made available for special police use as city police and guidelines permit. Any police equipment furnished by the police department shall remain the property of the department and shall at all times be subjected to the rules and regulations set forth by the department for its use. 
(b)  Members of the special police shall be outfitted with a uniform of such design and color to be selected by the chief of police. The uniform may be the same as those worn by regular police officers except that a distinctive badge, patch or insignia shall be worn to designate the wearer as a member of the special police. 
(c)  No member of the special police shall carry any firearm except in cases of emergency and necessity as determined by the police chief or city superintendent. 
(d)  It shall be grounds for immediate dismissal for any member of the special police to falsely represent that he has authority or to wear his uniform or insignia or to use any police equipment except during the performance of actual authorized duty while under the direction of the police department. 
(Code 1975,  15-18) 
Sec. 34-33. - Unlawful impersonation of a special officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn in as a member of the special police to impersonate such officer or to wear, carry or display the uniform, badge or insignia of such special police. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  15-19) 
Sec. 34-34. - Worker's disability compensation insurance. 
    Each member of the special police, while acting under the direction of the police chief, during a regular assigned tour of duty, is entitled to receive worker's disability compensation from the city in accordance with the provision of state law. 
(Code 1975,  15-20) 
Sec. 34-35. - Liability insurance. 
    All special police officers shall be covered by liability insurance identical to that provided to the regular police officers through the city's participation with the state municipal risk management authority. 
(Code 1975,  15-21) 
Secs. 34-36-34-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOST OR STOLEN PROPERTY 

Sec. 34-56. - Purpose. 
    Unclaimed lost or stolen property recovered by or delivered to the police department shall be disposed of or sold as provided in this article. 
(Code 1975,  15-30) 
Sec. 34-57. - Unclaimed stolen property. 
(a)  Report and request for disposal authority. Whenever the city police department has any recovered stolen property, including money, which is unclaimed for six months after recovery, the chief of the department shall report that fact to the city council and request authority from the council to dispose of it as provided in this article. The council shall act upon the request of the chief of police within six months after receipt of the request. 
(b)  Published notice. If the council approves the request, the chief of the police department shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days before the sale. The notice shall describe the property, including money, and shall state the time and place of public sale at which the property may be purchased by the highest bidder. When lost property is to be sold, the notice shall also state the date and place where such property was found. 
(c)  Sale and deposit of proceeds. The chief of the police department shall conduct such sale and shall deposit the proceeds of the sale after deducting the costs of the sale, together with any other money included in the notice, with the city treasurer to the credit of the city general fund. 
(Code 1975,  15-31) 
Sec. 34-58. - Unclaimed lost property. 
(a)  Applicability; determination by police chief. Provisions of this section shall apply to any personal property lost by the owner thereof within the city and unclaimed by such owner, or a relative, heir, or legal representative thereof, within six months from the date it is delivered to the custody of the police department. For purposes of this article, "lost property" means all personal property recovered by the city police department, which, under the circumstances, appears to have become separated from the possession of the owner thereof, accidentally or without an intent to abandon, but the location of which property is unknown to such owner, and which property cannot be identified by the police department as being the property of any particular owner. A determination by the chief of police that any personal property recovered by or delivered to the police department is lost property within the meaning of this article shall be prima facie evidence that such property is lost property. 
(b)  Sale of lost property by chief of police. Upon the request of the chief of police to the city council, lost property delivered into the possession of the police department by any person or other city department, or recovered or found by the police department, may be sold at the next ensuing police sale of stolen property. 
(c)  Disposition of property without intrinsic value. Property found to be of no intrinsic or commercial value may be donated to charitable institutions, or may be destroyed, but the inventories of such property shall first be submitted to the city council and the authority of the council secured for such disposition of the property. Property remaining unsold by the chief of police after having been offered for sale at any two police sales may be disposed of by the chief of police in the same manner upon order of the city council. 
(Code 1975,  15-32) 
Sec. 34-59. - Claims by owner. 
(a)  Prior to sale. Until the date of the sale of unclaimed lost or stolen property, any such property, including money, may be claimed at the city police department. If ownership is proved, the police department shall turn the property, including money, over to the owner and cancel the sale insofar as the claimed property is concerned. 
(b)  After sale. 
(1)  Filing a claim. If within six months after the sale of unclaimed lost or stolen property, the owner of the property, including money, files with the city council a claim for such property, and proves his right to such property, the council shall direct the city treasurer to pay money or the amount received for the property to the owner. 
(2)  Time limitation. The city council shall not approve any claims filed more than six months after the sale. 
(3)  Liability. Neither the chief of police or any member thereof who disposes of property in the manner provided in this article shall be liable to the owner thereof. 
(Code 1975,  15-33) 
ARTICLE IV. - COST RECOVERY FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSES 

Sec. 34-60. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the city from extraordinary expenses resulting from the utilization of city resources in response to certain incidents involving the utilization of emergency resources of the city, this division [article] authorizes the imposition of charges to recover where the cost incurred in responding to incidents. Authority for the enactment of these provisions is set forth in the Police and Fire Protection Act, MCLA 41.801 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07,  1, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 34-61. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, phrases, words and their definitions shall have the meaning set forth unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Bomb threat means the verbal or written threat of a bomb or other explosive device which if discharged as threatened would violate federal, state or local law. 
    Emergency service means a response by police, fire or public works department, or other responders on behalf of the city to an emergency incident, or to a call for assistance. 
    Emergency service fee means the cost incurred by the city as a result of providing emergency services including police, fire, or other support services to a person within the city including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Officer expenses incurred by the police department, fire department, public services department, or other public officials, or bodies, third parties engaged by the city in responding to the incident. Costs and expenses shall include cost of equipment, operations, personnel, materials used and other expenses including without limitation employee wages, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs of equipment including depreciation. 
(2)  Other costs and expenses incurred by the city in providing the emergency service or attempting to collect a fee including legal and engineering fees, litigation costs and expenses, supplies used directly or indirectly in the incident. 
(3)  Costs incurred in accounting for emergency services including billing and collection costs. 
(4)  Costs associated with deployment, including costs associated with dispatch and return of emergency resources. 
    False alarm means any automated or manual device designed to request or summon emergency assistance which device is activated intentionally or otherwise, in the absence of an actual need for emergency assistance. The determination that there was no actual need for emergency assistance shall be made by the most senior person responding to a false alarm. A false alarm shall not be deemed to have occurred if: 1) caused by an act of God (i.e., a lightning storm, power failure, etc.); 2) it originates from a motor vehicle alarm system; or 3) has not occurred more frequently than three times in 30 days or five times in 12 months. 
    Nonresident means a person or entity that does not have a primary residence in the City of St. Clair, own real property in the City of St. Clair, or have a principal office or place of business within the city. 
    Responsible party means any individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company, or any other legal entity responsible in whole or in part for causing the need for emergency service, or any person receiving emergency services, or any owner, tenant, occupant, or party in control of real and personal property from which, onto which, or related to which, there is an emergency response incident and service provided. All the foregoing parties are jointly and severally responsible. The city may proceed against any or all such persons, or entities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07,  1, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 34-62. - Liability for emergency service fee. 
    Emergency service fees shall be assessed against any responsible party or parties when the City of St. Clair has deployed any emergency resources under this ordinance. If more than one party is responsible for causing the expense of an emergency response under this ordinance, all such parties shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of the emergency response under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Emergency services provided for any accident, or fire involving, or related to any motor vehicle, trailer, aircraft, boat, snow mobile, water craft, or other vehicles owned or operated by a nonresident of the city. 
(2)  Emergency response to any fire which could be set with a permit, but for which a permit was not obtained. 
(3)  Emergency response to any fire which could be set with a permit, but which becomes uncontrolled regardless of whether a permit was obtained. 
(4)  Emergency response provided to any nonresident of the city within the areas of the city opened to the public, such as parks, roads, highways and places of business. 
(5)  Emergency response to an illegal fire under federal, state or local law. Charges under this subsection are payable by the responsible party causing in whole, or in part, or responsible in whole, or in part for such illegal fire. 
(6)  Emergency response to an activity, event, or incident in violation of federal, state, or local laws involving the illegal use of fireworks, or malicious destruction of property. 
(7)  Emergency response to an activity, event, or incident involving threats of harm to oneself, or another, or another's property which if carried out, would be a violation of federal, state, or local law. 
(8)  Utility line failure involving disabling of any transmission or service line, cable, conduit, pipeline, wire, or the like used to provide, collect, or transport electricity, natural gas, water, sewer, communication, or electronic signals (including, but not limited to, telephone, computer, cable, television, or other electronic impulses, if the owner, or party responsible for the maintenance of such utility line does not respond, employing personnel to the scene within one hour of a request to repair, or correct such failure.) Time limitations for response shall be extended to two hours in the event of weather-related emergencies. 
(9)  Any emergency service response to a particular location, if an emergency response has occurred at such particular location in excess of three times within 30 days or five times within 12 months. 
(10)  Emergency response to any occurrence, incident, activity, or emergency where a release of hazardous materials occurs or is reasonably imminent and where the fire chief or his designee has so declared such activity, accident or emergency a hazardous material incident or emergency. 
(11)  To the extent the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.20101, et seq.) or any other law preempts the cost recovery provisions of this ordinance, the liability for and recovery of costs for emergency response shall be governed by the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act or such other law, and the City may pursue collection of such costs of the emergency response in a civil action, pursuant to said laws. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07,  1, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 34-63. - Invoice for emergency services. 
    The city administration upon recommendation by the police, fire or public works department, shall prepare an invoice for emergency services pursuant to the fees as defined in the fee schedule, which shall be delivered by first class mail to any person, or persons responsible for the emergency service fee and may recover all assessable costs in connection with such emergency response. In making such a determination for total assessable costs, the city administration shall consider the following: 
(1)  The total assessable costs. 
(2)  The risk the public safety or emergency situation imposed upon the city, its residents, and their property. 
(3)  Whether there was any injury or damage to person or property. 
(4)  Whether an evacuation was required. 
(5)  If the emergency response required an unusual or extraordinary use of city personnel, equipment, or resources. 
(6)  Whether there was any damage to the environment as a result of the situation. 
    The invoice is due and payable within 30 days of the date of mailing, or delivery. Overdue unpaid amounts shall incur interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum simple interest. The notice shall generally identify the location of the emergency service response and provide a brief summary of the incident. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07,  1, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 34-64. - Fee schedule. 
    The city council from time to time may adopt and amend a schedule of costs as assessable costs which shall be available at the municipal offices for inspection by the public during regular business hours which may set forth charges established on an hour, or fractional hour basis for apparatus equipment and personnel. Actual additional costs incurred shall be chargeable, not withstanding that the same were not expressly provided in such fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07,  1, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 34-65. - Appeal. 
    Any person determined to be responsible for an emergency service fee may appeal that determination by filing a written statement of appeal to the city superintendent setting for the reasons for the appeal, shall be filed within 21 days following the mailing of any invoice, or if not mailed, the date of delivery by other means. The appeal stays payment until a final determination by the city superintendent. The party appealing may present information and evidence. The city superintendent shall make a final determination on any appeal within 14 days of the filing of any appeal. The determination shall be in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07,  1, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 34-66. - Other remedies. 
    The city shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy, or may institute appropriate action or proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect successful costs from a responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07,  1, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 34-67. - No limitation of liability. 
    The recovery of accessible cost pursuant hereto does not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable local, state or federal law to the city, or to any other person, or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07,  1, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 34-68. - Assessable costs, lien upon property. 
    Assessable costs when not paid, including late payment and interest shall constitute a lien upon real property which shall be payable and collectible in the same manner as real property taxes, including interest and penalties thereto as a cumulative remedy. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07,  1, 8-15-11) 
Chapter 35 - RESERVED 
Chapter 36 - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS 

Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Act means Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961, as amended. 
    Authorized city official means a police officer or other personnel of the city authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction notices. 
    Bureau means the City of St. Clair Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as established by this chapter. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the City of St. Clair Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized under Sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07,  1, 9-15-99) 
Sec. 36-2. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of (1) a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or (2) a municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07,  1, 9-15-99) 
Sec. 36-3. - Municipal civil infraction citations-Issuance and service. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(a)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(b)  The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court. 
(c)  Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by Section 8705 of the Act. 
(d)  A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(e)  An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(f)  An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
(1)  Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
(2)  Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(g)  Municipal infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided by subsection 36-3(g)(2), an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
(2)  If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07,  1, 9-15-99) 
Sec. 36-4. - Same-Contents. 
(a)  A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)  Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may do one of the following: 
(1)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or in person or by representation. 
(3)  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b.  Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)  The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)  That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)  That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)  That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)  That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)  That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)  The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07,  1, 9-15-99) 
Sec. 36-5. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau ("bureau") as authorized under Section 8396 of the Act to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance. 
(b)  Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at St. Clair City Hall and shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. The city treasurer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(c)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law. 
(d)  Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(e)  Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in subsections 36-3(f) and (g) of this chapter. In addition to any other information required by this Code or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f)  Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(g)  Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by Sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07,  1, 9-15-99) 
Sec. 36-6. - Establishment of a schedule of violations of the municipal civil infractions ordinance. 
(a)  A schedule of violations, for the payment of civil fines, payable to the bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices, is hereby established. The fines for the violations shall be as listed by ordinance for the following violations: 
(1)  Chapter 6, Amusements and Entertainment. 
Article III. Arcades and Game Devices 
Article IV. Poolrooms 
(2)  Chapter 10, Animals. 
Article II. Dogs 
Sec. 10-26. Keeping or harboring dog, interpretation. 
Sec. 10-29. License. 
Sec. 10-30. Running at-large prohibited. 
Sec. 10-31. Barking dogs. 
Sec. 10-33. Certain duties imposed on owner. 
(3)  Chapter 14, Building and Building Regulations. 
Article II. Building Code 
Article III. Electrical Code 
Article IV. Plumbing Code 
Article V. Mechanical Code 
Article VI. Property Maintenance Code 
(4)  Chapter 18, Businesses. 
Article II. Licensing of Business Establishments 
(5)  Chapter 26, Environment. 
Article II. Blight 
(6)  Chapter 30, Fire Prevention and Protection. 
Article I. In General 
Sec. 30-1. Hazardous growths of brush and accumulations of refuse. 
Sec. 30-2. Kindling of fires on streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
Article IV. Open Burning 
Sec. 30-82. Open burning prohibited; exceptions. 
(7)  Chapter 38, Offenses. 
Article I. In General 
Sec. 38-1. Attaching or affixing of signs to utility poles or trees. 
Sec. 38-4. Curfew for minors. 
(8)  Chapter 42, Solid Waste. 
(9)  Chapter 50, Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places. 
Article I. In General 
Article II. Construction of Sidewalks 
Article IV. Building Numbers 
(10)  Chapter 58, Traffic and Vehicles. 
Article V. Disabled Motor Vehicles. 
Sec. 58-92. Parking, storing, repairing, etc., generally. 
Sec. 58-94. Prohibited in front yards; exception. 
Sec. 58-95. Storing, servicing or repairing in side or rear yard 
Sec. 58-96. Storing, servicing or repairing within accessory garage. 
(11)  Chapter 66, Vegetation. 
(12)  Chapter 70, Waterways. 
Article II. Leasing of City-Owned Boathouse Lots and Dock Lots 
Article III. Licensing and Regulation of Tugboats Operating on Pine River. 
(b)  A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted at the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 1999-07,  1, 9-15-99) 
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; cemeteries, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 34. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Attaching or affixing of signs to utility poles or trees. 
(a)  No sign of any kind whatsoever, except those established and/or maintained by the city, county, state or federal governments, shall be located on, attached or affixed to any utility pole or tree located on public property or placed in any manner on public property within the city. 
(b)  All employees of the city are hereby authorized to immediately remove any sign within the city found to be in violation of the terms of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1991-05,  1, 12-2-91; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 38-2. - Unattended children in motor vehicles. 
(a)  The city council finds that young children left in motor vehicles without supervision pose an undue danger to the children, the public at large and to property both public and private and that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected if such practice is prohibited. 
(b)  No person shall permit, cause or allow a child less than 11 years of age to be left unattended and/or unsupervised in any motor vehicle upon a public street, highway or parking area open to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1993-01,  1(13-80), 2-1-93) 
Sec. 38-3. - Hunting prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt any wild animal in the city with a bow and arrow or any firearm, excluding any smooth bore rifle or handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling brass balls not exceeding .177 caliber by means of a spring, air or gas; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to the hunting of waterfowl on the St. Clair River that is done in compliance with applicable state and federal statute. 
(b)  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor and any person convicted of a violation hereof by a court of competent jurisdiction may be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  13-6.1) 
Sec. 38-4. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Under 12. No minor under the age of 12 years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 10:00 pm and 6:00 am, unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child. 
(b)  Under 18. No minor under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 11:00 pm and 6:00 am (immediately following) except where said minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor or where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or employer. 
(c)  Parental responsibility, assisting violation of article. No parent, guardian or other person having the care or custody of any minor who shall permit, suffer, allow or encourage such minor to violate the provisions of this article, nor any other person of the age of 18 years or over who shall assist, abet, allow, permit or encourage any minor under the age of 18 years to violate the provisions of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Penalty for violation of section. A violation of the provisions of this section shall be a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  13-11; Ord. No. 1996-13,  1, 10-7-96; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 38-5. - Possession of tobacco products by minors, penalty 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 shall purchase, offer or attempt to purchase, have in their possession or use cigarettes, cigars or any product which is intended for the formation of a smoking device, tobacco, tobacco snuff, chewing tobacco or any other tobacco product in any other form. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate this article shall be liable for a civil infraction fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12,  1, 12-18-00) 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES RELATING TO PUBLIC PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 

Sec. 38-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public property means and includes the following: 
(1)  All public parks within the city limits. 
(2)  All publicly owned parking lots within the city. 
(3)  All libraries and other public buildings owned by the city, including, by way of example and not by limitation, city hall, fire hall, library, water filtration plant and appurtenances, wastewater treatment plant and appurtenances, and city warehouse. 
(4)  Golf courses. 
(5)  Swimming pools. 
(6)  Cemeteries. 
(7)  Boulevards. 
(8)  Malls. 
(Code 1975,  13-22) 
Sec. 38-32. - Obstructing or damaging. 
    No person shall obstruct any walkway or drive in any public property and no person shall injure, mar or damage in any manner any monument, ornament, fence, bridge, seat, tree, fountain, shrub, flower, playground equipment, fireplace or other property within or pertinent to public property. 
(Code 1975,  13-23) 
Sec. 38-33. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No person shall bring any alcoholic beverages into or consume such beverages on any public property not licensed by the state liquor control commission; provided, however, that it shall be permissible to transport unopened containers of alcoholic beverages from the store where purchased to private property. 
(b)  The city council may by resolution permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon or in public places when it determines that a state liquor license is not required and may promulgate such regulations therefor as it determines are necessary. 
(Code 1975,  13-25; Ord. No. 1999-02,  1, 4-5-99) 
Sec. 38-34. - Littering. 
    No person shall place or deposit any garbage, glass, tin cans, paper or miscellaneous waste in or on any public property, except in containers provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1975,  13-26) 
Sec. 38-35. - Loitering. 
    No persons shall gather, congregate or loiter on any public property in any manner as to create a nuisance or create an improper diversion. 
(Code 1975,  13-27) 
Sec. 38-36. - Restrictions on use of public places. 
(a)  "Public place," as used in this section, means a street, plaza, pedestrian mall, park, parking lot, recreational facility, or other like facility open to use by the public generally, or a facility, building structure, park, recreation area or golf course, parking lot or land owned, leased or operated by a public agency. 
(b)  Upon application of the owner or agent thereof, of a public place, or upon a determination by the city council that regulation of its city-owned public places is necessary, the city council may determine that certain restrictions upon the use of a public place are reasonably necessary for the protection of the health, safety or welfare of the public using such places and, upon such determination by resolution of the city council, regulation may be promulgated thereunder. 
(c)  Regulations promulgated under this section may include the following, if upon due deliberation they are deemed necessary for the protection of the public: 
(1)  Prohibition of bicycles, skateboards, scooters, roller skates, sleds and sleighs, and the like, in public places. 
(2)  Restrictions upon the parking of vehicles; prohibition of certain types of vehicles in parts or all of public places and speed restrictions on vehicles. 
(3)  Prohibition of unlawful conduct, including loitering, breaches of the peace and trespass. 
(4)  Limitations upon pedestrian traffic. 
(5)  Such other and further regulations which are in harmony with this section. 
(d)  Whenever regulations under this section are promulgated by the city council, the city shall cause to be prepared signs containing such regulations, and such signs shall be posted in conspicuous places in public places so as to give notice of the regulations. The resolution enacting the regulations shall be published in the same fashion as ordinances of the city are published. All actual costs of signs, the replacement of signs and publication shall be borne by the applicant. 
(e)  Whenever a public place is owned, leased or operated by a municipal corporation or agency or subdivision thereof, the city council may designate, by resolution, that access to the public place shall be limited to certain hours, or that access may be denied and the facility closed, by posting notice to that effect in the manner and form set out in subsection (d) of this section. A notice that the public place is closed shall be posted from time to time by the operator thereof when warranted under the authorizing resolution of the city council. No person shall violate any posted regulations or trespass upon any public place posted as closed. In any enforcement proceeding for violation of this section, the license plate number displayed upon a vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that the owner of that vehicle placed the vehicle on the premises in question. 
(Code 1975,  13-30; Ord. No. 1998-03,  1, 7-6-98) 
Sec. 38-37. - Parades or processions, sales of merchandise, etc. 
(a)  No person shall, in or upon any of the public avenues, streets, parks, squares, grounds or other public places within the city, hold any parade or procession, except in accordance with a permit from the city council, such permit to be in writing and to designate the condition under which, and the time and place at which such person may avail himself of the privilege thereby granted; nor shall any person, in or upon any of the public avenues, streets, parks, squares, grounds or other public places in the city, expose for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, take up the collection of any money or erect or maintain any booth, stand, tent or apparatus, except in accordance with a permit from the city council. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to relieve the city police from the duty of keeping the streets, parks, squares and other public places in the city clear for the ordinary public use of such places. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  13-24) 
Sec. 38-38. - Additional rules. 
    The city superintendent is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the city council, pertaining to the conduct and use of public property as are necessary to administer the same and to protect public property and the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public, and no person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1975,  13-29) 
Sec. 38-39. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated under it for which a penalty is not specifically prescribed shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided for in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  13-31) 
Secs. 38-40-38-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 

Sec. 38-60. - Illegal use or possession of marijuana prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual to use or have in his or her possession or under his or her control marijuana or cannabis as defined by Michigan Compiled Law section 333.7106 unless pursuant to a valid prescription or except as otherwise authorized by Article 7 of the Public Health Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-14,  1, 12-5-11) 
State Law reference- MCL 333.7101 et seq. 
Sec. 38-61. - "Drug paraphernalia" defined; determining factors. 
(a)  The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. The term includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance. 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance. 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances. 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
(6)  Dilutants and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances. 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana. 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes or other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
(10)  Containers or other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
b.  Water pipes. 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, that have become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. 
g.  Chamber pipes. 
h.  Carburetor pipes. 
i.  Electric pipes. 
j.  Air-driven pipes. 
k.  Chillums. 
l.  Bongs. 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(b)  In determining whether an object is "drug paraphernalia," a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substances; 
(3)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of state law; 
(4)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
(5)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of state or local law; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of state law shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
(7)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
(8)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(9)  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(11)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(12)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(13)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and 
(14)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Code 1975,  13-41) 
Sec. 38-62. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(Code 1975,  13-42) 
Sec. 38-63. - Manufacture, delivery or sale of drug paraphernalia. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state law. 
(Code 1975,  13-43) 
Sec. 38-64. - Delivery or sale to a minor. 
    Any individual 18 years of age or over who violates section 38-63 by delivering or selling to an individual under 18 years of age, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state law shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  13-48) 
Sec. 38-65. - Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Code 1975,  13-44) 
Sec. 38-66. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists and embalmers in the normal legal course of their respective business or profession, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. 
(Code 1975,  13-45) 
Sec. 38-67. - Civil forfeiture. 
    Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this article shall be seized and forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1975,  13-46) 
Sec. 38-68. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall be convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article, except as specified in section 38-66, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  13-47) 
Secs. 38-69-38-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 38-91. - Purchase, possession, or consumption of alcohol by persons under the age of 21. 
(a)  A person less than 21 years of age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, except as provided in this section and MCLA 436.33A(1). A person less than 21 years of age who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions: 
(1)  For the first violation, a fine of not more than $100.00 and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in MCL 333.6107, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (c), below. 
(2)  For a second violation, a fine of not more than $200.00 and may be ordered to participate in a substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in MCL 333.6107, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (c), below. The person is also subject to sanctions against his or her operator's or chauffeur's license imposed in subsection (d), below. 
(3)  For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of not more than $500.00 and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in MCL 333.6107, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (c). The person is also subject to sanctions against his or her operator's or chauffeur's license imposed in subsection (d). 
(b)  A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person less than 21 years of age, or notwithstanding subsection (a), above, a person less than 21 years of age who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court shall order the secretary of state to suspend, pursuant to MCL 257.319, for a period of 90 days, the operator's or chauffeur's license of a person who is convicted of furnishing or using fraudulent identification in violation of this subsection and the operator's or chauffeur's license of that person shall be surrendered to the court. The court shall immediately forward the surrendered license and an abstract of conviction to the secretary of state. A suspension ordered under this subsection shall be in addition to any other suspension of the person's operator's or chauffeur's license. 
(c)  The court may order the person found violating subsection (a), above, to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in MCL 333.6104, in order to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. 
(d)  Immediately upon the entry of a conviction or a probate court disposition for a violation of subsection (a), above, the court shall consider all prior convictions or probate court dispositions of subsection (a), or a local ordinance or law of this state or another state substantially corresponding to subsection (a), and shall impose the following sanctions: 
(1)  If the court finds that the person has one such prior conviction or probate court disposition, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of the person for a period of not less than 90 days or more than 180 days. The court may order the secretary of state to issue to the person a restricted license after the first 30 days of the period of suspension in the manner described in subsection (e), below. In the case of a person who does not possess an operator's or chauffeur's license, the secretary of state shall deny the application for an operator's or chauffeur's license for the applicable suspension period. 
(2)  If the court finds that the person has two or more such prior convictions or probate court dispositions, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of the person for a period of not less than 180 days or more than one year. The court may order the secretary of state to issue to the person a restricted license after the first 60 days of the period of suspension in the manner described in subsection (e), below, and MCL 257.319. In the case of a person who does not possess an operator's or chauffeur's license, the secretary of state shall deny the application for an operator's or chauffeur's license for the applicable suspension period. 
(e)  In those cases in which a restricted license is allowed under this section, the court shall not order the secretary of state to issue a restricted license unless the person states under oath, and the court finds based upon the record in open court, that the person is unable to take public transportation to and from his or her work location, place of alcohol or drug education treatment, probation department, court-ordered community service program, or educational institution, and does not have any family members or others able to provide transportation. The court order under subsection (d), above, and the restricted license shall indicate the work location of the person to whom it is issued, the approved route or routes and permitted times of travel, and shall permit the person to whom it is issued only to do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Drive to and from the person's residence and work location; 
(2)  Drive in the course of the person's employment or occupation; 
(3)  Drive to and from the person's residence and an alcohol or drug education or treatment program as ordered by the court; 
(4)  Drive to and from the person's residence and the court probation department, or a court-ordered community service program, or both; 
(5)  Drive to and from the person's residence and an educational institution at which the person is enrolled as a student. 
(f)  If license sanctions are imposed, immediately upon the entry of a court-ordered sanction pursuant to subsection (d), above, the court shall order the person convicted for the violation to surrender to the court his or her operator's or chauffeur's license. The court shall immediately forward a notice of court-ordered license sanctions to the secretary of state. If the license is not forwarded to the secretary of state, an explanation of the reason why the license is absent shall be attached. If the finding is appealed to the circuit court, the court may ex parte, order the secretary of state to stay the suspension issued pursuant to this section pending the outcome of the appeal. Immediately following imposition of the sanction, the court shall forward a notice to the secretary of state indicating the sanction imposed. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to Act No. 293 of the Public Acts of 1968 (MCL 722.1 to 722.6), allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased or attempted to consume, possess or purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of subsection (a), above, shall notify the parent or parents, custodian or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, custodian or guardian of the person is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated subsection (a) is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated pursuant to Act No. 293 of the Public Acts of 1968. The notice may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first class mail. If a person less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a), his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(i)  This section does not prohibit a person less than 21 years of age from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed under state law, by the liquor commission or by an agent of the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption. 
(j)  This section shall not be construed to limit the civil or criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent or employee for a violation of this section. 
(k)  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person less than 21 years of age who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post secondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this section if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a necessary ingredient of the course. 
(l)  The consumption by a person less than 21 years of age of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue or temple is not prohibited by this section. 
(m)  Subsection (a), above, does not apply to a person less than 21 years of age who participates in either or both of the following: 
(1)  An undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2)  An undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the liquor commission or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action except that any initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the person less than 21 years of age is under the direction of the state police, the liquor commission or a local police agency and is part of the undercover operation. The state police, the liquor commission or a local police agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a person less than 21 years of age for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (a), above, MCL 436.22 or MCL 436.33. 
(n)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Probate court disposition means an order of disposition of the probate court or the family division of the circuit court for a child found to be within the provisions of chapter XllA of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939 (MCL 712A.1 to 712A.32). 
(2)  Work location means, as applicable, either the specific place or places of employment or the territory or territories regularly visited by the person in pursuance of the person's occupation or both. 
(Code 1975,  13-60; Ord. No. 1997-15,  1, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 2011-04,  1, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 38-92. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1997-15,  2, adopted Dec. 15, 1997, repealed  38-92 which pertained to supplying or procuring alcoholic beverages for persons under age 21 and derived from Code 1975,  13-61. 
Sec. 38-93. - Possession or transportation of alcohol in a motor vehicle by a person under the age of 21. 
    A person less than 21 years of age shall not knowingly transport or possess in a motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor, including beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages, unless the person is employed by a licensee under this Code, the state liquor control commission, or is an agent of the liquor control commission and is transporting or having the alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under the person's control during regular working hours and in the course of the person's employment, or unless the person is an agent or employee of a law enforcement agency and engaged in the lawful discharge of his agency or employment with such law enforcement agency. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975,  13-62; Ord. No. 1997-15,  3, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 38-94. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided in section 38-93, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. Any minor under the age of 17 years who violates any provision of this article shall be dealt with by the juvenile division of the probate court or as prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1975,  13-63) 
Secs. 38-95-38-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPEN HOUSE PARTIES 

Sec. 38-116. - Purpose. 
    The city council finds that the unregulated use of alcohol and drugs by minors creates social problems in many communities throughout the United States, including this city, and that the use of alcohol and drugs by minors can have devastating effects on not only the minors but on the public at large, including, but not limited to, injuries caused by vehicles operated by persons under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs. The city council further finds that adults could significantly alleviate alcohol and drug problems by assuming the responsibility for open house parties which occur at their residences, and that the public health, safety and welfare would be protected and advanced if that occurs. It is for these purposes that this article is adopted. 
(Code 1975,  13-70) 
Sec. 38-117. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult means a person 17 years of age or older. 
    Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by weight. The percentage of alcohol by weight shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of MCL 436.2, as amended. 
    Control means any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory right. 
    Drug means a controlled substance as defined by the Public Acts of Michigan. 
    Minor means a person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess alcoholic beverages pursuant to MCL 436.33b, as amended. 
    Open house party means a social gathering of persons at a residence which is attended by any persons who do not have an interest in the residence as either owner, tenant, lessee or other right of possession, or who are not members of the immediate family of a person having an interest in the residence as either owner, tenant, lessee or other right of possession. 
    Residence means a home, apartment, condominium or watercraft, including but not limited to boats, rafts, cabin cruisers, sailboats, houseboats and other such vessels of water travel, or other dwelling unit, and includes the curtilage of such dwelling unit. 
(Code 1975,  13-71) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 38-118. - Certain open house parties prohibited. 
    No adult having control of any residence shall allow an open house party to take place at such residence if any alcoholic beverage or drug is possessed or consumed at such residence by any minor, if the adult knew or reasonably should have known that an alcoholic beverage or drug was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at such residence and failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or drug at such residence. 
(Code 1975,  13-72) 
Sec. 38-119. - Exception. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to legally protected religious observances or legally protected educational activities. 
(Code 1975,  13-73) 
Sec. 38-120. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  13-74) 
Secs. 38-121-38-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 38-141. - Disorderly persons. 
    A person is disorderly if the person is any of the following: 
(1)  A person of sufficient ability who refuses or neglects to support his family. 
(2)  Any person soliciting for purposes of prostitution or offering themselves or others as subjects of prostitution for hire. 
(3)  A window peeper. 
(4)  A person who engages in an illegal occupation or business. 
(5)  A person who is intoxicated in a public place and who is either endangering the safety of another person or of property or is acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(6)  A person who is engaged in indecent, insulting or obscene conduct in a public place. 
(7)  A person who knowingly loiters in or about a place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
(8)  A person who is found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place. 
(9)  A person who willfully assaults another or who commits assault and battery upon another person or engages in or abets any fight, quarrel or disturbance. 
(10)  All persons who collect or assemble and stand or sit in crowds or loiter about or hinder, obstruct, impede or block the free and uninterrupted passage on any street, alley or driveway or in front of any hall stairway, doorway, vestibule or passageway leading to any store, office or public hall or building or any other place. 
(11)  All persons who loiter in or about any parking lot or other area set aside for the parking of vehicles in any park. No person shall park a motor vehicle in any park for the purpose of displaying or exhibiting same or for the purpose of offering same for sale or for the purpose of performing mechanical work or cleaning, washing or polishing same and engage in any display, exhibition, gathering, demonstration, parade or other gathering within a parking lot or other area set aside for the parking of vehicles in any park without a permit or written authorization by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 38-142. - Assault and battery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful in the city for any person to commit an assault by attempting or offering, to do corporal hurt to another, with an apparent present means of carrying out the attempt. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful in the city for any person to commit a battery upon the person of another resulting in any injury whatsoever, be it ever so small, actually done to the person of another in an angry, revengeful, rude or insolent manner. 
Sec. 38-143. - Gatherings and meetings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to wilfully interrupt or disturb any assembly of people met for the worship of God within the place of such meeting or out of it, or make or excite any disturbance or contention in any tavern, beer garden, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business place or in any street, lane, alley, public buildings, ground or park or at any election or other public meeting in the city where any persons are peaceably and lawfully assembled. 
Sec. 38-144. - Disorderly conduct aboard vessels. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any indecent, loud, boisterous or improper noise or disturbance on any ship, vessel, or pleasure boat owned by him and located within the city, to the disturbance or annoyance of citizens or others. 
Sec. 38-145. - Prowling. 
    No person shall prowl about the private premises of any other person in the nighttime without prior authority or prior permission of the owner or occupant of such premises. 
Sec. 38-146. - Failure to return rented property. 
    Any person to whom tangible property, of a value not to exceed $100.00, is delivered on a rental or lease basis under any agreement in writing providing for its return to a particular place at a particular time who refuses or willfully neglects to return such tangible property, after the expiration of the time stated in a notice in writing proved to have been duly mailed by certified mail addressed to the last known address of the person who rented or leased the tangible property, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 38-147. - Malicious destruction of property. 
    Any person who shall willfully and maliciously destroy, damage, injure, mar, or deface the property of another by any means shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05,  1, 11-18-13) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2013-05, adopted Nov. 18, 2013, changed the title of  38-147 from "Malicious destruction of personal property" to "Malicious destruction of property." 
Sec. 38-148. - Throwing stones or missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to throw any stone, brick or other missile at any passenger train, sleeping car, passenger coach, express car, mail car, locomotive, caboose, freight train, or at any motor bus, automobile or motor vehicle, or at any boats or other vessels. 
Sec. 38-149. - Noise. 
(a)  No person shall cause or create any unreasonable or improper noise or disturbance, injurious to the health, peace or quiet of the residents and property owners of the city. 
(b)  The following noises and disturbances are hereby declared to be a violation of this article; provided, however, that the specifications of the same are not thereby to be construed to exclude other violations of this article not specifically enumerated: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle for any purpose other than to avoid an accident or collision. 
(2)  The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, hooting or singing on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(4)  The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which emanates frequent or extended noise which shall disturb the quiet, comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  The operation of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or constructed as to cause loud or unnecessary grating, rattling, exhausting, or other noise disturbing the quiet, comfort, or repose of other persons. 
(6)  The operation of any steam whistle attached to a boiler of any type except for the purpose of giving notice of the time to begin or stop work as a warning of fire or other danger, or for other purposes upon danger, or for other purposes upon special permit therefor from the city council. 
(7)  The discharging outside of any enclosed building of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or motorboat engine except through a muffler or other similar device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive notices resulting therefrom or discharging outside of any enclosed building of any air operated devices, unless inspected and approved by the building inspector. 
(8)  The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or reconstruction of any building or premises in any platted residential district or section of the city, including the streets and highways therein, in such a manner as to create noise or disturbance unreasonably annoying to other persons, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and sundown except in the case of urgent necessity, in the interest of public health and safety, upon receipt of a permit thereof from the building inspector of the city, which permit shall limit the period that the activity may continue. 
(9)  The emission or creation or any excessive noises on any street which unreasonably interferes with the operation of any school or church. 
(10)  The creation of any loud or excessive noise, unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle, trailer, or other carrier, or in connection with the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates, or other containers. 
(11)  The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise which, by the creation of such noise, shall be unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity. 
(12)  The operation of any obstacle course or race track for motorcycles, or vehicles of any kind or nature in any area of the city not specially zoned for such an operation and/or where the noise emanating therefrom would be unreasonably disturbing and annoying to other persons in the vicinity. 
(13)  Prohibited operation of amplified sound system. 
a.  No person operating or in control of a parked or moving vehicle (including all motor vehicles, motorcycles, mopeds and bicycles), or any person who owns, leases, or is in control of real property in the city, shall operate or permit the operation of an electronic amplified sound system that is clearly audible from the vehicle or property, as follows: 
1.  At a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle located on a public road, public right-of-way, private road, or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for parking of motor vehicles, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; 
2.  At a distance of 25 feet from a vehicle located on a public road, public right-of-way or private road, or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for parking of motor vehicles, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day; 
3.  At a distance of 25 feet beyond the property line of the premises where such amplified sound is emitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
b.  An amplified sound system shall include, but not be limited to, radios, phonographs, compact discs and tape players, televisions, musical instruments, drums, sound amplifiers or similar devices which produce or amplify sound either electronically or mechanically. 
c.  Specifically exempt from this section are those activities permitted in section 6-36, being licensed peddlers and those amplified sounds emitted from bands, orchestras, or similar musical bodies as part of a parade or similar authorized musical production, including sporting, civic, community, or school events; and those activities permitted in section 58-9, being warning devices as provided by the uniform traffic code as adopted by the city. 
d.  A violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(c)  None of the prohibitions enumerated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine or emergency vehicle while engaged in necessary emergency activities. 
(2)  Excavation or repair of bridges, streets or highway by or on behalf of the city, state, or the county between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. when the public welfare, safety and convenience render it impossible to perform such work during other hours. 
(d)  The provisions of this section are deemed to be in addition to any other noise regulations set out in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 1997-11,  1, 11-3-97) 
Sec. 38-150. - Obstructing peace officer. 
    No person shall resist, obstruct, hinder, oppose or refuse to obey the lawful order of any member of the police force or any peace officer in the discharge of his duties as such. 
Sec. 38-151. - Questioning suspicious persons in public places. 
    No person shall refuse to give his name, address and an explanation of his actions upon demand of a police officer who has stopped such person in a public place in the city, whom he reasonably suspects is committing, has committed or is about to commit a felony or a breach of the peace, or is violating a condition of pardon, parole or probation. 
Sec. 38-152. - Larceny. 
    Any person within the city who shall commit the offense of larceny, by stealing, of the property of another, and money, goods or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, or bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt, release or defeasance, or any writ, process or public record, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 38-153. - Receiving or concealing stolen property. 
(a)  Any person who shall buy, receive, or possess or conceal or aid in the concealment, within the city, of any stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property, knowing the same to have been stolen, embezzled or converted, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or delivering any stolen, embezzled or converted property to him has a legal right to do so, shall be presumed to have bought or received such property knowing it to have been stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption may be rebutted by proofs. 
(c)  In any prosecution under this section, it shall not be necessary to aver, nor on the trial thereof, to prove, that the person who stole, embezzled or converted such property has been convicted. 
Sec. 38-154. - Misrepresentations as to identity. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to make misrepresentations about his identity, whether by statement, through the use of false, forged or altered identification or the use or presentation of identification of another, with intent to obstruct the due execution of the law, or with the intent to hinder or interrupt any officer in the legal performance of his duty, whether such intent be effected or not. 
Sec. 38-155. - Trespassing. 
    Any person who shall wilfully enter, upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Secs. 38-156-38-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 38-176. - Lewdness and indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be guilty of open and gross lewdness and lascivious behavior, or to designedly make any open or indecent or obscene exposure of his person, or of the person of another. 
Sec. 38-177. - Harassing or indecent telephone calls. 
    No person within the city shall harass, annoy or molest any other person or his family by telephoning, or causing to be telephoned, repeatedly such other person or his family, whether or not conversation ensues and regardless of the time of day or night, except for legitimate business purposes. Nor shall any person within the city use any threatening, vulgar, indecent, obscene, immoral or insulting language over any telephone. 
Sec. 38-178. - Furnishing alcoholic beverages to minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell or furnish alcoholic beverages to a person unless the person has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic beverages to a person who is less than 21 years of age, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is 21 years of age is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In an action for a violation of this section, proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent demanded or was shown, before furnishing alcoholic beverages to a person under 21 years of age, a motor vehicle operator's license or an identification certificate issued by the state, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person shall be a defense to an action under this section. 
Sec. 38-179. - Consumption of alcoholic liquors; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any open container of an alcoholic beverage, or to consume any alcoholic beverage, in any public park, playground, parking area or public facility. 
(b)  Organizations and groups may obtain permission for the consumption of alcoholic beverages in a public park or facility by applying to the city manager for a special permit which may be issued with the approval of the chief of police. 
Sec. 38-180. - Possession of alcoholic liquor in passenger compartment. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person shall not transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of a vehicle upon a highway, or within the passenger compartment of a moving vehicle in any place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, in this state. 
(b)  A person may transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles in this state, if the vehicle does not have a trunk or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, the container is enclosed or encased, and the container is not readily accessible to the occupants of the vehicle. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  This section does not apply to a passenger in a chartered vehicle authorized to operate by the state department of transportation. 
Secs. 38-181-38-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING FIRE 

Sec. 38-201. - False alarm of fire. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place, or to ring any bell or operate any public or private mechanical fire alarm apparatus to make a false report of fire in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of creating a false alarm of fire. 
Sec. 38-202. - Obstructing firefighters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly and willfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any firefighters in the performance of their duties, or who shall, while in the vicinity of any fire, willfully disobey any reasonable order, rule or regulation of the officer commanding any fire scene. 
Sec. 38-203. - Opening fire hydrants. 
    Any person who shall, without authority of the city, open any fire hydrant, except for the purpose of extinguishing a fire, or who shall wantonly injure or impair same, or who shall, without the authority of the owner, willfully break, injure, destroy or disturb any auxiliary firefighting appliance, including fire extinguishers, sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, and the like, within the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Secs. 38-204-38-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 38-226. - Aiming firearm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to intentionally, without malice, point or aim any firearm at or toward any other person. 
Sec. 38-227. - Reckless, wanton use or negligent discharge of firearm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to recklessly or heedlessly or willfully or wantonly use, carry, handle or discharge any firearm without due caution and circumspection for the rights, safety or property of others. 
Sec. 38-228. - Possession or control of firearm while intoxicated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, while under the influence of intoxicating beverages, or any exhilarating or stupefying drug, to carry, have in his possession or control, or use in any manner, or discharge any firearm. 
Sec. 38-229. - Possessing or carrying knives. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or control, except in his own domicile, or carry or use in any manner any knife, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp edged or pointed instrument or weapon, provided, however, that such person shall not be in violation of this section if his possession of such knife, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp edged or pointed instrument is necessary for his employment, trade or occupation or if he is engaged in or is proceeding to or returning from a place of hunting, trapping or fishing and whenever required, is also carrying a currently valid license issued to him by the state department of conservation or if such person is a duly enrolled member of the Boy Scouts of American or a similar organization or society and such possession is necessary to participate in the activities of such organization or society. 
Sec. 38-230. - Manufacture, sale, or possession of certain weapons or other dangerous devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, offer for sale or possess any billy, metallic knuckles, bludgeon, blackjack, sling shot, karate stick, sand gag, cross bow, BB gun, or any gas ejecting device, weapon, cartridge, container or contrivance designed or equipped for or capable of ejecting any gas which will either temporarily or permanently disable, incapacitate, injure or harm any person with whom it comes in contract. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person duly licensed to manufacture, sell or possess any gas ejecting device, weapon, cartridge, container or contrivance as mentioned. 
Sec. 38-231. - Display of replica, toy or imitation gun. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to brandish, aim, point, or exhibit to any other person a replica or facsimile of a firearm in such manner as to frighten, threaten, harass, panic or annoy any other person. A "replica or facsimile of a firearm" shall mean any device or object which is a replica, facsimile, imitation or toy version of any firearm, including but not limited to toy guns, movie or stage props, air guns, starter pistols, inoperative firearms, models, replicas or any other device designed or used to imitate a firearm. 
Sec. 38-232. - Carrying or possessing imitation gun in public or in a motor vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess, whether concealed or displayed, in a motor vehicle in an area of the vehicle accessible to the occupants thereof an imitation, replica, facsimile or toy version of any firearm with intent to brandish, use, aim or point such firearm to frighten, panic, threaten, harass or annoy any other person. Carrying or conceal 
ment of any such firearm under or near the driver's seat, glove box or dashboard shall be a prima facie rebuttable inference of such intent. 
Sec. 38-233. - Confiscation of firearms. 
    All weapons, guns, pistols, firearms, knives, dirks, razors, stilettos, or any other sharp edged or pointed instruments, or weapons carried, possessed or used contrary to this article, are hereby declared forfeited to the city. 
Secs. 38-234-38-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - OFFENSES AGAINST ANIMALS 

Sec. 38-251. - Cruelty to animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor or person having the charge or custody of any animal within the city to cruelly drive or work the same when unfit for labor, or to carry our cause to be carried on or upon any vehicle, or otherwise, any living animal, having the feet or legs tied together or in any cruel and inhuman manner to carry or cause to be carried any living animal, in or upon any vehicle, or otherwise, without providing suitable racks, cars, crates or cages in which such animal may stand or lie down during transportation and while awaiting slaughter, or to abandon any diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick, infirm, or disabled animal in any place, or to willfully or negligently permit and allow any aged, diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick or disabled animal to suffer unnecessary torture or pain or to otherwise maliciously inflict any torture or pain upon any animal. 
Sec. 38-252. - Attempt to commit violation. 
    Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by this article and in such attempt shall do any act towards the commission of such offense, but shall fail in the perpetration or shall be intercepted or prevented in the execution of same, where no express provision is made by ordinance for the punishment of such attempt, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable under this Code, but in no case shall imprisonment for such violation exceed one-half the greatest punishment which might have been inflicted if the offense so attempted had been committed. 
Sec. 38-253. - Steel-jaw traps. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use a steel-jaw (leg-hold) trap for purposes of detaining, catching or trapping wild life or domestic animals. 
Secs. 38-254-38-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING FRAUD 

Sec. 38-276. - Frauds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing, or to aid or abet, or in any manner to be concerned therein. 
Sec. 38-277. - Hotel, motel, inn, restaurant, cafe, marina, boat dock, mooring or ramp; defrauding; limitation. 
    Any person within the city who shall put up at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant, cafe, marina, boat dock, mooring or ramp as a guest and shall procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, except when credit is given therefor by express agreement, with intent to defraud such keeper thereof out of the pay for same, or who, with intent to defraud such keeper out of the pay therefor, shall obtain credit at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant, cafe, marina, boat dock, mooring or ramp for such food, entertainment, or accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto is guilty of a misdemeanor. No conviction shall be had under the provisions of this section unless complaint is made within 60 days of the time of the violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04,  1, 8-2-99) 
Sec. 38-278. - Prima facie evidence. 
    Obtaining such food, lodging or accommodation by false pretense, or by false or fictitious show of baggage or other property, or refusal or neglect to pay therefor on demand, or payment thereof with a check, draft or order upon a bank or other depository on which payment was refused, or absconding without paying or offering to pay therefor, or surreptitiously removing or attempting to remove baggage, shall be prima facie evidence of such intent to defraud. 
Chapters 39-41 - RESERVED 
Chapter 42 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50. 

Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means and includes tree trimmings and shrubbery cuttings up to four inches in diameter and cut into lengths not exceeding three feet in length and tied into bundles which can be readily handled by an individual collector. 
    Building material refuse means and includes wood, plaster, stone, brick or other waste and unused materials resulting from the construction or repair of buildings. 
    Dumpster means any container of more than one cubic yard capacity, whether covered or not, used for the depositing and/or temporary storage of rubbish ordinarily associated with the collection, transportation and disposal of such rubbish by motor vehicle. 
    Garbage means and includes all refuse and waste materials attendant to the preparation, dressing, cooking of, or the use and storage of food for human consumption, including wrappings. 
    Rubbish means and includes all combustible refuse, including but not limited to paper cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture, and bedding; and noncombustible refuse, including but not limited to metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, and other mineral waste; provided, that the term shall not include earth and wastes from building operations. 
(Code 1975,  9-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 42-2. - Receptacles generally. 
    It shall be the duty of owners, proprietors or persons in charge of any dwelling house, store, manufacturing establishment, office building or other building within the city to place or cause to be placed all garbage and rubbish in suitable receptacles and containers provided by them. Such receptacles and containers shall be of durable metal or plastic construction and be watertight with a tightfitting cover, with handles on the outside by which they may be lifted. The cover shall be kept in place except when necessary to remove to empty such receptacle or container. 
(Code 1975,  9-2(a)) 
Sec. 42-3. - Dumpsters, screening requirements. 
(a)  All dumpsters located in the city must be enclosed or screened from public view. Such screening shall consist of a completely obscuring wall or fence not less than six feet (1.8288 meters) in height on all sides and securely fastened to a concrete or asphalt pad. They shall be maintained in good condition and the surrounding area kept free of litter and debris. It is recommended that the appearance of the screening should have some style related to its adjoining architectural motif. 
(b)  Screening materials for dumpsters shall consist of any of the following: 
(1)  Masonry, either brick, concrete block or reinforced concrete; 
(2)  Wood, provided the wood is heartwood cedar, redwood, marine grade exterior plywood or the equivalent, of at least five-eighths-inch thickness (1.5875 centimeters), or other types of wood which have been pressure treated with a preservative. If cedar, redwood or plywood are used in the screening, it shall be protected from possible rot or decay by the application of an exterior stain. Wood that has been pressure treated need not be further protected from possible rot or decay. 
(c)  All of the existing dumpsters located within the city shall comply with the provisions of this section. The city council may grant a waiver of all or part of the provisions of this section upon a finding that by reason of the shape or area of the specific property on which the existing dumpster has been installed, the strict application of this section would result in practical difficulties or undue hardship to the owner. In granting a waiver, the city council may impose reasonable conditions in fulfillment of the purpose of this section. 
(d)  This section is not intended to require the screening of any dumpster used on a temporary basis during the construction of any building, provided that such dumpster is removed from the premises or is moved to an approved, screened location on the site prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the building under construction. 
(Code 1975,  9-2) 
Sec. 42-4. - Duty of city to collect garbage. 
    It shall be the duty of the city to arrange for a schedule of collection days for the collection of garbage, rubbish and other waste materials in the several parts of the city and to provide the necessary labor and equipment for such collections in accordance with such schedule, insofar as is practicable. 
(Code 1975,  9-3) 
Sec. 42-5. - Private collection or transportation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not an employee of the city for such purpose to collect or remove any garbage, rubbish and other waste materials from the premises where it has been created or has been formed, or to transport, cart, carry or convey through or over any of the streets, alleys or other public thoroughfares of the city any such waste materials, without permission first being received from the city superintendent. 
(Code 1975,  9-4) 
Sec. 42-6. - Placement for collection. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge of the premises to cause to be placed in the garbage receptacles or containers garbage created or accumulated on his premises or the premises under his charge or control, and to keep the cover on at all times when not in use; and it shall be the further duty of each owner, occupant or person in charge 
of any premises to place or cause to be placed on the day scheduled by the city for the collection of garbage from premises, the receptacles or containers within a reasonable distance from the curb to such premises. When combustible rubbish is mixed with the garbage in the receptacle or container for the garbage, the container or receptacle may be placed on the outside of the sidewalk. 
(b)  Receptacles of garbage, combustible rubbish or mixtures of garbage and combustible rubbish shall be placed on the outside of the sidewalk after 12:00 noon of the day preceding the day scheduled for collection. All empty receptacles or containers are to be removed from the street the same day that the collection is made. 
(c)  Receptacles, containers and bundles of articles of noncombustible rubbish shall be placed on the outside of the sidewalk after 12:00 noon of the day preceding the day scheduled for collection, which collection day may be separate from the day scheduled for the collection of garbage and combustible rubbish, as set by the city superintendent or his authorized representative. All empty receptacles or containers are to be removed from the street the same day that the collection is made. 
(d)  All brush is to be placed outside of the sidewalk and collected by the city at such time as designated by the city superintendent. 
(Code 1975,  9-5) 
Sec. 42-8. - Collection of building material refuse, etc. 
    Concrete blocks, broken concrete, stumps and other building material refuse and other such foreign matter will not be picked up or collected by the city as a regular service and should not be included with garbage or combustible or noncombustible rubbish. Such materials will be picked up and collected by the city upon payment of a specific charge and in accordance with rules and regulations as determined by the city superintendent. 
(Code 1975,  9-8) 
Sec. 42-9. - Burying, burning or depositing on streets or vacant lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, burn or throw or leave in any street, alley, public thoroughfare or vacant lot within the limits of the city any garbage or rubbish materials, except as properly placed in receptacles or containers or bundled for city collection and set in the proper location on the collection days as scheduled. 
(Code 1975,  9-9) 
Sec. 42-10. - Scavenging prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or pick out or sort in any way any garbage or rubbish materials after they have been set out at the sidewalk for city collection. 
(Code 1975,  9-10) 
Sec. 42-11. - Rules and regulations to implement chapter. 
    The city superintendent shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of this chapter, which rules and regulations shall be uniform and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or the standards of the state department of health. 
(Code 1975,  9-11) 
Sec. 42-12. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    The chief of police and his authorized agents shall be the enforcing officers and shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Code 1975,  9-12) 
Sec. 42-13. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  9-13; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Chapters 43-45 - RESERVED 
Chapter 46 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq.; deferment for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq., MSA 5.3536(1) et seq.; powers re special assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5, MSA 5.2074, 5.2075, 5.2077, 5.2084. 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost, when referring to the cost of any local public improvement, means and includes the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, legal fees, interest on special assessment bonds for not to exceed one year, and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Local public improvement means any public improvement which is of such a nature as to benefit especially any real property within a district in the vicinity of such improvement. 
(Code 1975,  1-46) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 46-2. - Authority to assess. 
    The whole cost or any part thereof of any local public improvement may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands specially benefited by the improvement in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1975,  1-47) 
Sec. 46-3. - Initiation of special assessment projects. 
    Proceedings for the making of local public improvements within the city, the tentative necessity thereof, and the determination that the whole or any part of the expense thereof shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited, provided that all special assessments levied shall be in proportion to the benefits derived from the improvements, may be commenced by resolution of the council, with or without a petition. 
(Code 1975,  1-48) 
Sec. 46-4. - Initiation by petition. 
    Local public improvements may be initiated by petition signed by property owners whose aggregate property in the proposed district represents not less than 51 percent of the total front footage of the privately owned real property located therein, all shown by the last preceding general tax records of the city. Such petition shall contain a brief description of the property owned by the respective signatories thereof, and if it shall appear that the petition is signed by at least 51 percent of the owners as aforesaid the clerk shall certify such petition to the council. The petition shall be addressed to the council and filed with the clerk and shall in no event be considered directory but is advisory only. 
(Code 1975,  1-49) 
Sec. 46-5. - Survey and report. 
    Before the council shall consider the making of any local improvement, the council shall cause to be prepared a report which shall include necessary plans, profiles, specifications and detailed estimates of cost, an estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the assessment district, and such other pertinent information as will permit the council to decide the cost, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part or proportion thereof should be paid by special assessments upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, should be paid by the city at large. The council shall not finally determine to proceed with the making of any local public improvement until such report has been filed, nor until after a public hearing has been held by the council for the purpose of hearing objections to the making of such improvement. 
(Code 1975,  1-50) 
Sec. 46-6. - Determination on the project; notice. 
    After receiving the report required in section 46-5 for making any local public improvement as requested in the resolution of the council, and the council has reviewed such report, a resolution may be passed tentatively determining the necessity of the improvement, setting forth the nature thereof, prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited, determination of benefits received by affected properties, and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large, designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected, designating whether to be assessed according to frontage or other benefits, placing the complete information on file in the office of the city clerk, where such information may be found for examination, and directing the city clerk to give notice of public hearing on the proposed improvement, at which time and place opportunity will be given interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each owner of or person in interest in property to be assessed as shown by the latest general tax assessment roll of the city. The publication of notice shall be made at least seven full days prior to the hearing and the mailing of notice shall be made at least ten full days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall include a statement that appearance and protest at the hearing in the special assessment proceedings is required in order to appeal the amount of the special assessment to the state tax tribunal and shall describe the manner in which an appearance and protest shall be made. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the council. 
(Code 1975,  1-51) 
Sec. 46-8. - Deviation from plans and specifications. 
    No deviation from original plans or specifications as adopted shall be permitted by any officer or employee of the city without authority of the council by resolution. A copy of the resolution authorizing such changes or deviation shall be certified by the city clerk and attached to the original plans and specifications on file in the clerk's office. 
(Code 1975,  1-53) 
Sec. 46-9. - Limitations on preliminary expenses. 
    The council shall specify the provisions and procedures for financing a local public improvement. No contract or expenditure, except for the cost of preparing necessary profiles, plans, specifications and estimates of cost, shall be made for the improvement, nor shall any improvement be commenced until the special assessment roll to defray the costs of the improvement shall have been made and confirmed. 
(Code 1975,  1-54) 
Sec. 46-10. - Special assessment roll. 
    The assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefited by the proposed improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the proportionate amount benefited thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the detailed estimate of cost as approved by the council. 
(Code 1975,  1-55) 
Sec. 46-11. - Assessor to file assessment roll. 
    When the assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, he shall file the assessment roll with the city clerk for presentation to the council for review and certification by it. 
(Code 1975,  1-56) 
Sec. 46-12. - Meeting to review special assessment roll; objections. 
    Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the council, by resolution, shall accept the assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination, shall fix the time and place the council will meet to review such special assessment roll and direct the city clerk to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. The notice shall be given by publication one time, at least seven full days prior to the date of the hearing, in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each owner of or person in interest in property to be assessed as shown by the latest general tax assessment roll of the city, mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the council. At this meeting all interested persons or parties shall present in writing their objections, if any, to the assessments against them. The assessor shall be present at every meeting of the council at which a special assessment is to be reviewed. 
(Code 1975,  1-57) 
Sec. 46-13. - Changes and corrections in assessment roll. 
    The council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of such special assessment roll, and at such meeting, or a proper adjournment thereof, shall consider all objections thereto submitted in writing. The council may correct the roll as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein; or it may, by resolution, annul the assessment roll and direct that new proceedings be instituted. The same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a record of such changes as the council deems justified, the council determines that it is satisfied with the special assessment roll and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file in the office of the city clerk and directing the city clerk to attach his warrant to a certified copy thereof within ten days, and therein commanding the assessor to spread and the treasurer to collect the various sums and amounts appearing thereon as directed by the council. 
(Code 1975,  1-58) 
Sec. 46-14. - Objection to assessment. 
    If, at or prior to the final confirmation of any special assessments, the owners of privately owned real property to be assessed for more than 50 percent of the cost of an improvement, or in the case of paving or similar improvements the owners of more than 50 percent of the frontage to be assessed for any such improvement, shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made by proceedings delineated by this article without a five-sevenths vote of the members elect of the council. 
(Code 1975,  1-59) 
Sec. 46-15. - When due. 
    All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the council shall make payable at a future time as provided in this article, shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. 
(Code 1975,  1-60) 
Sec. 46-16. - Partial payments. 
    The council may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed ten in number, the first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll or on such date as the council may determine and deferred installments being due annually thereafter, or, in the discretion of the council, may be spread upon and made a part of each annual city tax roll thereafter until all are paid. Interest shall be charged on all deferred installments at a rate not to exceed the annual rate allowed by law, commencing on the due date of the first installment, or 60 days after the date of confirmation if the first installment is not due upon confirmation, and payable on the due date of each subsequent installment. The full amount of all or any deferred installments, with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be paid in advance of the due dates thereof. If the full assessment or the first installment thereof shall be due upon confirmation, each property owner shall have 60 days from the date of confirmation to pay the full amount of such assessment, or the penalty. Following such 60-day period, the assessment or first installment thereof shall, if unpaid, be considered as delinquent and the same penalties shall be collected on such unpaid assessments or first installments thereof as are provided by law to be collected on delinquent general city taxes. Deferred installments shall be collected without penalty until 60 days after the due date thereof, after which such installments shall be considered as delinquent and such penalties on such installments shall be collected as are provided by law to be collected on delinquent general city taxes. After the council has confirmed the roll, the city treasurer shall notify by mail each property owner on such roll that the roll has been filed, stating the amount assessed and the terms of payment. Failure on the part of the city treasurer to give such notice or of the owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the city or any assessment thereon, nor excuse the payment of interest or penalties. 
(Code 1975,  1-61) 
Sec. 46-17. - Delinquent special assessments. 
    Any assessment, or part thereof, remaining unpaid on the first Monday of July following the date when the assessment became delinquent shall be reported as unpaid by the treasurer to the council. Any such delinquent assessment, together with all accrued interest, shall be transferred and reassessed on the next annual city tax roll in a column headed "special assessments" with a penalty of four percent upon such total amount added thereto, and when so transferred and reassessed upon the tax roll shall be collected in all respects as provided for the collection of city taxes. 
(Code 1975,  1-62) 
Sec. 46-18. - Creation of lien. 
    Special assessments and all interest, penalties and charges thereon from the date of confirmation of the assessment roll shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and, until paid, shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for state, county and city taxes, and the lands upon which such assessments, interest, penalties and charges are a lien shall be subject to sale therefor the same as are lands upon which delinquent city taxes constitute a lien. 
(Code 1975,  1-63) 
Sec. 46-19. - Additional assessments, refunds. 
    The city clerk shall, within 60 days after the completion of each local or special public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify such cost to the assessor who shall adjust the special assessment roll to correspond therewith. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by less than five percent, it shall be reported to the council, which may place the excess in the city treasury or make a refund thereof pro rata according to the assessment. If the assessment exceeds the amount necessary by five percent or more, the entire excess shall be credited to owners of property as shown by the city assessment roll upon which such assessment has been levied, pro rata according to the assessment. No refunds of special assessments may be made which impair or contravene the provisions of any outstanding obligation or bond secured in whole or part by such special assessments. In the case of assessments due in installments, the council may order the refund given by credit against the installments last coming due. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the cost of the improvement for which it was made, the council may make an additional pro rata assessment, but the total amount assessed against any one parcel of land shall not exceed the benefits received by such lot or parcel of land. 
(Code 1975,  1-64) 
Sec. 46-20. - Collection of special assessments. 
    If bonds are issued in anticipation of the collection of special assessments as provided in this chapter, all collections on each special assessment roll or combination of rolls shall be set in a separate fund for the payment of the principal and interest on the bonds so issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments, and shall be used for no other purpose. 
(Code 1975,  1-66) 
Sec. 46-21. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local improvements shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, expenses incidental thereto, including the repayment of the principal and interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments, if refunds are authorized. 
(Code 1975,  1-67) 
Sec. 46-22. - Written appeals. 
    If a special assessment is made against property, the notice of special assessment sent to the property owner or person responsible for payment of the ad valorem property taxes under the general property tax act shall include a statement that the owner or any person with an interest in the real property may file a written appeal of the special assessment with the state tax tribunal within 30 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll if that special assessment was protested at the hearing held for the purpose of confirming the roll. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 211.746, MSA 5.3534(6). 
Sec. 46-23. - Reassessment for benefits. 
    Whenever the council shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatever, in whole or in part, the council shall have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the manner as provided for the original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(Code 1975,  1-69) 
Sec. 46-24. - Combination of projects. 
    The council may combine several districts into one project for the purpose of effecting a saving in the costs. There shall be established for each district separate funds and accounts to cover the cost of the project. 
(Code 1975,  1-70) 
Sec. 46-25. - Division of parcels. 
    Should any lots or lands be divided after a special assessment thereon has been confirmed and divided into installments, the assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts upon the several lots and lands so divided, and shall enter the several amounts as amendments upon the special assessment roll. The city treasurer shall, within ten days after such apportionment, send notice of such action to the persons concerned at their last known address by first class mail. Such apportionment shall be final and conclusive on all parties unless protest in writing is received by the city treasurer within 20 days of the mailing of the notice. 
(Code 1975,  1-71) 
Sec. 46-26. - Deferred payments of special assessments. 
    The council may provide for the deferred payment of special assessments from persons who, in the opinion of the council and assessor, by reason of poverty are unable to contribute toward the cost thereof. In all such cases, as a condition to the granting of such deferred payments, the city shall require mortgage security on the real property of the beneficiary payable on or before his death, or in any event, on the sale or transfer of the property. 
(Code 1975,  1-72) 
Sec. 46-27. - Additional procedures. 
    In any case where the provisions of this article may prove to be insufficient to carry out fully the making of any special assessment, the council shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures required. 
(Code 1975,  1-65) 
Sec. 46-28. - Single lot assessments. 
    When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to any single lot or parcel of land, which expense is chargeable against such lot or parcel of land and the owner thereof, pursuant to any Charter provision or ordinance or state law, and is not of that class required to be prorated among several lots or parcels of land in the special assessment district, the amount of labor and material or any such other expense or service for which such expense was incurred, with a description of the lot or parcel of land upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported by the city superintendent to the council. The council may by resolution charge and collect said expense as a single lot assessment on either the city (summer) or county (winter) tax bill under the procedure described in this chapter. The provisions of this chapter with reference to pro rata special assessments generally, and the proceedings necessary to be had before making the improvement, shall not apply to single lot assessments contemplated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01,  1, 1-20-04) 
Chapters 47-49 - RESERVED 
Chapter 50 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 42; special assessments, ch. 46; subdivisions, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 62; vegetation, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Duty of property owner or occupant to remove snow, ice, dirt, etc., from sidewalks. 
(a)  The occupant, and in case there is no occupant, the owner or person having charge, care or control of any house, building or lot within the city fronting or abutting on any street or highway within the city where sidewalks exist shall remove and clear away and keep removed and cleared away from the entire width of the sidewalk, all snow, ice, dirt, mud and other objectionable substances, within 24 hours of accumulation. 
(b)  The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered, and it shall be his duty, if any person required by this section to remove or clear any obstruction from the sidewalks neglects or refuses so to do for 24 hours after receiving an order from the chief of police, code enforcement officer, or their duly authorized representative, requiring him to remove and clear away such obstruction, to cause such snow, ice and other obstructions to be removed and cleared away at the expense of such person. If such person refuses or neglects to pay such expense of removal on demand, such person shall be deemed to be indebted to the city in the amount of the cost and expense incurred in causing such removal and such costs may be recovered before any court of competent jurisdiction. It is expressly provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to excuse the neglect or failure to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section or release from the penalty provided therefor. 
(Code 1975,  16-1; Ord. No. 2015-01,  1, 6-1-15) 
Sec. 50-2. - Obstructing, injuring, etc., streets. 
    No person shall encumber or obstruct any street, alley or other highway within the city except as permitted by the city council. This section does not apply to the use of sidewalks for the display of goods and merchandise in accordance with section 50-4. 
(Code 1975,  16-2) 
Sec. 50-3. - Placing refuse from business establishments in streets or alleys. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep into, or in any manner to place or cause to be placed in any of the public streets or alleys of the city, any filth, rubbish, paper or sweepings of stores or other places of business. 
(Code 1975,  16-3) 
Sec. 50-4. - Permission required for maintenance of posts or fixtures on sidewalks. 
    No person shall put up, erect, keep, use or maintain, on or in any sidewalk in this city, any post, erection or fixture for the support of any sign, awning or advertisement, or for any other purpose, without special permission from the city council. 
(Code 1975,  16-5) 
Sec. 50-5. - Awnings, signs, etc., extending over sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall put up, erect, keep, maintain or use any awning on or over any sidewalk in this city less than seven feet above the sidewalk over which it projects. 
(b)  No person shall put up, erect, keep, use or maintain any sign, advertisement or device extending on or over the sidewalk more than three feet from the side of the wall or building to which such sign, advertisement or device is adjoined or attached, nor shall any person hang upon or fasten to any awning extending over any sidewalk any goods, wares, merchandise or other things coming nearer to the sidewalk than seven feet above such walk. 
(Code 1975,  16-6) 
Sec. 50-7. - Penalty for violation of sections 50-1 through 50-7. 
    A violation of this chapter [sections 50-1 through 50-7] shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  16-8; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 50-8-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-04,  1, adopted Nov. 6, 2017, changed the title of art. II from "Construction of Sidewalks" to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 50-31. - Duty of property owners. 
    Every owner, or part owner, of any parcel of land within the city shall construct sidewalks along all streets and avenues in front of and adjacent thereto. 
(Code 1975,  16-20) 
Sec. 50-32. - Notice to construct. 
(a)  Wherever the city council shall, by resolution, order any sidewalk to be constructed, the city clerk shall cause notice to be given to the owner or part owner of the land in front of or adjacent to which such sidewalk is required to be built, to build the same within 30 days from the time of service of such notice. 
(b)  Such notice shall be personally served on the owner or part owner of such land, or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such owner or part owner at his last known address. 
(Code 1975,  16-21) 
Sec. 50-33. - Construction by city upon property owner's failure to comply with notice. 
    If the owner or part owner of land shall fail or neglect to build a sidewalk within the time specified in the notice provided for in section 50-32, the city council shall cause such sidewalk to be built and the costs thereof, including the proportion of the cost and expense of serving notices, printing and other contingencies connected therewith, or such part thereof as the council shall determine, shall be charged to such owner or part owner. The council may cause the amount of such expense incurred thereby, for which such owner or part owner shall have become liable, together with a penalty of ten percent in addition thereto, to be reported to the city assessor to be levied by him as a special tax or assessment upon the lot or premises adjacent to and abutting upon such sidewalk, which special assessment shall be subject to review. After proper notice is given as in all other cases of special assessments, such tax, when confirmed, shall be a lien upon such lot or premises the same as other special assessments, and the council shall order the city assessor to spread the amount due, together with such penalty, upon his roll as a special assessment upon such lot or premises, and the assessment shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes. 
(Code 1975,  16-22) 
Sec. 50-34. - General specifications. 
(a)  All sidewalks within the city shall be constructed of concrete. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be constructed as follows: The cement shall be laid upon a base of four inches of clear sand or cinders, and shall not be less than four inches in thickness and of four parts sand or gravel and one part cement, and shall not be less than four feet in width. 
(Code 1975,  16-23) 
Sec. 50-35. - Determination of grade, line and width. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons, before commencing the construction of any sidewalk, to obtain from the city superintendent the proper grade and line of such walk. It shall also be the duty of the city superintendent to determine and fix the width of any sidewalk to be constructed on or along any of the streets or avenues of the city. 
(Code 1975,  16-24) 
Sec. 50-36. - Compliance with article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build any sidewalk on or along the streets or avenues of the city of any other or different material or of any different dimensions than are provided therefor in this article, or build any such walk except in conformity to the width, line and grade as fixed by the city superintendent, unless the city superintendent, on proper application, otherwise orders. 
(Code 1975,  16-25) 
Sec. 50-37. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  16-26; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 50-38-50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, adopted Oct. 19, 1998, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Art. III,  50-61-50-66, pertained to street excavations and derived from Code 1975,  16-37-16-42.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 2017-04,  1, adopted Nov. 6, 2017, changed the title of art. III from "Construction and Repair" to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 50-61. - Title. 
    This article may be known as the "City of St. Clair Public Right-Of-Way Ordinance" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 50-62. - Declaration of purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the use of public right-of-way and to establish permit procedures and standards pertaining to the installation of facilities and structures within the public right-of-way and utility easements, encouraging joint planning of utility and telecommunication construction projects in the public right-of-way, coordinating and standardizing the location of particular kinds of facilities and structures in the public right-of-way and minimizing their interference and impairment of sidewalks, streets, sanitary sewers, storm drains or water pipes. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 50-63. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise indicated, the terms used in this article are defined as follows: 
    Alley means a public or legally established thoroughfare other than a street affording a secondary method of vehicular access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Curb means a part of the street usually of the same elevation as the center of the street which is parallel to the street which separates the portion of the roadway established for vehicular traffic from the adjacent greenbelt area designed to keep vehicular traffic from the greenbelt area. 
    Facilities and structures means poles, towers, monitoring wells, pipes, conduits, guy wires, anchors, pedestals, utility boxes, manholes, handholes, vaults, utility pits, nodes, junction boxes, buildings and enclosures, including fences. 
    Public right-of-way means the entire area owned or dedicated by the city or other governmental agency or entity for public use as a highway, street, alley or other public place. 
    Street means that portion of a public thoroughfare improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic including curbs on paved roads and shoulders on unimproved thoroughfares. 
    Utility easement means a right or privilege over a specific portion of land area granted by the owner to the public, a corporation or some particular person or persons for specific uses and purposes, and which is designated a public or private easement depending on the nature of the use. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 50-64. - General permit requirements. 
(a)  It is unlawful to install facilities or structures within any public right-of-way or utility easement without a permit from the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful to make any excavation or opening in or to tunnel under any public right-of-way without a permit from the city. The city superintendent or his designee may, if public safety requires, grant immediate permission to a person to make a necessary excavation or opening within the public right-of-way provided that a permit is obtained by the next business day. 
(c)  An emergency above ground repair within the public right-of-way made without a permit must be reported to the city by the next business day. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 50-65. - General construction requirements. 
(a)  No unnecessary damage or injury may be done to any tree or shrub or to the roots thereof. If any sidewalk is blocked by any work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which must be safe and convenient for travelers. 
(b)  Owners of any underground facilities and structures within a public right-of-way must participate in the Miss Dig System and respond to and stake or locate its facilities and structures within the rules and regulations as prescribed by the Miss Dig System and hold the city, its agents and contractors harmless for any damage to facilities and structures which may be damaged as a result of the city repairing or maintaining its sanitary sewers, storm drains or water mains located in any public right-of-way if due to untimely or incorrect locations being staked or identified. 
(c)  The placement of facilities and structures within public right-of-way and utility easements is subject to approval by the city engineer. The location of above ground facilities and structures are subject to review and approval by the city's site plan committee for visibility, traffic and pedestrian safety, landscaping, screening and other site conditions. 
(d)  All openings, excavations or obstructions in a public right-of-way must be properly barricaded and illuminated as required by the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices to prevent injury or damage to persons or vehicles. Safety devices must be installed at all construction sites to provide adequate notice and warning to both pedestrians and motorists. 
(e)  All openings, excavations and tunnels in a public right-of-way must be properly shored and braced in accordance with all standards promulgated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Michigan Occupational Safety and Health Administration (MIOSHA) to insure the safety of all workers and prevent cave-ins and washouts which would likely cause damage to the surface grade of the street or adjoining portions of the right-of-way. If it appears that there is a danger to the public safety, the city has the authority to install any and all barricades, warning signs and other such devices that it may deem necessary and may charge the permit holder for costs incurred in protecting the public and may revoke the permit. 
(f)  Underground facilities and structures constructed of nonmetallic material are required to have a traceable metallic wrap or accompanying wire for the purpose of tracing and locating with conventional locating equipment. When placed in the public right-of-way, facilities and structures constructed of material susceptible to breakage (i.e. fiber optic line) may be encased in a protective shell as approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 50-66. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Application for a permit under the terms and conditions of this article and any other applicable provision of the city Code shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications showing the proposed work to be performed within the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Application for a permit may not be accepted unless it contains all of the required information, is accompanied by required plans which conform to the applicable provisions of the city Code ordinances and regulations and is accompanied by the payment of a permit fee as established by resolution of the city council from time to time. The proposed plans and specifications shall be reviewed by appropriate city departments depending on the nature of the work to be performed. 
(c)  Adequate self-insurance or liability policies naming the city as additional insured may be required by the city. A properly executed certificate of insurance containing evidence that the pertinent policy of insurance or endorsement applies to the provisions under which the permit is issued and approved as to form by the city attorney shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 50-67. - Construction bond and hold harmless requirement. 
    As a condition of obtaining a permit the applicant may be required to file with the city a cash construction bond in an amount of at least $1,000.00 or five percent, whichever is greater, as established by the city engineer based on the applicant's estimated cost of the project, including labor, materials and overhead, which may be utilized to pay all valid claims for damages resulting from activity within the public right-of-way. The applicant may post a blanket bond of $5,000.00 covering all new construction up to $100,000.00 per year. The estimated cost of the project shall be consistent with the installed cost of the project as reported for state and local tax purposes. The cash bond shall be conditioned to pay all damages to the public right-of-way of the city and to hold the city harmless of every damage of every other nature whether to persons or property for which such city may be held liable by reason of or which is occasioned by the doing of a thing or the exercise of the privilege for which the permit upon which the cash bond was based was granted. The applicant must execute an agreement to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless in the event a claim arises out of an activity conducted by the applicant within the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 50-68. - Blanket permit and bond. 
    The owners of any facilities and structures within a public right-of-way may obtain an annual blanket work permit (January 1 to December 30) covering all maintenance and repair activities upon payment of a fee set by resolution of the city council, the posting of a cash bond in the amount of $1,000.00 and the filing of maps describing the location of all the owner's facilities and structures within the city. However, no fee maybe required of telecommunications providers except as allowed by Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002. The holder of an annual blanket work permit must file with the city upon request, a report describing the nature and location of the maintenance and repair work. The cash bond shall be conditioned to pay all damages to the public right-of-way of the city and to hold the city harmless of every damage of every other nature whether to persons or property for which such city may be held liable by reason of or which is occasioned by the doing of a thing or the exercise of the privilege for which the permit upon which the cash bond was based was granted. The applicant must execute an agreement to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless in the event a claim arises out of an activity conducted by the applicant within the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 2002-03,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 50-69. - Inspection of work; suspension or revocation of permit; filing of "as-built" plans with GIS data. 
(a)  All construction work done pursuant to any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be inspected by the city to determine that the work conforms with the applicable city Code provisions. The city may suspend or revoke any permit where the workmanship or materials used do not conform to the approved plans and specifications and the applicable provisions of this Code or other applicable ordinances. Violation of the terms and conditions contained in this article or any other applicable ordinance or Code provision may result in the permit being revoked. It is unlawful to perform any work authorized by any permit or cause any work to be performed after a permit has been suspended or revoked. 
(b)  "As-built" or engineering maps and plans must be submitted by the applicant to the city engineer as soon as they are completed but no later than 90 days after completion of the work; if available, a digital geographical information system layer, using a program, format and computer media acceptable to the city and containing such information and data as the city may require, which accurately displays the work. Proprietary information may be submitted under a promise of confidentiality as provided by the Freedom of Information Act. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 50-70. - Review procedure. 
    All operations for which a permit is granted pursuant to the terms of this division are under the direction and supervision of the city superintendent or his designee. If a permit is refused, suspended or revoked, the applicant may within ten days of the denial, suspension or revocation appeal that determination to the city council. The city council may, after proper notice to all interested parties, conduct a hearing concerning the refusal, suspension or revocation. After conducting the public hearing the city council may either affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the city superintendent or his designee. The decision of the city council is final. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 50-71. - Conflict between laws. 
    In the event that any parts of this article conflict with any other applicable city Code provision or ordinance of the city, the more restrictive city Code provision or ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1998-06,  1, 10-19-98) 
Secs. 50-72-50-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING NUMBERS 

Sec. 50-86. - Required. 
    All dwellings and business houses in the city shall be numbered in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1975,  16-53) 
Sec. 50-87. - Plan. 
(a)  The numbering of houses and business places in the city shall be in accordance with the so-called "Philadelphia Plan," as near as may be. For that purpose the city shall be divided into two divisions, called north and south, and the dividing line is hereby declared to be Adams Street. 
(b)  On the north and south side of Adams Street, and on all streets running east and west, each block shall have 100 numbers. The even numbers shall be on the north side and the odd numbers on the south side. In all streets running north and south the same general plan shall be followed, the even numbers on the east side and the odd numbers on the west side, commencing at Adams Street with number 100 and running north and south to the city limits. 
(c)  All vacant lots or unplatted land shall be assigned numbers in accordance with the general plan provided for in this section. 
(d)  For the purpose of numbering, each 20 feet of frontage shall be considered a lot and assigned a number and whenever the occupancy is not in harmony therewith, the occupancy shall be assigned the number of the lot, the greater portion of which is included in such occupancy. Provided that, whenever a portion of a lot is occupied separately, it shall be numbered the same as the last preceding number with the fraction one-half added thereto. 
(Code 1975,  16-54) 
Sec. 50-88. - Map. 
    The city council shall have made a map of the city, which shall show all streets, their names, numbers and the division of each block for numbering purposes with numbers assigned as provided in this article. Such map shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and be open for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(Code 1975,  16-55) 
Sec. 50-89. - Attachment of and specifications for numbers. 
    The numbers provided for in this article shall be securely fastened or inscribed in a conspicuous place on the front of each building, occupancy or premises, and shall be plain, legible figures not less than two inches in length provided at the expense of each owner/occupant. 
(Code 1975,  16-56) 
Sec. 50-90. - Notice to number; failure to comply with notice. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk, whenever it is necessary to number or renumber any building, occupancy or premises under the provisions of this article, to notify the owner or occupant to that effect in writing, and should such owner or occupant refuse or neglect to do so within ten days thereafter, he shall be deemed to have violated this article, and each ten days such person shall neglect or refuse so to do, after a notice as aforesaid, shall be deemed a new violation of this section and may be prosecuted separately, and the fines and penalties provided in this article imposed for each such violation. 
(Code 1975,  16-57) 
Sec. 50-91. - Injuring or defacing numbers. 
    Any person injuring, defacing or removing the numbers or street signs or any portion thereof on any building, occupancy or premises required by the provisions of this article, whether he is the owner or occupant of such building, occupancy or premises on which such numbers or street signs are placed or not, shall be deemed to have violated this article. 
(Code 1975,  16-58) 
Sec. 50-92. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  16-59; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 50-93-50-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY FACILITIES 

Sec. 50-116. - Public interest; declaration as to legislative determination. 
(a)  The city council finds that utility facilities used in the transmission and distribution of gas, telephone, cable television and electrical service, such as mains, valves, wires, poles, cables, underground devices and conduits, manholes, towers and other conductors, fixtures and appurtenances necessary for the maintenance and operation of such utility businesses, are usually located over, in, under or through the streets, highways, alleys and other public places and ways of the city. 
(b)  No comprehensive local regulation and inspection of the installation and maintenance of these utility facilities has heretofore been exercised by the city, and as a result, such facilities have been installed and maintained so that their location and condition could impair, hamper and hinder the reasonable, efficient and economical use of the public rights-of-way for other public purposes. In addition, the city's ability to maintain, clean, sweep, drain, remove snow and otherwise improve and work in city streets is diminished by the presence of such utility facilities, and the city is not otherwise compensated for the additional administrative costs attributable thereto. 
(Code 1975,  16-70) 
Sec. 50-117. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable television utility business means the activity of providing cable television services or goods to the public and includes, by way of illustration and not as a limitation, the ownership, control or management of any equipment, plant, generation machinery or devices, distribution facilities and the like for the purposes of supplying and distributing cable television services to consumers in the city. 
    Cable television utility facility means any wire, pole, cable, antenna, underground conduit, manhole, tower and other transformer, fixture, device and appurtenance of any description whatsoever necessary or used for the maintenance and operation of a cable television system in the city. 
    Electrical utility business means the activity of providing electrical energy, services or goods to the public and includes, by way of illustration and not as limitation, the ownership, control or management of any equipment, plant, generation machinery or device, distribution facility and the like for the purposes of supplying and distributing electrical energy and power to consumers in the city. 
    Electrical utility facility means any wire, pole, cable, underground conduit, manhole, transformer, fixture, device and appurtenance of any description whatsoever necessary or used for the maintenance or operation of an electrical distribution system in the city. 
    Gas utility business means the activity of providing gas energy, services or goods to the public and includes, by way of illustration and not as limitation, the ownership, control or management of any equipment, plant, generation machinery or device, storage facility and pumping device or valve, distribution facility and the like for the purposes of supplying and distributing gas energy and power to consumers in the city. 
    Gas utility facility means any main, pipe, valve, pumping device, storage facility, equipment, plant, generation machinery or device, underground conduit, manhole or other fixtures whatsoever necessary or used for the maintenance and operation of a gas distribution system in the city. 
    Legislative body means the city council. 
    Municipality means this city. 
    Streets, highways, alleys and public ways shall mean streets, avenues, highways, boulevards, concourses, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, waterways, docks, bulkheads, wharves, piers, alleys, all other public rights-of-way, and public places or waters within or under the jurisdiction of the city. 
    Telephone utility business means the activity of providing telephone goods or services to the public and includes, by way of illustration and not as a limitation, the ownership, control or management of any equipment, plant, generation machinery or device, distribution facility and the like for the purposes of supplying and distributing telephone service to consumers in the city. 
    Telephone utility facility means any wire, pole, cable, underground conduit, manhole, tower and other fixtures, devices and appurtenances of any description whatsoever necessary or used for the maintenance and operation of a telephone system in the city. 
    Utility business means any cable television, gas, telephone or electrical utility business having any utility facility in any street, highway, alley or public way in the city. 
    Utility facility means any cable television facility, any gas utility facility, any electric utility facility or any telephone utility facility. 
(Code 1975,  16-71) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 50-118. - Permit-Required. 
    No utility business shall install, maintain, use, operate, build, construct or otherwise place or locate any utility facility in, upon, over or through any street, highway, alley or other public place or way in the city without a permit issued under this article. Provided, however, that to the extent any provision of this article conflicts with any provision of a franchise issued by the city to a utility business, then the franchise provision shall control. 
(Code 1975,  16-72) 
Sec. 50-119. - Same-Application, fee. 
    Application for a permit to install, maintain, use, operate, build, construct or otherwise place or locate any utility facility shall be obtained from the city clerk annually, and such application shall be fully completed and returned to the clerk, together with such annual fee as may be required by resolution of the city council from time to time. The fee established by the city council shall be limited to estimated costs to be incurred by the city. 
(Code 1975,  16-73) 
Sec. 50-120. - Contents of application. 
    The application for a permit required under this article shall require the submission by the applicant of the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The number of new poles, feet of wire, pipes, mains or cable, and the number and description of other new utility facilities that the applicant proposes to locate or maintain in the city during the ensuing year. 
(3)  A complete set of construction or engineering plans and specifications for the utility business showing the location, size, nature and interrelationship of the utility facilities to be installed before a new installation is made. As-built plans of all of the utility's facilities located in the municipality shall be available for inspection at a reasonably convenient location and at reasonable business hours. 
(4)  A reliable estimate of the remaining useful life and required periodic maintenance schedule for the utility facilities to be used in the utility business. 
(5)  Identification of special problems and difficulties as to vehicular and pedestrian traffic disruption and proposed solutions therefor. 
(6)  The estimated value to the nearest $1,000.00 of the utility facilities to be located in the city. 
(7)  Copies of approvals, licenses or permits obtained from any other governmental agency for the project, if required. 
(8)  Plans for restoration of the public right-of-way. 
(9)  Such other information as may be reasonably necessary for analysis of the project under the standards of this article similar to any of the foregoing. 
(Code 1975,  16-74) 
Sec. 50-121. - Review of application; procedure and standards. 
    Upon receipt of an application, the city clerk shall forward the application to the city superintendent for his review and report. Thereafter, and upon receipt of the superintendent's report, the city council shall consider the application and either grant or deny the permit, or grant such permit with such conditions as the council deems advisable. The decision of the council shall be based upon the following standards: 
(1)  That all submissions required by this article have been made by the applicant, sufficient to reasonably analyze the project. 
(2)  That the proposed utility facilities do not unreasonably interfere with or impair other public uses of the street, highway, alley or public way. 
(3)  That disruption to travel by the public upon the right-of-way is not unreasonably impaired. 
(4)  That restoration of the public right-of-way to substantially its previous condition is assured. 
(5)  That the public health, safety and welfare is not unreasonably endangered by the construction of the utility facility. 
(6)  Applicable conditions and provisions of any current franchise granted by the city. 
(Code 1975,  16-75) 
Sec. 50-122. - Annual permit. 
    A permit issued under this article shall expire one year from the date of its issuance. The permit shall state the number of poles, or linear feet of wire, or linear feet of gas mains the utility business has in place in a public right-of-way on the date the permit is issued. Poles, wires and mains may be added or removed without the issuance of a new permit, but the utility facility shall notify the city clerk in writing of any such additions or removals, and of the location thereof, and a fee in the amount established by the city council shall be paid. 
(Code 1975,  16-76) 
Sec. 50-123. - Fees to be paid upon issuance of annual permit. 
    An applicant shall pay to the city treasurer an annual permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council from time to time pursuant to section 50-119. 
(Code 1975,  16-77) 
Sec. 50-124. - Performance measurement. 
    Within 60 days from the date of the issuance of a permit under this article, upon written request by the municipality, the utility business shall provide the municipality testing procedures to be utilized so as to ensure adherence to the technical standards required by the state public service commission. 
(Code 1975,  16-81) 
Sec. 50-125. - Insurance; indemnification, liability for damages. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in a current franchise ordinance, within 30 days after the issuance of a permit under this article, the utility business shall file with the municipality, and maintain on file while the permit is in effect, a comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability policy sufficient to protect and satisfactory to the municipality and residents thereof from financial risks that may be incurred as a result of the utility's activities in the municipality. 
(b)  The utility business shall indemnify and hold the municipality harmless from all liability, damage, cost or expense arising from any claims against the municipality which result, directly or indirectly, from the operations conducted by the utility business in the boundaries of the municipality. The damages and penalties shall include all damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the system authorized, whether or not such act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article. To fund this liability, the utility business shall maintain a sufficient and satisfactory umbrella liability policy. 
(Code 1975,  16-86) 
Sec. 50-126. - Inspection. 
    Any utility business granted a permit under this article shall be inspected from time to time by representatives of the city to ensure compliance with the construction plans filed with the city, the requirements of this article and any conditions imposed upon the utility business by the permit. 
(Code 1975,  16-78) 
Sec. 50-127. - Construction codes. 
    The utility business shall at all times comply with all construction codes and ordinances in effect in the municipality, and with any and all rules and regulations of the state public service commission as may apply. 
(Code 1975,  16-80) 
Sec. 50-128. - Suspension and revocation of permit. 
    If the city superintendent has probable cause to believe that the utility business has violated any condition of a permit granted under this article, has varied substantially from filed construction plans, has violated any condition of this article, or is endangering the public health, safety or welfare, he may suspend the permit for a period of not more than 14 days. Thereafter, the city council shall conduct a public hearing upon the suspension, and if it is found that the suspension of the permit was warranted, and that the act or omission complained of has not been remedied, the permit shall be revoked. At the hearing, the utility business may appear and cross-examine witnesses, be represented by counsel, and shall be given notice of the specifications of the charges and notice of the hearing. 
(Code 1975,  16-79) 
Sec. 50-129. - Overhead and underground construction requirements. 
    Where facilities and equipment exist for the overhead installation of the utility business's lines, such facilities and equipment may be utilized. Where facilities and equipment are unavailable, the utility business's lines shall be installed underground. The municipality may vary the requirement for underground line installation if the utility business establishes to the satisfaction of the legislative body that underground installation cannot be accomplished due to undue hardship and/or practical difficulties. The rates charged for such installations shall be those established by the state public service commission. 
(Code 1975,  16-82) 
Sec. 50-130. - Tree trimming. 
    The utility business shall trim trees when necessary to make the lines safe and accessible and such trimming shall be done in compliance with all existing governmental laws, ordinances, rules or regulations. The utility business shall defend, hold harmless and indemnify the municipality from any or all actions, causes of actions or damages caused as a result of such activity. 
(Code 1975,  16-83) 
Sec. 50-131. - Right of inspection and restoration. 
    In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the utility business shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the municipality, replace and restore all paving, sidewalks, driveways or other surface of any street or other alley disturbed in as good a condition as before such work was commenced. All such work shall be subject to inspection by municipal authorities. 
(Code 1975,  16-85) 
Sec. 50-132. - Construction approval by municipality. 
    Except for individual service drops and connections, and in cases of emergency, and except as otherwise provided in section 50-122, a utility business shall not erect any pole, install any underground lines or conduits, run any line, main or other utility facility, or make any attachment, or engage in construction of any kind without the prior approval of the city superintendent or such other department or engineering consultant as the municipality may from time to time determine is appropriate. Such approval will not be unreasonably withheld and the municipality shall have and maintain the right to inspect the construction, operation and maintenance of the system to ensure the proper performance and compliance with the regulatory provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975,  16-87) 
Sec. 50-133. - Relocation to accommodate public and private improvements. 
    If at any time this municipality or any other municipal corporation shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade or location of any highway, street, alley or other public place, the utility business, upon reasonable notice by this municipality, or such other municipal corporation, shall remove, reposition and relocate its utility facilities at its own expense. If the municipality is reimbursed for the relocation costs by a third party, the utility shall receive the benefit of such reimbursement. A utility business shall, on the request of any person holding an appropriate permit issued by the municipality, temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of any building or other structure. 
(Code 1975,  16-84) 
Sec. 50-134. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor which shall be punishable upon conviction thereof as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  16-88) 
Sec. 50-135. - Injunctive relief. 
    In lieu of or in addition to the remedy provided for by section 50-134, the city may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief or other appropriate civil remedies to prevent violations of this article. 
(Code 1975,  16-89) 
Chapters 51-53 - RESERVED 
Chapter 54 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 62; vegetation, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Subdivision control act, MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Partition or division of land in recorded plat. 
(a)  This section is adopted pursuant to MCL 560.263, MSA 26.430(263), being a part of the Subdivision Control Act of 1967. 
(b)  No lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat lying within the boundaries of the city shall be further partitioned or divided unless such partition or division is approved by a majority vote of the city council voting thereon. 
(c)  In no case may the partition or division of any lot, outlot or other parcel in a recorded plat be divided into more than four parts; provided, that any lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat not served by public sewer and public water systems shall not be further partitioned or divided if the resulting lots, outlots or other parcels of land are less than the minimum size provided for in the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1975,  17-1) 
Secs. 54-2-54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-26. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the community; 
(2)  Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; 
(3)  Achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and livability; 
(4)  Secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage and other health requirements; 
(5)  Secure adequate provisions for recreational areas and other public facilities; and 
(6)  Provide logical procedures for the achievement of these purposes. 
(Code 1975,  17-13) 
Sec. 54-28. - Variances. 
    The governing body may permit variances from this article, provided that such variances are not in conflict with the intent and purpose of this article and provided further that strict compliance with these criteria would render a particular parcel of land unplattable. 
(Code 1975,  17-15) 
Sec. 54-29. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, whether such person is the owner or agent of the owner of the property, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  17-16) 
Secs. 54-30-54-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 54-41. - Stages of preparation for platting. 
    The preparation of a subdivision for platting shall be carried out through two phases, preliminary plat and final plat, in accordance with the procedures set out in this division. 
(Code 1975,  17-27) 
Sec. 54-42. - Initial investigation. 
    Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, it is suggested that the proprietor meet informally with the municipal departments concerned to investigate the procedures and standards of the municipality with reference to this article and with the proposals of the master plan as they affect the area in which the proposed subdivision is located. The proprietor should not submit a preliminary plat at this time. The proprietor should concern himself with the following factors: 
(1)  The proprietor shall secure a copy of the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, engineering specifications, and other similar ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement of land so as to make himself aware of the requirements of the municipality. 
(2)  The area for the proposed subdivision shall be properly zoned for the intended use. 
(3)  An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the adequacy of public open spaces, including parks and playgrounds to serve the proposed subdivision, shall be made by the proprietor. 
(4)  The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares shall be investigated by the proprietor. 
(5)  Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the municipality shall be investigated by the proprietor. 
(Code 1975,  17-28) 
Sec. 54-43. - Preliminary plat. 
    The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat requires tentative and final approval is as follows: 
(1)  Content. The preliminary plat shall include the following: 
a.  Identification and description. 
1.  Proposed name of subdivision. 
2.  Location by section, town and range, or by other legal description. 
3.  Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner, and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his interest in the land. 
4.  Scale of plat, one inch equals 100 feet as minimum acceptable scale. 
5.  Date. 
6.  Northpoint. 
b.  Existing conditions. 
1.  An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet, showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings such as section lines and/or major streets or collector streets, shall be provided. 
2.  Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision including those of areas across abutting roads. 
3.  Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision. 
4.  The school board or school board superintendent of the school district having jurisdiction in the area concerned shall be informed and made aware of the proposed preliminary plat by the proprietor. A letter or document from the school board or school board superintendent indicating awareness of the proprietor's intentions shall be submitted to the planning commission as part of the preliminary plat. 
c.  Proposed conditions. 
1.  Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways. 
2.  Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots. 
3.  Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision. 
4.  If the subdivision is proposed to be developed under the subdivision open space plan, such subdivision shall meet the requirements of section 54-61 of this article. 
(2)  Filing: 
a.  Ten copies of a valid and complete preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate and any other information required to be submitted under the subdivision act, shall be filed with the clerk. 
b.  Submittal with the clerk shall be at least ten days prior to the regular planning commission meeting (which meeting shall be considered as the date of filing) at which the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. Should any of the data required in this section be omitted, the clerk shall notify the proprietor of the additional data required and commission action shall be delayed until the required data is received. The commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 60 days after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees to an extension of time in writing. 
(3)  Technical review and recommendation. The clerk shall transmit a copy of the valid and complete preliminary plat to the municipal engineer and municipal planner for their technical review and recommendation. 
(4)  Tentative approval. 
a.  Planning commission review. 
1.  The clerk shall place the preliminary plat on the next regular planning commission agenda, at which meeting the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 60 days after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees, in writing, to an extension of the time required for approval by the governing body and planning commission. 
2.  It shall be the duty of the clerk to send a notice by registered or certified mail to the owners of land immediately adjoining the property to be platted of the presentment of the preliminary plat and the time and place of the meeting of the commission to consider such preliminary plat; such notice shall be sent not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. 
3.  The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the municipal engineer as to compliance with plans for utilities and other improvements. 
4.  The municipal engineer shall notify the commission of his recommendation for either approval or rejection of the preliminary plat. 
5.  Should the commission find that the preliminary plat is not acceptable, it shall record the reason in its official minutes and forward a copy thereof together with all accompanying data to the governing body; and recommend that the governing body disapprove the preliminary plat until the objections causing disapproval have been changed to meet with the approval of the commission. 
b.  Governing body. 
1.  The governing body will not review a preliminary plat until it has received the review and recommendations of the commission. Following the receipt of such recommendations, the governing body shall consider the preliminary plat at such meeting that the matter is placed on the regularly scheduled agenda. The governing body shall take action on the preliminary plat within 90 days of the date of initial filing of the plat with the clerk, as required in subsection (2)a of this section. 
2.  Should the governing body tentatively approve the preliminary plat, it shall record its approval on the plat and return one copy to the proprietor. 
3.  Tentative approval shall not constitute final approval of the preliminary plat. 
4.  Tentative approval of the governing body shall be effective for a period of 12 months. Should the preliminary plat, in whole or in part, not be submitted for final approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat must again be submitted to the commission and governing body for approval unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor, and such request is granted in writing by the governing body, prior to its expiration. 
(5)  Review by governing body for final approval. 
a.  The proprietor shall file a valid preliminary plat with the clerk together with a certified list of all authorities required for approval in sections 112 to 119 of the Subdivision Act (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430 et seq.), as amended. The proprietor shall also provide approved copies of preliminary plats from each of the required authorities. 
b.  The governing body shall take action on the preliminary plat within 20 days of the submission of approval of the required authorities. 
c.  If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to the plat tentatively approved by the governing body and meets all conditions laid down for tentative approval, the governing body shall give final approval to the preliminary plat. 
d.  The clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons shall be given. 
e.  Final approval shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of final approval. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the governing body in writing, prior to its expiration. 
f.  No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made before the preliminary plat has received final approval of the governing body, engineering plans have been approved by the municipal engineer, and any deposits required under division 3 of this article have been received by the municipality. 
(Code 1975,  17-29, 17-30) 
Sec. 54-44. - Final plat. 
    The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as follows: 
(1)  Preparation: 
a.  The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the subdivision act. 
b.  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this article. 
c.  The proprietor shall submit, as evidence of title, an abstract of title certified to date with the written opinion of an attorney-at-law thereon, or, at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for examination in order to ascertain as to whether or not the proper parties have signed the plat. 
(2)  Review: 
a.  Five mylar copies and three paper prints of the final plat shall be filed by the proprietor with the clerk and the proprietor shall deposit such sums of money as the governing body may require in this article or by other ordinances. 
b.  The final plat shall be reviewed by the municipal engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
c.  The municipal engineer shall notify the governing body of his recommendation for either approval or rejection of the final plat. 
d.  The governing body shall review all recommendations and take action on the final plat within 20 days of its date of filing. 
e.  Upon approval of the final plat by the governing body, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the subdivision act. The three prints of the final plat shall be forwarded, two to the clerk and one to the planning commission. The five mylar copies shall be forwarded to the clerk of the county plat board. 
(Code 1975,  17-31) 
Secs. 54-45-54-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 54-56. - Purpose and intent. 
    The following design standards are intended as a guide to sound land planning and are for typical development conditions. Should there be unusual topographic or property problems, these standards may have to be modified to either greater or lesser conformance in accordance with the judgment of the planning commission and the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1975,  17-42) 
Sec. 54-57. - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  Generally. The specifications set forth in this section are by the planning commission for the width and location of all highways, streets and alleys which may be platted or accepted within the city. All such regulations are intended to be in harmony with all road right-of-way standards and policies of the city. 
(b)  Layout. The layout of proposed streets shall provide for the continuation of existing streets in surrounding areas and/or shall conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved by the planning commission in cases where topographical or other conditions preclude the continuation of existing streets. In general, such streets shall be of a width as great as that of the street so extended. Due consideration shall be given to traffic safety. Minor residential streets shall be laid out so as to discourage their use by through traffic. Due consideration shall also be given by the subdivider to the attractiveness of the street layout in order to obtain the maximum livability and amenity of the subdivision. Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain a railroad, the council may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use of the intervening land such as for parks in residential districts. Any intersection occurring on a street which crosses a railroad track shall not be less than 400 feet from the nearest railroad right-of-way. Greater distances may be required if it is deemed necessary for safety, approach gradients or future grade separations. 
(c)  Major streets. Where the subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the city council may, at its discretion, require the construction of marginal access streets, double frontage of lots with provisions of a screen planting contained in a no-access reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear-service alleys, or other treatment which the council considers essential to adequate protection of residential lots and to separation of through and local traffic. 
(d)  Private streets and alleys. Private streets and alleys shall not be permitted, but rather all streets and alleys shall be dedicated to the public. 
(e)  Access to property. Each residential lot within a subdivision shall be provided with a satisfactory means of access. Building permits shall not be issued for the construction of buildings which do not have access onto a public street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to a street where the control of such is definitely placed with the council. 
(f)  Intersections. Intersecting streets shall be so laid out that the intersection angles are approximately 90 degrees, but in no case shall the angle of intersection be less than 60 degrees. Streets convening at one point shall be the least practicable number. 
(g)  Visibility. No fence, wall, structure or planting shall be erected, established or maintained on any corner lot which will obstruct the view of a driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection, except that shade trees would be permitted where all branches are not less than eight feet above the ground level, and excepting that where such branches extend over a street or alley, clear passage shall then be maintained to a height of 12 feet. Such unobstructed corner shall mean a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 30 feet from the intersection of the street lines, or, in the case of a rounded property corner, from the intersection of the street property lines extended. 
(h)  Half streets. Generally, half streets shall not be permitted where a subdivision adjoins undeveloped property, except for such major streets of over 60 feet in right-of-way width as may be recommended in the city's comprehensive plan or by the city. They shall be permitted only when the planning commission or council considers the use of a half street essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in accordance with the intent of this article and where the planning commission or council finds it practicable to require the dedication of the other half of the right-of-way when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever there already exists a dedicated and recorded half street or half alley on an adjoining plat, the other half shall be dedicated on the proposed plat to make the street or alley complete. 
(i)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. 
(j)  Cul-de-sacs. Where required for the full and best utilization of the property, cul-de-sacs may be utilized. 
(k)  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be permitted only in cases where the planning commission or council is of the opinion that there is a reasonable expectation that such streets will be extended to a suitable outlet when the adjacent property is platted. If the commission or council permits the platting of the dead-end streets with the expectation of such future extension, the commission or council shall determine whether the subdivider shall provide a temporary turnaround at the closed end of the street. 
(l)  Alleys. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential areas, but may be permitted or required in commercial or industrial areas for the purpose of service access, such as for offstreet parking and loading. All such alleys shall have a minimum width of 26 feet. A diagonal cutoff shall be made at all acute and right angle intersections of two alleys sufficient to provide an inside turning radius of 30 feet. 
(m)  Street names. Street names shall not be permitted which might cause confusion with names of existing streets in or near the city. Streets that will be continuations of existing streets shall be called by the same names of such existing streets. All names shall be approved by the city council. 
(n)  Building lines and setback lines. Building and setback lines shall conform to the requirements of the city zoning ordinance. 
(o)  Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to at least the following minimum requirements: 
Street type Minimum right-of-way 
(feet) (1) Major streets ..... 100 (2) Collector streets .....  86 (3) Industrial service streets .....  60 (4) Local residential .....  60 (5) Turnaround (loop) street ..... 120 (6) Alley .....  26 (7) Cul-de-sac streets, turnarounds: a. Industrial ..... 110 b. Residential and others .....  80  
Maximum length for residential cul-de-sac streets shall generally be 500 feet. Maximum length for industrial and other cul-de-sac streets may exceed 500 feet subject to the approval of the city council. 
(p)  Horizontal alignment. The centerline of pavement shall coincide with the centerline right-of-way, except for irregular right-of-way widths. 
(q)  Street grades. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grades shall not be less than 0.5 percent. The maximum street grade shall be 5.0 percent, except that the city council may make an exception to this standard on the recommendation of the engineer. 
(r)  Street curvature. The minimum horizontal centerline radii of curved local streets shall be 200 feet. Greater radii may be required for principal streets of a 60-foot right-of-way. Greater tangents shall be required on streets of greater right-of-way. 
(s)  Radii at intersections. Minimum pavement radii at intersections shall be 40 feet at intersections of county primary roads, 25 feet at intersections with major streets of over a 60-foot right-of-way, and 20 feet on local streets. 
(t)  Surface drainage. 
(1)  The preferred plan for yard drainage shall provide for drainage from the front of the lot to the rear of the lot with a minimum grade of one percent and a maximum grade of three percent. Front yard drainage may be authorized by the city superintendent. 
(2)  If it is found to be essential to the economical development of substantial portions of a project, the easement at the rear of the lot may be below the building grade. In this event the grade shall be not less than one percent nor more than three percent and the grade from the house to the street shall be not less than one percent with the building grade being not less than 12 inches above the street grade. 
(3)  Where low easements are essential to the economical development of major portions of the project, the longitudinal grade of such easements shall not be less than four-tenths of one percent and the length of such longitudinal easements shall not exceed 500 feet of continuous drainage, with no more than 100 feet of such distance being upstream from an angle point in the easement. 
(4)  Where required by the city engineer, there shall be provided a four-inch drain with the drain tile being laid in a trench being backfilled with pea gravel or approved bank-run gravel, the depth and outlet for such tile being subject to city approval. 
(u)  Access to streets across ditches. Subdividers shall provide access to all proposed streets across watercourses or ditches in a standard manner approved by the county road commission and the county drain commission. 
(Code 1975,  17-43) 
Sec. 54-58. - Utility and other easements. 
(a)  The subdivider shall contact each public utility involved for preferred locations of easements. Utility easements shall be located preferably along rear property lines, but may be located alongside lot lines and front lot lines if necessary. Utility easements shall not be less than 12 feet in total width, with six feet located on each side of the property line. Utility easements six feet wide are permissible along rear property lines, if such rear property lines abut unplatted land. 
(b)  Drainage easements shall be provided which conform substantially with the lines of any natural watercourses, drainage ditches, channels or streams. Such easements shall be of adequate width for the particular conditions of the site. The planning commission or the city council may consider and impose requirements necessary to provide for rear yard swales, a minimum width eight feet (four feet either side of property line) to be fully constructed by the subdivider to finished slopes and ground elevations (within 0.2 feet) complete with ground cover prior to final approval. The swale, if required, shall be maintained in a permanent drainage easement and is not subject to any alterations once approved. The planning commission or the city council may, if it considers such requirement necessary to the proper development of the subdivision and the circulation of local traffic, require that the drain, if within a public right-of-way, will be tiled and enclosed. 
(Code 1975,  17-44; Ord. No. 1991-01,  1, 1-21-91) 
Sec. 54-59. - Lots. 
(a)  Generally. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. Lots shall be of such size as to permit a variety of house types, to provide side yards for desirable access, light, air, privacy and safety from fire hazards, to provide for setbacks from the street line and to allow sufficient space for household purposes. 
(b)  Access. All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a properly dedicated street. Lots, other than corner lots, normally should not be permitted to front onto two streets. 
(c)  Width. The minimum width of any lot shall be 60 feet, except that greater widths may be required in the zoning ordinance. Where desirable, to plat wedge-shaped lots so as to best utilize a parcel of land, the required lot width shall be measured at the front building line, from and parallel to the front property line, when the front lot line is narrower than the rear lot line. When the rear lot line is narrower than the front line, the width shall be measured at the rear building line and be parallel to the rear property line. 
(d)  Repealed. 
(e)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be provided extra width sufficient to permit the maintenance of building setback lines on both the front and side street lines in order to protect similar setbacks on both the front and side streets which exist or are planned. Where lots have side yards abutting upon a street, on the same side of which other residential lots front in the same block, the lots shall be of such width to permit a side yard setback on the street equivalent to the required front yard setback of the lots fronting on such street. 
(f)  Side lot lines. Side property lines of lots shall generally be perpendicular to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation from this rule will give a better lot plat. Property lines on sides and rear of lots should be straight. 
(g)  Area. The width and depth of lots shall be such that minimum lot areas will be in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(h)  Business or commercial lots. No lot or parcel classified as business or commercial shall be platted that is less than 60 feet in width. The area of such lot or parcel shall be sufficient in size so as to provide sufficient area for offstreet parking and loading in accordance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1975,  17-45; Ord. No. 2005-03,  1, 9-6-05) 
Sec. 54-60. - Blocks. 
(a)  Generally. The size and shape of blocks shall be appropriate for the type of lots and land use proposed. Blocks shall be designed so as to permit good lot orientation, safe street design and economical use of the land. 
(b)  Length. Length of blocks between intersecting streets shall normally be from 400 to 800 feet. This form shall be altered only where the topography of the land makes it advisable to do so in order to protect the public safety and convenience, and in no event shall blocks be less than 300 feet in length. Where blocks exceed 800 feet in length, an easement up to 20 feet in width may be required by the planning commission or council near the center of each block for a pedestrian walkway. 
(c)  Nonresidential blocks. Blocks intended for purposes other than residential shall be especially designed for such purposes and shall have adequate provision for offstreet parking and loading in accordance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1975,  17-46) 
Sec. 54-61. - Open spaces. 
    In the design of the plat, thorough and equitable consideration shall be given by the subdivider and the planning commission to the provision of suitable sites for recreational, school and other public purposes. The location of these areas should conform to the objectives of the comprehensive plan and shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to the land being subdivided and the prospective uses of such land. 
(Code 1975,  17-47) 
Sec. 54-62. - Uses. 
(a)  Control. No property shall be subdivided for residential use if such is considered unsuitable for building purposes by the planning commission or council. 
(b)  Restrictions. Whenever property is subdivided with the intention that it shall have a use more restrictive than that designated in the zoning ordinance, such use shall be stated in an application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance or in a separate statement filed with the planning commission. Conformance with the objectives of the comprehensive plan shall be required so as to ensure general uniformity of land uses within blocks and neighborhoods. 
(c)  Conformance with zoning ordinance. Property use and area restrictions must be in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Business and commercial lots. Business or commercial lots, when platted, shall bear a reasonable relation in number to the probable number of families constituting the purchasing power of the surrounding tributary area. The planning commission shall recommend the location of business and commercial lots in accordance with the comprehensive development plan and the zoning ordinance. 
(e)  Land subject to flooding. Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which are subject to flooding or inundation by stormwater shall be clearly shown on the final plat. Such land shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other purposes or uses as may increase damage to health, life or property, or unduly aggravate the flood hazard. All subdivision proposals for land located in any of the flood hazard areas of the city as determined by article 16-5 of the zoning ordinance shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. All such proposals shall provide for adequate drainage to reduce or eliminate exposure to flood hazards, and base flood elevation data shall be provided for all such proposals for development which are greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Code 1975,  17-48) 
Sec. 54-63. - Utilities and improvements. 
    In order to provide healthful, clean and desirable living conditions, the subdivider shall be entirely responsible for installing the following site improvements, or shall furnish to the city a surety bond executed by a reputable surety company authorized to do business in the state, sufficient to permit the completion of all contemplated improvements, before a plat shall be accepted by the city: 
(1)  Storm drainage. All subdivisions shall have storm drains which shall be approved by the municipal engineer and governing body, and which shall conform to the following standards: 
a.  Storm sewers shall be provided in such a manner that each lot, outlot or parcel is serviced by a storm sewer. An outlet shall be provided for each lot, outlot or parcel for the purpose of connecting the sump pump discharge of the storm and ground water collected in footing drains. 
b.  The storm sewer described in this subsection (1) of this section may be the public storm sewer located in the street right-of-way or a private storm sewer located in an easement at the rear of a lot, outlot, or parcel or combination of the same. A storm sewer located in an easement at the rear of a lot, outlot, or parcel or combination of the same will not be maintained, repaired or replaced by the municipality or government agency, nor shall the municipality or government agency have any responsibility for such storm sewer, except for such duties as may be imposed upon the municipality or government agency by statute, ordinance or regulation. 
c.  If repairs are needed to any portion of the storm drainage system not located in the street right-of-way as determined by the city, and if the benefiting lot owners do not make the repairs, the city may, at its sole discretion, proceed to make the repairs itself or contract for the repairs, and the benefiting lot owners shall be responsible for and shall pay their proportionate share of the cost for such repairs. If the city shall make such repairs or cause such repairs to be made as provided in this subsection, the city shall bill all benefiting lot owners for their proportionate share of the costs of such repairs and all benefiting lot owners shall pay their proportionate share of the costs of such repairs to the city within 30 days after the date of billing. It is further provided that if a benefiting lot owner shall fail or refuse to pay his proportionate share of the costs of repairs as determined by the city and as provided in this subsection, such unpaid amount shall become a lien upon the subject property of the nonpaying lot owner and such lien may be collected by the city in the same manner as taxes are collected by the city, or in any other manner permitted by law. 
d.  A sump pump outlet must be provided to each lot (lot line or easement line) connected by an approved method to a storm sewer, rear yard underdrain, or storm sewer structure immediately adjacent to the lot. The sump pump outlet pipe shall be a type intended for underground use and shall have a minimum crushing strength of 1,000 pounds per linear foot. Minimum grade is 1.0 percent. 
e.  Rear yard drainage is required in all residential subdivisions, except where otherwise authorized. 
1.  All catchbasins, rear yard underdrains, swales and sump pumps shall drain to the storm sewer described in subsections (1)a through c of this section. 
2.  Rear yard swales shall be no longer than 500 feet before being intercepted by a standard catchbasin and shall have a minimum grade of 1.0 percent. 
3.  Rear yard swales more than 120 feet in length must not be graded straight down to a street without being intercepted by a standard catchbasin and a low point shall be established. 
4.  Side yard swales between houses must be a minimum of 0.5 foot lower than the lower adjacent house grade. 
5.  Where topography prevents rear yard drainage from being practical, rear to front drainage may drain only the specific lot in question. Other bordering lots are not to drain across this lot. Lots with rear to front drainage must have swales around the house with a swale grade of 2.0 percent or more. 
(2)  Sanitary sewerage system. Where provided, the location and design of all trunkline and lateral sanitary sewers and any other necessary appurtenances such as pumping stations shall first be approved by the municipal engineer and all applicable reviewing agencies, and all work shall be carried out under the supervision of the engineer. 
(3)  Water systems. The location and design of water mains with house connections, the installation of fire hydrants, and any other necessary appurtenances shall first be approved by the municipal engineer and all applicable reviewing agencies as to suitability and all work shall be carried out under the direction of the city engineer. 
(4)  Street construction. All streets shall conform to the following criteria which shall be considered as minimum standards: 
a.  Commercial and industrial streets. Commercial and industrial streets shall be of concrete surface and integral curb. The design standard relating to width and depth shall be reviewed by the municipal engineer and approved by the city council. 
b.  Residential streets. Pavement width of residential streets shall not be less than 28 feet from back of curb to back of curb. Greater widths may be required and therefore are subject to review by the municipal engineer and approval by the city council. All work shall be carried out under the direction of the city engineer. The following types of construction may be reviewed and approved as provided in this section: 
1.  Deep strength asphalt pavement with concrete curb and gutter: Minimum thickness of the deep strength asphalt shall be six inches in street construction of this type. Such pavement shall be constructed on a granular base, which requirement shall depend upon the type of soil common to the area where the pavement is located. 
2.  Asphalt on compacted granular base: Minimum thickness of the asphalt shall be 21/2 inches in street construction of this type. Such pavement shall be constructed on a compacted, aggregate base which shall be not less than eight inches thick. 
3.  Concrete with integral curb and gutter: Minimum thickness of street construction of this type shall be not less than six inches. Such pavement shall be constructed on a granular base, the requirements for which shall depend upon the nature of the base, soil conditions and related engineering considerations. 
c.  Parking. In order to provide adequate traffic flow and emergency vehicle ingress and egress, the subdivider shall consider the following pavement widths and onstreet parking restrictions: 
Curbed streets Face-to-face 
of curb (feet) No parking ..... 27 Parallel parking, one side ..... 31 Parallel parking, both sides ..... 39  
If parking is to be permitted on one side the restriction shall apply as follows: 
1.  Streets of a north-south direction shall have no parking permitted on the west side of the street. 
2.  Streets of an east-west direction shall have no parking permitted on the south side of the street. 
(5)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required on at least one side of each street subject to council approval and conform to the following standards: 
a.  Minimum width shall be four feet. 
b.  Walks shall be located no closer than one foot from property lines. 
c.  Construction: 
1.  Four-inch clear sand base. 
2.  Four-inch-thick concrete with six-inch thickness at driveway crossings. 
3.  Concrete shall be no less than four parts sand or gravel and one part cement. 
(6)  Utilities; requirements for underground wiring. All local distribution lines including telephone, electric, television, and other similar services distributed by wire or cable shall be placed entirely underground throughout the area subdivided, except for main supply and perimeter feed distribution lines which serve areas outside the subdivided area, and except for surface facilities related to underground service, such as above ground closures or terminals. Such wires, conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the proprietor or within dedicated public ways. 
Overhead local distribution lines within such subdivided area may be permitted upon written recommendation from the planning commission and approval of the city council at the time of final plat approval where it is determined that underground lines would not be consistent with the general welfare, health, safety, plat design and character of the subdivision. 
All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the state public service commission. All drainage and underground utility installations which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor. 
(Code 1975,  17-49; Ord. No. 1991-02,  1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 1996-17,  1, 12-2-96) 
Sec. 54-64. - Protection of natural features. 
    Due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as large trees, exceptionally fine groves of trees, watercourses, scenic points, historic spots, and similar community assets, which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision. 
(Code 1975,  17-50) 
Sec. 54-65. - Application of subdivision act. 
  
Chapters 55-57 - RESERVED 
Chapter 58 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610, MSA 9.2305, 9.2306, 9.2310. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(a)  Adopted. The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference. MCL 257.625(1)(C) of the Vehicle Code is specifically adopted by reference, pursuant to MCL 117.3(k). 
(b)  References in Code. References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the city. 
(c)  Penalties. The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference. The City of St. Clair may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days; provided, however, that a violation of MCL [257.]625(1)(C) is punishable by one or more of the following: 
(i)  Community service of not more than 360 hours. 
(ii)  Imprisonment for not more than 180 days. 
(iii)  A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00. 
(Ord. No. 2000-02,  1, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 2012-05,  3, 6-18-12) 
Secs. 58-2-58-8. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE 

Sec. 58-9. - Code adopted. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships and villages promulgated by the director of state police and published in the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code and amendments as published in the Quarterly Supplement No. 5 to the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code, in accordance with Act No. 62 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956 (MCL 257.951 et seq., MSA 9.2651 et seq.), is adopted by reference as in this article modified. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt Uniform Traffic Code, MCL 257.951, MSA 9.2651. 
Sec. 58-10. - References in code. 
    References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships and Villages adopted by reference in this article to "governmental unit" mean the city. 
Secs. 58-12-58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 2008-04, adopted Dec. 15, 2008, repealed  58-26 in its entirety. Former  58-26 pertained to parking prohibited between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. during certain months, and derived from Code 1975. 
Sec. 58-27. - Traffic ticket for parking violations. 
    The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer or other designated employee of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the traffic ticket or notice of violation was issued must respond to the police department. It shall also indicate the address of the police department, the hours during which the police department is open, and the amount of penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued. If the violation notice has not been disposed of by the police department within the specified time, the matter shall be referred to the district court and processed as a civil infraction as authorized by section 2.10b of the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(Code 1975,  12-3) 
Sec. 58-28. - Parking prohibited on city rights-of-way. 
    No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle on the city right-of-way, which is defined as the city-owned area lying between the curb and the sidewalk, or, when no sidewalk is present, from the curb to the property line, commonly referred to as the parkway, be it paved or unpaved. A violation of this section shall be a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09,  1, 9-6-11) 
Sec. 58-29. - Parking space defined. 
    Parking spaces for all residential uses shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet (9'  18'), and shall be on a hard-surfaced driveway, or in a garage. Cars shall not be located in the required front yard, unless the zoning administrator finds that the site cannot be physically altered to provide parking which is not in the required front yard. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09,  1, 9-6-11) 
Secs. 58-30-58-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SNOW EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 58-41. - Prohibition. 
    No person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any portion of any roadway within any area designated within the city during a snow emergency, or park or allow to remain parked any vehicle in violation of any parking restriction instituted as part of a declared snow emergency as provided in this division. The registered owner of any such vehicle shall be responsible for the cost of removal. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  1, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 58-42. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief is the chief of police, or in his/her absence, the duly authorized representative. 
    Director is the director of public services, or in his/her absence, the duly authorized representative. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder or berm. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Superintendent is the city superintendent, or in his absence, his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  1, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 58-43. - Procedure for declaration. 
(a)  Whenever the director, chief, or superintendent finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau or other weather service that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on city streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the director, chief, or superintendent shall put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or all city streets by declaring it in a manner prescribed in this section. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), a parking prohibition shall automatically go into effect on any street on which there has been an accumulation of snow and ice of four inches or more. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  1, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 58-44. - Notice of declaration. 
(a)  The director, chief, or superintendent, upon declaring a snow emergency, shall cause a public announcement of such parking prohibitions and/or restrictions and the areas designated for said restrictions by means of broadcasts and/or telecasts from various commercial stations serving the city and on the public access channel of any cable television franchisee servicing the city. 
(b)  The director shall prepare such declaration of snow emergency and cause it to be posted in the city hall for such period of time as the snow emergency regulations are in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  1, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 58-45. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove or cause the removal and/or impounding of any vehicle that obstructs or otherwise impedes traffic on any street in the city. Such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the police department by means of towing to a vehicle impound. The chief is authorized to engage the services of any private towing company to remove vehicles under the direction of a member of the police department where the same are found in violation of traffic ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(b)  Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same from the custody of the police department said owner shall furnish evidence of identity and ownership and shall sign a receipt and pay a fee to cover cost of removal plus the cost of storage; said owner shall pay an additional storage fee for each day the vehicle is stored in the vehicle impound in excess of the first 24 hours the vehicle is impounded. 
(c)  Whenever this section is alleged to have been violated, the chief or the appropriate designee shall have the authority to issue and serve an appearance ticket upon the violator if they have reasonable cause to believe that a violation has been committed. Such appearance ticket shall be in the form authorized by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  1, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 58-46. - Stalled vehicle. 
    Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, whether or not in violation of this section, on any city street on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway. No person shall abandon or leave his/her vehicle in the roadway, regardless of whether he/she indicates by raising the hood or otherwise that the vehicle is stalled, except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline station, or other place of assistance and return without delay. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  1, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 58-47. - Termination. 
    Once in effect, a prohibition under this division shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the individual declaring the snow emergency in accordance with this section, except that any street area which has become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of the entire block shall be automatically excluded. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  1, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 58-48. - Exemptions. 
    In all areas of the city , an owner of a motor vehicle who resides at premises which do not have a driveway shall be exempted from the requirement to move the motor vehicle in the event of a snow emergency; however, residents in the area are required to park their vehicles as close to the curb as possible to make room for snow plows and other emergency vehicles. Motor vehicles with handicapped stickers and duly authorized emergency response vehicles shall also be exempt from the provisions of this division. In addition, vehicles parked on streets or portions of streets specifically excepted from the director's declaration of emergency shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  1, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 58-49. - Relationship to other laws. 
    Any provision of this division which becomes effective by declaration as prescribed above upon the occurrence of certain weather conditions shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedent over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  1, 12-15-08) 
Sec. 58-50. - Penalty. 
    A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04,  1, 12-15-08) 
Secs. 58-51-58-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 

Sec. 58-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial vehicle means and includes all motor vehicles used for the transportation of passengers for hire, or constructed or used for transportation of goods, wares or merchandise, and/or all motor vehicles designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
    Highway or street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Motor vehicle means and includes every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
    Person means every natural person, firm, company, agency, copartnership, trust, association, organization, or corporation and their legal successors. 
    Truck means and includes every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Vehicle means and includes every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices exclusively moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and excepting a mobile home as defined in section 2 of Act No. 419 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 125.1102, MSA 19.855(2)), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1992-01,  1, 2-17-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 58-67. - Operating prohibitions and limitations; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall operate or drive, or cause to be operated or driven, a truck or commercial vehicle having a gross weight in excess of 20,000 pounds upon any highway or street within the city, except as provided and permitted in this section, in accordance with the following exceptions: 
(1)  On Range Road, Fred Moore Highway, Carney Drive, St. Clair Highway, M-29 and on Clinton Avenue between Fred Moore Highway and M-29 within the city, which such highways and streets are hereby established and declared to be designated local truck traffic routes. Trucks or commercial vehicles having a gross weight in excess of 20,000 pounds shall be permitted to operate and drive on all such designated local truck traffic routes. 
(2)  Trucks or commercial vehicles operated or driven in connection with rendering or providing of emergency medical, rescue, firefighting or law enforcement services to a person or location within the city. 
(3)  Road repair, construction or maintenance trucks or commercial vehicles while involved in the repair, construction or maintenance of highways or streets within the city. 
(4)  Garbage service trucks or commercial vehicles while engaged in the collection of garbage or the providing of garbage collection services to persons or locations within the city. 
(5)  Public utility vehicles while engaged in the installation, construction, repair or maintenance of a public utility or public improvement within the city. 
(6)  Recreational vehicles owned by persons residing within the city. 
(7)  School buses and public transportation vehicles. 
(8)  Trucks or commercial vehicles while engaged in and for purposes of making deliveries or pickups of materials, manufactured products, goods, wares, merchandise or other items of personal property to or from persons or locations within the city. 
(9)  Trucks or commercial vehicles while engaged in and for purposes of providing services to persons or locations within the city. 
(10)  Trucks or commercial vehicles leaving from or returning to their usual and customary storage location at the owner's or operator's personal residence or commercial or industrial location within the city. 
(11)  Trucks or commercial vehicles being operated or driven to or from the owner's or operator's business located within the city for purposes related to such business. 
(b)  All vehicles operated or driven on any highway or street within the city under or pursuant to any of the exceptions set forth in subsections (a)(3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10) or (11) of this section, which such highway or street is not a designated local truck traffic route, shall be driven in such a manner so as to enter the city using a designated local truck traffic route and proceed to its destination within the city by the most direct route and shall thereafter leave such destination by driving to the nearest designated local truck traffic route within the city by using the most direct route to such designated local truck traffic route, and all such vehicles leaving the city shall do so by way of a designated local truck traffic route. 
(c)  Nothing contained in the exceptions set forth above in subsections (a)(1) through (11) of this section, inclusive, shall permit or be construed to permit any violation within the city of any laws or statutes of the state applicable to trucks, motor vehicles, commercial vehicles, highways or streets, or to weight limitations or restrictions imposed by any laws or statutes of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1992-01,  2, 2-17-92) 
Sec. 58-68. - Weight of vehicles; police officers authorized to stop and weigh vehicles. 
    A city police officer, having reason to believe that the weight of a truck or commercial vehicle being operated or driven within the city is unlawful and in violation of this article, may require the operator or driver to stop and submit to a weighing of such truck or commercial vehicle by means of either portable or stationary scales approved and sealed by the state department of agriculture as a legal weighing device and/or may require that the truck or commercial vehicle be driven to the nearest weighing station of the department of state highways and transportation for the purpose of weighing such truck or commercial vehicle to determine if the weight of the truck or commercial vehicle is unlawful and in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1992-01,  3, 2-17-92) 
Sec. 58-69. - Duty of operator or driver to stop and provide information to police officer. 
    Upon the request of a police officer of the city, it shall be the duty of any person operating or driving a truck or commercial vehicle within the city to stop and to answer any questions asked by such police officer regarding the weight of the truck or commercial vehicle, its destination and its point of origin, and such person shall also present and show to such police officer any requested log book, weight slips, delivery slips and other written documentation or evidence of destination or point of origin for such police officer's examination. 
(Ord. No. 1992-01,  4, 2-17-92) 
Sec. 58-70. - Civil infraction; civil fine and costs for violation of article. 
    A person who violates this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The court having jurisdiction in such matters may order a person responsible for such a civil infraction to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00 and costs of not more than $100.00, as shall be determined by the court. 
(Ord. No. 1992-01,  5, 2-17-92) 
Secs. 58-71-58-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISABLED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 58-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disabled motor vehicle means any vehicle which is incapable of being self-propelled upon the public streets, or which does not meet the requirements for operation upon the public streets, including a current license. 
(Code 1975,  12-47) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 58-92. - Parking, storing, repairing, etc., generally. 
(a)  No person shall permit any disabled motor vehicle to be parked, stored, placed or allowed to remain within the city in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Storage, repair and servicing of disabled motor vehicles not authorized in this article, and the tearing down, stripping or junking of motor vehicles shall be permitted only where and when such use is specifically authorized, permitted or licensed under other ordinances of the city and in accordance therewith. 
(Code 1975,  12-48) 
Sec. 58-93. - Prohibited on streets; exception. 
    Disabled motor vehicles shall not be permitted in the rights-of-way of the streets, alleys or highways within the city; provided however, that this shall not apply to towing or similar transporting of such vehicles; and provided further, that a reasonable time, not to exceed 48 hours from time of disability, shall be permitted for the removal or servicing of a disabled vehicle in an emergency caused by accident or sudden breakdown of the vehicle. 
(Code 1975,  12-49) 
Sec. 58-94. - Prohibited in front yards; exception. 
    Disabled motor vehicles shall not be permitted in a front yard, as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city; provided, however, that a reasonable time, not to exceed 48 hours from the time of disability, shall be permitted for the removal or servicing of a disabled vehicle in any emergency caused by accident or sudden breakdown of the vehicle. 
(Code 1975,  12-50) 
Sec. 58-95. - Storing, servicing or repairing in side or rear yards. 
    One disabled motor vehicle may be permitted in a side or rear yard of a residential, commercial or industrial lot as an accessory use to the main use of the lot; provided, that such vehicle is not located in any open space required by the zoning laws. Service and repair work may be performed on such vehicle and, incidental thereto, parts, tools and equipment may be stored and used. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as authorizing the disassembling, tearing down or scrapping of a motor vehicle, or to permit one motor vehicle to be scavenged or stripped for parts for use on another motor vehicle. Provided, however, that a disabled vehicle shall not be permitted to remain outside of a building for a period in excess of 30 days on any lot used for residential purposes or on that portion of any lot within 20 feet of an abutting lot used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1975,  12-51) 
Sec. 58-96. - Storing, servicing or repairing within accessory garage. 
    Storage, service and repair of a disabled motor vehicle which is conducted entirely within the confines of an accessory garage shall be permitted; provided, that such vehicle is the property of the owner or occupier of the lot and that such use is not a commercial use of the property, unless such use is authorized by other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1975,  12-52) 
Sec. 58-97. - Enforcement of article. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce this article; provided, however, that the chief building inspector and the zoning enforcement officer shall assist and cooperate in such enforcement. 
(Code 1975,  12-53) 
Sec. 58-98. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  12-54; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 58-99-58-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SNOWMOBILES 

Sec. 58-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Highway or street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained where any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Operate means to ride in or on, and be in actual physical control of, a snowmobile. 
    Operator means any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile. 
    Pedestrian walkway means any sidewalk, path, lane or any portion of land publicly maintained where any part thereof is designated or ordinarily used by the public for purposes of pedestrian travel. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, the state and any of its agencies or subdivisions, and any body of persons whether incorporated or not. 
    Public right-of-way means that portion of a highway less the roadway and any shoulder. 
    Roadway means that portion of a highway improved, designated or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    Shoulder means that portion of a highway on either side of a roadway which is normally plowed of snow for the safety and convenience of vehicular traffic. 
    Snowmobile means any motor-driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow or ice, of a type which utilizes sled-type runners or skies or an endless belt tread, or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated. 
(Code 1975,  12-60) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 58-122. - Registration and identification. 
    A snowmobile shall not be operated in the city unless it has been registered in accordance with 1968 PA 74, as amended, being MCL 257.1501 et seq., MSA 9.3200(1) et seq. In any proceedings for the violation of this article involving prohibited operation or conduct, the registration number displayed on a snowmobile shall constitute prima facie evidence that the snowmobile owner was the person operating the snowmobile at the time of such violation, unless proof to the contrary is provided by the apprehension of the actual operator. 
(Code 1975,  12-67) 
Sec. 58-123. - Operating restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any street, alleyway or other public right-of-way within the city; provided, that for the purpose of ingress or egress to a snowmobile area, a snowmobile may be operated within the street or street right-of-way under the following conditions: 
(1)  The snowmobile is being operated in a direct route to or from a legal snowmobile area. 
(2)  The snowmobile is being operated with the flow of traffic and in the extreme right-hand side of the street or shoulder area, excluding pedestrian walkways. 
(3)  The person operating the snowmobile comes to a complete stop before crossing any street or right-of-way, and all crossing of streets and rights-of-way shall be at right angles thereto. 
(4)  When traveling within a street or right-of-way, the snowmobile shall not be operated at a speed greater than the minimum required to maintain forward movement. 
(5)  No snowmobile shall be operated on State Highway M-29, St. Clair Highway or Fred W. Moore Highway, except to cross over at right angles from a side intersecting street. 
(Code 1975,  12-61) 
Sec. 58-124. - Signs to be erected. 
    The chief of police shall erect, or cause to be erected, a sign identifying the city limits on each street leading into the city, at the point where such street intersects with the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1975,  12-62) 
Sec. 58-125. - Age restrictions for operators; violations. 
    A parent or legal guardian shall not permit his child who is under the age of 12 years to operate a snowmobile without the direct supervision of an adult, except on land owned or under the control of the parent or legal guardian. A person who is at least 12 but less than 16 years of age may operate a snowmobile in the city only if he is under the direct supervision of a person who is 18 years of age or older, or if he has in his immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the state department of natural resources, or unless he is on land owned or under the control of his parent or legal guardian. An owner of a snowmobile shall not permit his snowmobile to be operated contrary to this section. 
(Code 1975,  12-64) 
Sec. 58-126. - Prohibited operations. 
    A person shall not operate a snowmobile: 
(1)  Upon any public school property without the express permission of the board of education. 
(2)  On any railroad or railroad right-of-way, except railroad, public utility or law enforcement personnel when in the performance of their duties. 
(3)  On or across any cemetery or burial ground. 
(4)  Within 100 feet of a slide, ski or skating area, except for the purpose of servicing the area or for a medical emergency. 
(5)  While under the influence of, or while one's ability to operate a snowmobile is visibly impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating beverages or drugs of any kind, or combination thereof. 
(6)  In a careless or reckless way, or with disregard for the safety of persons or property, or at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard for existing conditions. 
(7)  Within 100 feet of a dwelling between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., at a speed greater than the minimum required to maintain forward movement. 
(8)  In or upon the lands of another without the written consent of the owner, as provided by state law. 
(9)  To hunt, pursue, worry or kill any wild bird or animal within the city. 
(10)  In any public park or lots, or any lands open to the use of the public for purposes other than vehicular traffic, including sidewalks. 
(Code 1975,  12-63) 
Sec. 58-127. - Allowing certain persons to use snowmobile prohibited. 
    A snowmobile owner, dealer or rental agent shall not sell, lease, rent or otherwise allow any person to operate a snowmobile who is either under the influence of any intoxicating beverage or drug, or combination thereof, or whose ability to operate such snowmobile is visibly impaired by consumption of any intoxicating beverage or drug. 
(Code 1975,  12-65) 
Sec. 58-128. - Duty to stop upon signal of uniformed police officer. 
    An operator of a snowmobile who is given by hand, voice, emergency light or siren a visual or audible signal by any uniformed police officer of the city acting in the lawful performance of his duty and directing the operator to bring his snowmobile to a stop, and who willfully fails to obey such direction by increasing his speed, extinguishing his lights, or otherwise attempting to flee or elude the officer, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable under the terms of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  12-68) 
Sec. 58-129. - Penalty. 
    Any person who is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction of violating the terms of this article shall be punished as prescribed by section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  12-69) 
Secs. 58-130-58-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS FOR SHOPPING CENTER PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 58-171. - Finding of fact; authority for article. 
    The city council hereby determines and declares the regulations of parking and traffic control set out in this article as a matter involving the safety of the residents of the city and accordingly does hereby enact the following regulations in conformity with Act 235 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969 (MCL 257.941 et seq., MSA 9.2641 et seq.). 
(Code 1975,  12-29) 
Sec. 58-172. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parking area means an area near or contiguous to a shopping center and used by the public as a means of access to and egress from the stores and business establishments at the shopping center and free parking of motor vehicles of the patrons of such shopping center. 
    Shopping center means a minimum area of three acres of land on which there is located one or more stores or business establishments and where there is provided public parking facilities. 
(Code 1975,  12-30) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 58-173. - Traffic control orders and devices. 
    The city council, working in cooperation with the shopping center board, is hereby authorized to designate parking spaces, loading zones, traffic lanes, prohibited areas and limited parking areas within the parking area of a shopping center and to erect such signs as it shall deem necessary to give notice to the public of such control orders; and to erect or cause to have erected and to maintain any stop signs, yield right-of-way signs or other traffic control devices as it shall deem necessary to implement this article. No person shall drive or park a motor vehicle in violation of any traffic control order or traffic control device as may be established pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1975,  12-31) 
Sec. 58-174. - Speed limit. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle in a parking area at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. 
(Code 1975,  12-32) 
Sec. 58-175. - Parking generally. 
    No person shall park any motor vehicle in other than a designated parking space and other than in a safe and prudent manner in a parking area. 
(Code 1975,  12-33) 
Sec. 58-176. - Leaving vehicle unattended for more than 48 hours. 
    No person shall leave any vehicle unattended for a period in excess of 48 hours in a parking area. 
(Code 1975,  12-34) 
Sec. 58-177. - Unnecessary noise. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle in a parking area with unnecessary noise, or start, move or turn such motor vehicle, or apply the brakes or the power on the motor vehicle, or in any manner operate it so as to cause the tires to squeal or the tires or vehicle to make any noise not usually connected with the operation of the motor vehicle, except in the case of an emergency. 
(Code 1975,  12-35) 
Sec. 58-178. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as prescribed in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(b)  The city council may, by resolution, establish a schedule of fines for violation of section 58-175. 
(Code 1975,  12-36) 
Secs. 58-179-58-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 58-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle means any device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is over 20 inches in diameter. 
(Code 1975,  4-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 58-202. - Authority of police department to number frames. 
    The police department may place numbers on the frames of bicycles which shall be distinctive to the city. 
(Code 1975,  4-6) 
Sec. 58-203. - Removing, altering, etc., frame numbers. 
    No person shall wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1975,  4-7) 
Sec. 58-204. - License-Required. 
(a)  No person who resides within this city shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license decal is attached thereto as provided in this article. 
(b)  A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed and a license decal is attached thereto as provided in this article. 
(Code 1975,  4-19) 
Sec. 58-205. - Same-Application; fee. 
    Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be made to the chief of police. A license fee as set by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid to the city before a license shall be granted. 
(Code 1975,  4-20) 
Sec. 58-206. - Same-Issuance. 
(a)  Generally. The chief of police, upon receiving proper application therefor, is authorized to issue a permanent bicycle license. 
(b)  Not to issue when applicant not entitled to possession of bicycle. The chief of police shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner of, or entitled to the possession of, such bicycle. 
(c)  Inspection. The chief of police, or an officer assigned such responsibility, shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the bicycle and shall refuse a license for any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Code 1975,  4-21-4-23) 
Sec. 58-207. - License decal-Generally. 
(a)  The chief of police, upon issuing a bicycle license, shall also issue a license decal bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle and the name of the city. 
(b)  The chief of police shall cause such license decal to be firmly attached to the frame of the bicycle. 
(c)  No person shall remove a license decal from a bicycle except upon a transfer of ownership or in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in the city. 
(Code 1975,  4-24) 
Sec. 58-208. - Same-Surrender or transfer upon change of ownership of bicycle. 
    Upon the sale or other transfer of ownership of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license decal and shall either surrender such license decal to the chief of police or may, upon proper application and upon payment of the additional fee as set by resolution of the 
city council from time to time, have such decal assigned to another bicycle owned by the applicant. 
(Code 1975,  4-25) 
Sec. 58-209. - Parents and guardians not to permit violation of article by children. 
    No parent or guardian of any child, shall authorize or knowingly permit any such child to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975,  4-4) 
Sec. 58-210. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  4-5; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 58-211. - Dealers' reports. 
    Each person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the chief of police of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold; 
(2)  A description of such bicycle by name or make; 
(3)  The frame number thereof; and 
(4)  The number of the license decal, if any, found thereon. 
(Code 1975,  4-8) 
Sec. 58-212. - Records. 
    The chief of police shall keep a record of: 
(1)  The number of each license; 
(2)  The date issued; 
(3)  The name and address of the person to whom issued; 
(4)  The number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued; and 
(5)  A record of all bicycle license fees collected by him. 
(Code 1975,  4-26) 
Sec. 58-213. - Rules and regulations to implement article. 
    The chief of police shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of this article, including the inspection and minimum safety standards for bicycles licensed pursuant to this article, which rules and regulations shall be uniform and not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975,  4-2) 
Sec. 58-214. - Enforcement. 
    The chief of police and his authorized agents shall be the enforcing officers and shall be charged with the enforcement of this article and the rules and regulations promulgated under this article. 
(Code 1975,  4-3) 
Secs. 58-215-58-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EMERGENCY RESPONSE REIMBURSEMENT 

Sec. 58-251. - Purpose. 
    The city has determined that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic accidents in the city involve drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquors and/or a controlled substance. In addition, the city finds that in traffic accidents involving drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquors and/or a controlled substance there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and/or financial burden is placed upon the city police, public service, firefighting and rescue services by persons who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquors and/or a controlled substance. 
Sec. 58-252. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(a)  Emergency response shall mean: 
(1)  The providing, sending and/or utilizing public service, police, firefighting, and/or rescue services by the city to an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or any controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic liquor and any controlled substance; or 
(2)  The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when the driver was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or any controlled substance. 
(b)  Expense for an emergency response under this article shall include the following: 
(1)  The salaries or wages, including overtime pay, of law enforcement personnel associated with an emergency response, including arresting an individual, processing the person after arrest, preparing reports on the arrest, investigating the incident, and collecting and analyzing evidence, including the administration, provision and analysis of any chemical tests to determine blood alcohol content or the presence of a controlled substance. 
(2)  The charges levied by the fire department and emergency medical service personnel, for time spent responding to and providing firefighting, rescue, and emergency medical services, and for medical supplies lost or expended, in relation to an emergency response set forth in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section. 
(3)  All legal costs, including attorney fees and the payment of city personnel to attend court hearings, incurred by the city in prosecuting charges filed as a result of an emergency response. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 58-253. - Liability for expense of an emergency response. 
(a)  Person responsible. Any person who, while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or any controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic liquor and any controlled substance, operates a motor vehicle which results in an emergency response as defined in this article shall be responsible and/or liable for the expenses of the emergency response. 
(b)  Presumptions. For the purpose of this article, a person is under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic liquor and any controlled substance, when his physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary prudence. Further, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor if a chemical analysis of his blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in his blood was in excess of 7/100 of one percent. 
(c)  Charge against person. The expenses incurred by the city as a result of an emergency response shall be charged to the person liable for the expenses under the terms of this article. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied. 
(d)  Cost recovery schedule. The city shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of costs specifying the expenses associated with an emergency response. This schedule shall be available to the public from either the city clerk or the chief of police or his designee. 
(e)  Billing. The chief of police, or his designee, may within ten days of receiving itemized costs, or any part thereof, incurred by the city for an emergency response, submit a bill for the costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this section. The bill shall require full payment in 30 days from the date of service. 
(f)  Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs. Any failure by the person described in this section as liable for the expense of an emergency response, to pay the bill within 30 days of service shall be considered a default. In case of default, the city may commence a civil suit to recover the expenses and any costs allowed by law. 
Sec. 58-254. - Conflict with criminal laws. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge or reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including fines imposed by a judge under the state vehicle code, or Uniform Traffic Code, on a driver for operating a motor vehicle under the influence of an alcoholic liquor and/or a controlled substance. 
Chapters 59-61 - RESERVED 
Chapter 62 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; subdivisions, ch. 54. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 62-26. - Legislative findings. 
(a)  Necessity for potable water. The city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms that the businesses, industries, governmental and charitable agencies and residents located in the city need to have potable and otherwise usable water. 
(b)  Availability of potable water. The city council further has previously found, and currently reaffirms, that the supply of potable water available from private wells within the city is insufficient to assure that all businesses, industries, governmental and charitable agencies, and residents will have sufficient potable water available for their use and other water necessary for industrial and fire prevention and control unless the city offers water to all properties located within the city. 
(c)  Method for measuring use-Water supply services. Based on advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms, that the most precise method, given available technology, of measuring the use of the water supply from the system by any user is by a meter or meters installed and controlled by the city. 
(d)  Continuation of service. The city council has previously found, and further currently reaffirms that, in order to provide and continue to provide clean potable and other usable water to all customers of the system, in quantities necessary for all varieties of use, it is necessary from time to time to install improvements, enlargements, extensions and repairs to the system. 
(e)  Purpose of charges. The charges and fees for the use of and connection to the system are hereby established for the purpose of recovering the cost of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, and operation of the system and to comply with federal and state safe drinking water acts and related regulations, to provide for the payment of principal of and interest on any bounds authorized to be issued as and when the same become due and payable, to create a bond and interest redemption fund therefor, to provide a fund for reasonable and necessary improvements to the system, to provide a fund for equipment replacement and to provide for such other funds as are necessary to meet contractual obligations of the city. Such charges and fees shall be made in accordance with the purposes herein described as well as the following: 
(1)  All premises connected directly or indirectly to the system, except as hereinafter provided, shall be charged and shall make payments to the city in amounts computed on the basis of this chapter. 
(2)  The charges, rates and fees for water service by the system are established herein to adequately provide for bond requirements and to ensure that the system does not operate at a deficit. 
(3)  The system staff or designated parties shall periodically review the charges, rates, fees, rules and regulations of the system, which review shall be completed not less than one time per fiscal year. Results of the review shall be reported to the city council with recommendations for any adjustments. 
(4)  The charges, rates and fees shall be set so as to recover costs from users in reasonable proportion to the cost of serving those users. 
(f)  Proportionality, fairness, and benefits of charges, rates and fees. The city council has previously found and further currently reaffirms that the fairest and most reasonable method of providing for the operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvements of the system is to charge each user, based in all cases on amount of use, for the costs of: 
(1)  Retiring debt secured by the net revenues of the system issued to pay for improvements and replacements to the system; 
(2)  Ongoing repair, replacement and improvement and budgeted as part of the annual costs of the system; and 
(3)  Operation, administration and maintenance costs of the system. 
    The city has investigated several methods of apportioning the costs of the water service provided by the system. Based on its investigation and on the advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found, and currently re-affirms, that to ensure the stability and viability of the system for the benefit of its users, the fairest and most accurate way to apportion the costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and improvement of the system is to charge each user: (i) a connection fee and a capital charge for water service when such user's property is first connected to the system; (ii) a commodity rate for the use of water; (iii) a readiness-to-serve charge; and (iv) other charges and costs for services which are equivalent to the cost of providing such services. The city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms, that the rates and charges currently in effect accurately apportion the fixed and variable costs of the system among the users of the system and that the commodity rate and the readiness-to-serve charges each provide actual benefits to such users in the form of ready access to water service that would be unavailable if such charges were not charged. 
    In addition to the findings set forth above, the city council has previously found and currently reaffirms that the capital charge reflects the depreciated capital costs of the system, previously paid by the city and the system, less grants, attributable to each new user and that the opportunity to connect to the system provides actual benefits to each new user equal to or greater than the amount of such charges. Furthermore, the city council has previously found and currently re-affirms, that the charges imposed by the system are sufficient to meet the short-term capital improvement needs of the system. 
(g)  Design life of improvements. Based on the advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found and currently re-affirms that any improvements to or capital expenditures for the system paid for by rates and charges did not, at the time such improvements were constructed and financed, have an expected design life that would exceed the term of the respective bonds issued to finance such improvements or capital expenditures. 
(h)  Charges for non-residents. 
(1)  Contracts for water service. The city has previously entered, and may continue to enter into contracts with municipalities adjacent to the city, to provide service to users of the water supply system located in those municipalities. Rates and charges billed for use by the residents of those municipalities shall be in accordance with the applicable contract. 
(2)  Charges for service to customers outside city where no other contract compensates the city for indirect costs. The city has previously found, and hereby ratifies and confirms, that the total direct and indirect costs of providing service to customers outside the city jurisdiction, where no other contract exists with the governmental units where those customers are located, equals at least two times the rates and charges imposed for direct services and debt service cost to customers located in the city. Indirect costs include payment for capital improvements, extraordinary repairs and replacements for the water supply system benefitting all users of the system and paid for by customers served within the corporate limits of the city or the corporate limits of other municipalities which have entered into contracts with the city for such costs, funding depreciation of the improvements to the water supply system, and fire and police or other protection for the water supply system paid by city taxpayers or by the governmental units with which the city has contracts for water supply. 
(Code 1975,  21-1; Ord. No. 2002-02,  1, 9-26-02) 
Sec. 62-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Backflow means water of questionable quality, wastes, or other contaminants entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow. 
    Cross connection means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which a backflow could occur. 
    Department means Water Department. 
    Main and water main means all pipes other than supply pipes and service pipes. 
    Net revenues means the revenues of the system remaining after deducting the reasonable expenses of administration, operation and maintenance of the system. 
    Premises means the particular property connected to the system including all appurtenant land and improvements. 
    Public water supply means a water supply system operated by a municipality which furnishes water to the public for household or drinking purposes. 
    Readiness-to-serve charge means a charge approximately equal to the proportional fixed costs of the city's water system attributable to each user. 
    Revenues means all of the income derived from the rates charged for the services, facilities and water furnished by the system. 
    Secondary water supply means any water supply that is not a public water supply and including but not limited to a water supply from ground or surface sources not meeting the requirement of Act No. 399 of Public Acts of 1976 (Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act), as amended (MCL 325.1001 to 325.1023), or water from a public water supply which in any way has been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminate or stored in other than an approved storage facility or a private water storage tank supplied from a public water supply unless it is designed and approved for potable water usage. 
    Service pipe means any pipe extending from the property line into a premises, the cost of connection and maintenance of the same being the responsibility of the owner. 
    Service stub means any pipe tapped into a city main and extending to and including the curb stop or valve at the property line. 
    System means the complete water supply system for the city, including all water lines, pumps, supply, storage and treatment facilities, and all other facilities used or useful in the supply and distribution of potable water for domestic, commercial or industrial use, including all appurtenances thereon and including all extensions and improvements thereto which may be acquired. 
    Unit means a single-family home. A two-family structure is the equivalent of two units. In apartment buildings, each apartment is equivalent to one unit. 
(Ord. No. 1997-06,  1, 2-17-97; Ord. No. 2002-02,  1, 9-26-02) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 62-28. - Control of system. 
    The operation, maintenance, alteration, repair and management of the system shall be under the supervision and control of the city. 
(Code 1975,  21-2.1) 
Sec. 62-30. - Free service prohibited. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the system to any person. 
(Code 1975,  21-2.3) 
Sec. 62-31. - Revision of rates. 
    The rates fixed by this article are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation, such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as this article may require. Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts. 
(Code 1975,  21-2.4) 
Sec. 62-32. - Fiscal year operation. 
    The system shall be operated on the fiscal year basis of the city. 
(Code 1975,  21-2.5) 
Sec. 62-33. - Investment of funds. 
    Moneys in any fund or account established by the provisions of this article may be invested in obligations of the United States of America in the manner and subject to the limitations provided in Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), as amended. If such investments are made, the securities representing the investments shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the funds from which such purchase was made. Income received from such investments shall be credited to the fund from which such investments were made. 
(Code 1975,  21-2.6) 
Sec. 62-34. - Service pipe connections. 
(a)  All service pipes shall be type "K" copper or polyethylene (PE) pressure pipe tubing. Polyethylene (PE) pressure pipe and tubing shall be of pressure class 125 or greater. 
(b)  No connection through which water may pass from one property or premises to another shall be permitted even though the ownership of both properties or premises may be the same. 
(c)  Service pipes shall be laid with a minimum of five feet of cover. 
(d)  Fire lines shall be isolated from potable water supply by a double check valve assembly or equivalent. 
(e)  Fire lines directly connected to the city water main shall be flushed every six months at a rage high enough to produce a velocity of three feet per second and flushed long enough to change the water twice. 
(f)  A separate gate value the same size as the meter connections shall be placed on both sides of each meter. Such valves shall be equal in quality to the curb stop or valve at the property line. 
(g)  At the time a water service application is made for a building under construction, applicant must pay a flat rate for water usage as determined by the water superintendent. 
(h)  No person is permitted to turn water on or off at the curb stop except for the purpose of testing his work, in which case the curb stop shall be left in the same position as originally found. 
(i)  A minimum of a one-inch size service line is required to be installed for all new lines that are installed for new or existing structures. 
(Ord. No. 2001-08,  1, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 62-35. - Use of water. 
(a)  No person shall take or use water from a premises other than his own, or a premises of which he has possession. 
(b)  No steam boiler shall be connected directly to a water service pipe. 
(c)  Where one ownership of property is occupied by two or more distinct families, or where a business building is occupied by two or more firms or persons, a single charge for water will be made against the owner of the property for the whole. 
(d)  When more than one meter is served by one water service, all the meters served by that service must operate from a manifold type arrangement approved by the water superintendent. Failure of one dwelling unit in a manifold arrangement to pay for water received will result in a discontinuance of water to that meter. 
(e)  Where a building, originally built as a single building or premises and fitted with one service pipe, but capable of being divided by sale or otherwise, has been or may be hereafter subdivided and each subdivision shall be separately owned, the separate divisions so made must be connected to the main by separate service pipes within 30 days after such division. 
(f)  Where the water has been turned off by the water department for any reason, only the water department shall turn it on again. 
(g)  No person shall obstruct or interfere in any way with any curb stop, valve or fixture connected with the system by placing in, on or about it, building materials, rubbish, soil, shrubbery, flowers or other hindrances to easy and free access thereto. 
Sec. 62-36. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Fire hydrants are provided for the use of the water by fire departments. 
(b)  No person shall open or cause to be opened any fire hydrant without first securing a "Permit to Use Fire Hydrant" at the water office, and making a refundable deposit of $100.00. If the hydrant must be repaired after use, the deposit will be deducted from the total bill and the balance billed to the permit holder. 
(c)  No person shall in any manner obstruct or prevent free access to or place any object, material, snow or debris of any kind within a distance of 20 feet of any hydrant. 
Sec. 62-37. - Water meters. 
(a)  The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or damage by hot water and from injury or interference by any person. 
(b)  Water meters shall remain the property of the city water department and will at all times remain under it's control. A minimum 5/8 by 3/4 size water meter service shall be installed on all new and replacement service lines. All meters shall be required to be connected to remote readers when installed or within 30 days of written notification of the water department. 
(c)  By-passes are required on all two-inch and larger meter installations. By-passes will not be allowed on meters smaller than two inches. 
(d)  If a meter fails to function or to register, the consumer will be charged at the consumption of the previous years time period. 
(e)  When a discrepancy between a remote recorder and a water meter is found, the reading on the water meter dial will be used for billing. 
(f)  All persons are forbidden to interfere with or move a water meter from any service connection without first receiving permission from the water department superintendent. No person shall remove or break any seal on meters or by-pass valves. 
(g)  A consumer may request that his water meter be tested. If the meter is found accurate, a charge equal to the actual cost of the test will be made. If the meter is found defective, it shall be repaired or an accurate meter installed and no charge shall be made. 
(h)  A meter shall be considered accurate if, when tested, it registers not to exceed five percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If a meter registers in excess of five percent more than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered "fast" to that extent. If a meter registers in excess of five percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered "slow" to that extent. 
(i)  If a meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and is determined to register "fast," the city shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to the percent "fast" multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by the consumer within the three months prior to the test. If a meter so tested is determined to register "slow," the department may collect from the consumer a sum equal to the percent "slow" multiplied by the amount of all the bills incurred by the consumer for the prior three months. When the department, on its own initiative, makes a test of a water meter, it shall be done without cost to the consumer, other than his paying the amount due the city for water used by him as above provided if the meter is found to be "slow." 
(Ord. No. 2001-08,  1, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 62-38. - Inspections and inspectors. 
(a)  Inspectors, foremen and employees of the city whose duty it may be to enter upon private premises to make inspection and examination of the pipes, fixtures or attachments used in connection with the water supply, will be provided with a badge or such other credentials as the city may deem proper to identify them as authorized agents of the department. 
(b)  Any officer, inspector, foreman, or other authorized employee of the city shall, upon presentation of the badge or other credentials provided, have free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with water for the purpose of making any inspection thereof, including the examination of the entire water supply and plumbing system upon such premises. No person shall refuse to admit any authorized inspector and employee of the city for any such purpose. In case any authorized employee is refused admittance to any premises, or upon being admitted shall be hindered or prevented in making such examination, or finds evidence that meter tampering or bypass has been performed by the owner/occupant, the city may turn off the water service to such premises forthwith in order to assure that there is no contamination of the public water supply. The water service shall not be resumed until free unobstructed examination of the premises is accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 1999-12,  1, 10-18-99) 
Sec. 62-39. - Mandatory connection to system. 
(a)  Each premises upon which a dwelling or other building is constructed, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall connect to the city water supply system and pay all applicable charges as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The city council may determine an availability or frontage charge to be paid by customers not fronting on a water main based upon the area of the property to be served and the quantity of water required. 
(c)  Existing water lines which do not meet city or health standards may be replaced before water is delivered to the present users and the cost charged against the benefitting property. 
Sec. 62-40. - Liability. 
    Should it become necessary to shut off the water from any section of the system because of accidents or for the purpose of making repairs or in case of construction, the city water department will endeavor to give timely notice to the consumers affected thereby, and will, so far as practical, use its best efforts to prevent inconvenience and damage arising from any such causes, but failure to give such notice will not render the city water department responsible or liable for damages that may result therefrom, or from any other cause. 
Sec. 62-41. - Protection of public water supply generally; labeling of water outlets not supplied by potable system. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this article and by the state and city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING. 
(Code 1975,  21-3) 
Sec. 62-42. - Cross connections with public water supply system. 
(a)  Compliance. A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with existing laws, ordinances and rules including: 
(1)  Act No. 266 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended (MCL 338.901 to 338.917). 
(2)  Laws of the city, including this section and all other sections of this Code pertaining to plumbing, water supply and sewage disposal. 
(3)  Act No. 399 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended, and the Administrative Rules, Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act, which the city adopts by reference. 
(4)  The Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the state department of public health, being sections R325.11401 to R325.11407 of the state administrative code, which the city adopts by reference. 
(b)  Access to premises. A duly authorized representative(s) of the city may access the consumer's premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of reading meters, inspections, making repairs, or installing or removing any or all department apparatus used for rendering service to the consumer. On request, the consumer shall furnish the representative(s) of the city any pertinent information regarding matters concerning water service to the consumer. The refusal to supply such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(c)  Discontinuance of service. The department is authorized to disconnect water service to the consumer, after reasonable notice, for violation of any of the rules and regulations of the department or the provisions of this section, or for non-payment of all or part of a water bill, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of public water supply from cross connections or otherwise. 
(1)  Connections. A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with all state laws, local ordinances and state and local rules, including Act No. 399 of Public Acts 1976, as amended (MCL 325.1001 and 325.1023) and Act No. 266 of Public Acts of 1929, as amended (MCL 338.901 to 338.917) and R325.11401 to R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. A cross connection shall not be made, or be permitted to be made, to a public water supply system. 
(2)  Inspections. The department shall develop a program for the elimination and prevention of cross connections. As part of this program, the department or its designated agent shall cause inspections and reinspection to be made for cross connections to the public water supply. The frequency of inspections and reinspection shall be based on potential health hazards as determined by the department, or its designated agent, to the public water supply through possible cross connections. 
(3)  Protective devices. A consumer shall obtain written approval by the city of any proposed backflow prevention corrective action or protective device before use or installation. The department may require the filing of a backflow device test report, on a periodic basis established by the department, for any backflow prevention devices used by a consumer. All testing and maintenance of consumer's backflow prevention devices shall be at the consumer's own expense and be performed by a person approved by the city. That individual testing the device shall certify the results of his or her testing. Such certification may be required to be part of the backflow prevention device test reports which may be required to be filed with the city. The city shall review backflow device test reports filed with the city but may refuse to review any backflow device test report until the review fee required by the city, if any, has been paid. Reports for which a required review fee, if any, has not been paid and which have not been reviewed, will be treated for purposes of this section in the same manner as a failure to file a report. Failure to file a report required by the department may be deemed evidence of a cross connection. 
(4)  Cross connection program fees. The city may by resolution establish fees to be charged consumers that are reasonably related to the services provided the consumer by the city in the operation of the program for the elimination and prevention of cross connections. Any such fees may be added to, and for purposes of discontinuance of service, shall be considered part of a consumer's water bill. 
(5)  Protection of potable water and warning requirements. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by a public water supply system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as "water unsafe for drinking." 
(6)  Piping identification. When a secondary water source is used in addition to a public water supply system, exposed public water piping shall be identified by a blue color or tags and all other exposed piping shall be distinguished from the public water piping by a different contrasting color or tags and so maintained that the public water supply and secondary water supply pipes can be traced readily in their entirety. If such piping is so installed that it is impossible to trace it in its entirety, it will be necessary to protect the public water supply at the service connection in a manner acceptable to the state department of environmental quality. 
(d)  Review board. A cross connection board of appeals shall be appointed by the mayor as provided herein which shall have the duty to review decisions of the department official as herein provided. 
(1)  Application for appeal. The owner of a building or structure may appeal to the cross connection board of appeals when it is claimed that there has been an improper application of this subsection or a misinterpretation of the rules, ordinances or regulations relevant to its enforcement. 
(2)  Membership of board. The cross connection board of appeals shall consist of three members who shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council, and one member shall be appointed for three years, one for two years and one for one year; and thereafter, each new member shall be appointed for three years or until a successor has been appointed. 
(3)  Time for appeal. Any appeal filed pursuant to this section must be filed within 28 days from the decision of the official rendering an order or decision under the authority of this section. 
(4)  Notice of meeting. The board shall meet within ten days of filing of an appeal or at stated periodic meetings if warranted by the volume of work. 
(5)  Public hearings. All hearings shall be public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the official of the jurisdiction and any other person whose interests may be affected by the matter on appeal, shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
(6)  Action of the board. The board shall make such recommendations to the official as it determines are appropriate and in conformance with relevant rules and regulations. 
(7)  Resolution of board. Every action of the board shall be by resolution and certified copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the official. 
(8)  Determining vote. Failure to secure two concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the decision of the official, except that the appellant shall be entitled to further hearing before a full board if there were not three qualified members present when the vote was taken. 
(9)  Official's report. The official shall report to the board, within 15 days of its recommendation, his final determination regarding the matter reviewed by the board. 
(Code 1975,  21-4; Ord. No. 1997-06,  1, 2-17-97; Ord. No. 1998-02,  1, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 62-43. - Penalty for violating section 62-41 or 62-42. 
    Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of section 62-41 or 62-42 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of such sections shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this section. 
(Code 1975,  21-5) 
Sec. 62-44. - Limitation on use of water for sprinkling. 
(a)  When the city council determines that a water emergency exists, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, or consent to, approve or direct the use of, city water for outdoor sprinkling in the city, except as follows: 
(1)  Evennumbered street addresses on evennumbered days; 
(2)  Oddnumbered street addresses on oddnumbered days; 
(3)  All other by permission of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  Whenever city water shall be used for outdoor sprinkling unlawfully, as provided in this section, such use shall be prima facie proof that it was so used, or that such use was consented to, approved or directed by, the person to whom such water was billed at the time of such use, as appears from the records of the city water department. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  21-6) 
Sec. 62-45. - Connection of domestic water wells to buildings served by sanitary sewers prohibited. 
    No person shall connect any domestic water well to any building on property owned by such person which is served by public sanitary sewers. The city shall periodically inspect all domestic water wells on such property under section 62-42 to enforce this provision. 
(Code 1975,  21-7) 
Secs. 62-46-62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE 

Sec. 62-61. - Legislative findings and purpose. 
(a)  Public sanitary sewer systems essential. Public sanitary sewer systems are essential to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the state and the city. Septic tank disposal systems are subject to failure due to soil conditions or other reasons. Failure or potential failure of septic tank disposal systems poses a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, presents a potential for ill health, transmission of disease, mortality and potential economic blight, and constitutes a threat to the quality of surface and subsurface waters of the state and the city. 
(b)  Connection to system essential for public health, safety and welfare. The connection to available public sanitary sewer systems at the earliest reasonable date is a matter for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and necessary in the public interest, which is declared as a matter of legislative determination. 
(c)  Purpose of article. The purpose of this article is to provide for the minimum standards of materials and workmanship, the inspection by the city and the use of the connection to the available public sanitary sewer system for the protection of the public health and welfare. 
(d)  Necessity for sewage disposal. The city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms, that the use of septic tanks, privies, privy vaults, cesspools, or similar private sewage disposal facilities, may be deleterious to the health, safety and welfare of the businesses, industries, governmental and charitable agencies, and residents of the city and that the health, safety and welfare of the businesses, industries, governmental and charitable agencies and residents is enhanced by the creation of a public sewer system and wastewater treatment plant, with regulation by the city of pollutants and other harmful materials according to state and federal standards. 
(e)  Method for measuring use-Sewage disposal services. Based on advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms, that the most practical, cost effective and accurate method, given available technology, of measuring the use of the system's sewers by any user is by the meter or meters used to measure water usage. 
(f)  Continuation of service. The city council has previously found, and further currently reaffirms that, in order to provide and continue to provide for the safe and uninterrupted removal and treatment of sewage, pollutants and other harmful materials, it is necessary from time to time to install improvement, enlargements, extensions and repairs to the system's sewers and sewer service pipes. 
(g)  Purpose of charges. The charges and fees for the use of and connection to the system are hereby established for the purpose of recovering the cost of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, and operation of the system and to comply with federal and state safe drinking water acts and related regulations, to provide for the payment of principal of and interest on any bonds authorized to be issued as and when the same become due and payable, to create a bond and interest redemption fund therefor, to provide a fund for reasonable and necessary improvements to the system, to provide a fund for equipment replacement and to provide for such other funds as are necessary to meet contractual obligations of the city. Such charges and fees shall be made in accordance with the purposes herein described as well as the following: 
(1)  All premises connected directly or indirectly to the system, except as hereinafter provided, shall be charged and shall make payments to the city in amounts computed on the basis of this chapter. 
(2)  The charges, rates and fees for sewer service by the system are established herein to adequately provide for bond requirements and to ensure that the system does not operate at a deficit. 
(3)  The system staff or designated parties shall periodically review the charges, rates, fees, rules and regulations of the system, which review shall be completed not less than one time per fiscal year. Results of the review shall be reported to the city council with recommendations for any adjustments. 
(4)  The charges, rates and fees shall be set so as to recover costs from users in reasonable proportion to the cost of serving those users. 
(h)  Proportionality, fairness, and benefits of charges, rates and fees. The city council has previously found and further currently reaffirms that the fairest and most reasonable method of providing for the operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of the system is to charge each user, based in all cases on amount of use, for the costs of: 
(1)  Retiring debt secured by the net revenues of the system issued to pay for improvements and replacements to the system; 
(2)  Ongoing repair, replacement and improvement and budgeted as part of the annual costs of the system; and 
(3)  Operation, administration and maintenance costs of the system. 
    The city has investigated several methods of apportioning the costs of the sewer disposal service provided by the system. Based on its investigation and on the advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms, that to ensure the stability and viability of the system for the benefit of its users, the fairest and most accurate way to apportion the costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and improvement of the system is to charge each user: (i) a connection fee and a capital charge for sewer service when such user's property is first connected to the system; (ii) a commodity rate for the use of sewer services; (iii) a readiness-to-serve charge; and (iv) other charges and costs for services which are equivalent to the cost of providing such services. The city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms that the rates and charges currently in effect accurately apportion the fixed and variable costs of the system among the users of the system and that the commodity rate and the readiness-to-serve charges each provide actual benefits to such users in the form of ready access to sewer service that would be unavailable if such charges were not charged. 
    In addition to the findings set forth above, the city council has previously found and currently reaffirms that the capital charge reflects the depreciated capital costs of the system, previously paid by the city and the system, less grants, attributable to each new user and that the opportunity to connect to the system provides actual benefits to each new user equal to or greater than the amount of such charges. Furthermore, the city council has previously found and currently reaffirms that the charges imposed by the system are sufficient to meet the short-term capital improvement needs of the system. 
(i)  Design life of improvements. Based on the advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found and currently reaffirms that any improvements to or capital expenditures for the system paid for by rates and charges did not, at the time such improvements were constructed and financed, have an expected design life that would exceed the term of the respective bonds issued to finance such improvements or capital expenditures. 
(j)  Charges for non-residents. 
(1)  Contracts for sewer disposal services. The city has previously entered, and may continue to enter, into contracts with municipalities adjacent to the city, to provide sewage disposal services to users of the water supply system located in those municipalities. Rates and charges billed for use by the residents of those municipalities shall be in accordance with the applicable contract. 
(2)  Charges for service to customers outside city where no other contract compensates the city for indirect costs. The city has previously found, and hereby ratifies and confirms, that the total direct and indirect costs of providing sewer disposal service to customers outside the city jurisdiction, where no other contract exists with the governmental units where those customers are located, equals at least two times the rates and charges imposed for direct services and debt service cost to customers located in the city. Indirect costs include payment for capital improvements, extraordinary repairs and replacements for the sewage disposal system benefitting all users of the system and paid for by customers served within the corporate limits of the city or the corporate limits of other municipalities which have entered into contracts with the city for such costs, funding depreciation of the improvements to the sewage disposal system, and fire and police or other protection for the sewage disposal system paid by city taxpayers or by the governmental units with which the city has contracts for sewage disposal services. 
(Code 1975,  21-21; Ord. No. 2002-02,  1, 9-26-02) 
Sec. 62-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Available public sanitary sewer means a public sanitary sewer located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts upon the property and passing not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure in which sanitary sewage originates. 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building sanitary drain means that part of the lowest piping of the sanitary sewage drainage system of a building which receives the sanitary sewage from soil pipes, waste pipes, and other drainage pipes inside the perimeter walls of the building, and conveys it to the building sanitary sewer, which begins approximately five feet outside the building wall. 
    Building sanitary sewer means part of the sanitary sewage drainage system of a building which extends from the end of the building sanitary drain (approximately five feet outside the building wall) and conveys its discharge to a public sanitary sewer. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sanitary sewage. 
    Compatible pollutant means a substance able to be treated in the POTW such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, and fecal coliform bacteria. 
    Debt service charge means a charge levied on users of sewage works for the purpose of meeting the bonded indebtedness payment schedule due to the construction of improvements to the sewage system. 
    Floatable oil means an oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from sanitary sewage by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Sanitary sewage shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the sanitary sewage does not interfere with the public sanitary sewer. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable solid waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
    Health department means the local, county or state agency having jurisdiction over the private sewage disposal systems at structures within the city. 
    Incompatible pollutants means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
    Industrial waste means the wastewater discharged from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
    Licensed contractor means a contractor that has filed an application and met all bonding, insurance and other requirements as set forth in this article and is thereby authorized by the city to install building sanitary sewers within the city. 
    Major contributing industry means an industrial user of the POTW that: 
(1)  Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday; 
(2)  Has a flow greater than five percent of the flow carried by the public sanitary sewer receiving the wastewater; 
(3)  Has in its wastewater a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in the standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (Public Law 92-500 of 1972); 
(4)  Is found by the permit issuing authority in connection with the issuance of an NPDES permit to the POTW receiving the wastewater to have a significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that POTW or upon the quality of effluent from that POTW. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    Normal domestic sewage means wastewater containing a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 220 milligrams per liter (mg/l), a suspended solids (SS) content of 220 mg/l, and a phosphorous content (as P) of ten mg/l. 
    NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to the national pollutant discharge elimination system prescribed in the Clean Water Act (the Federal Pollution Control Act of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977, Public Law 95-217). 
    Operation and maintenance cost, by way of illustration but not of limitation, means all costs for labor, power, chemicals, materials and supplies, replacements, contractual services, billing and administration chargeable to sewage works. 
    pH means the common logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10 -7 . 
    Piping code means the standards, rules, regulations and specifications adopted by the city council covering the design and installation of plumbing systems for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
    Plumbing inspector means the authorized agent or representative of the city charged with the administration and enforcement of the preinspections of this article and the plumbing code. 
    Preinspection means an inspection conducted by the plumbing inspector prior to issuance of a permit to install the building sanitary sewer. 
    Premises means a structure which cannot be completely divided in its present utilitarian condition through sale. The following are examples of what is meant by premises: 
(1)  A building under one roof, owned, leased or occupied by one party as one business or residence; 
(2)  A combination of residential buildings or commercial buildings, leased or occupied by one party in one common enclosure; 
(3)  The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall; or 
(4)  A building owned by one party having more than one internal division, such as apartments, offices, stores, etc., and which may have a common or separate entrance. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in sanitary sewage to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the public sanitary sewer. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means, except that no industrial user shall increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking or dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sanitary sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Property owner means a person holding ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
    Public sanitary sewer means a common sanitary sewer owned by the city located in the public right-of-way used or intended for use by the public for the collection and transportation of sanitary sewage for treatment and disposal. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means the structures, equipment, appurtenances and processes required to collect, carry away, treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent, and in this article shall specifically mean the city wastewater system. 
    Readiness-to-serve charge means a charge approximately equal to the proportional fixed costs of the city's sewer service. 
    Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes "replacement." 
    Sanitary sewage means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, business buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that is not admitted intentionally. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer service charges means the total cost charged to a user of the system including operation, maintenance and replacement as well as the debt service charge. 
    Sewer superintendent means the person authorized by the city council to administer the licenses, permits and inspections required under this article for the city public sanitary sewer or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or sanitary sewage which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation and shall adversely affect the public sanitary sewer or performance of the POTW, or both. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sanitary sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Structures in which sanitary sewage originates or structure means a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities which generate water-carried sanitary sewage are used or are available for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes. 
    Surcharges means a charge levied to all users whose sanitary sewage concentrations for BOD, suspended solids or phosphate (as P) (ten mg/l) exceed those levels defined under "normal domestic sewage." 
    Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, sanitary sewage or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, section 307(A), 33 USC 1317, or included in the critical materials register promulgated by the state department of natural resources. 
    Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and POTW. 
    Useful life means the period during which a treatment works operates (not "design life," which is the period during which a treatment works is planned and designed to be operated). 
    User charges shall mean charges levied on users of a treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of such works, pursuant to section 204(b) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, P.L. 92-500. 
    User classes shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Residential shall include all dwelling units used as domiciles such as detached, semidetached and row houses, mobile homes, garden and standard apartments and permanent multifamily dwellings which contribute normal domestic strength. (Transient lodging, considered commercial in nature, is not included.) 
(2)  Industrial shall include establishments discharging a trade or process waste. 
(3)  Commercial shall mean a user of the treatment works engaged in the purchase or sale of goods, transaction of business or otherwise rendering a service. 
(4)  Governmental shall mean a federal, state or local government user of the treatment works which has executive, legislative, judicial, administrative or regulatory activities. 
(5)  Institutional shall mean a user of the treatment works involved in a social, charitable, religious, educational or other special purpose activity. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1975,  21-22; Ord. No. 2002-02,  1, 9-26-02; Ord. No. 2003-04,  1, 5-19-03) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 62-63. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsafe manner upon public or private property within the city, any human or animal excrement, sanitary sewage, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste, floatable oil, properly shredded garbage, compatible pollutants, incompatible pollutants, toxic pollutants, or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy tank, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sanitary sewage. 
(d)  Mandatory connection requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  Structures in which sanitary sewage originates located in the city in the area served by the public sewer for which there is an available public sanitary sewer shall not be used or occupied unless such structures are connected to the public sanitary sewer. 
(2)  The owner of any structure, building or house in which sanitary sewage originates, which is more than 200 feet from a sanitary sewer and discharges into the waters of any state any raw sewage of human origin, any sewage or any substance which is or may become injurious to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other uses which are being made or may be made of such waters, or which is or may become injurious to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish, aquatic life, or plants or whereby the growth or propagation thereof is prevented or injuriously affected or whereby the value of fish and game is or may be destroyed or impaired, shall, within 50 days of a notice to connect, which shall be sent by first class mail to the address shown on the latest tax assessment rolls, connect to the public sanitary sewer so that the discharge is abated. 
(3)  If a structure in which sanitary sewage originates has not been connected to an available public sanitary sewer before use and occupancy, the city shall require the connection to be made forthwith after notice, which notice shall be made by first class mail, sent to the property owner or by posting a copy thereof on the property on which the structure is located. The notice shall: 
a.  Give the approximate location of the public sanitary sewer which is available for connection to the structure involved; and 
b.  Advise the property owner of the requirements and of the enforcement provisions of this section. Enforcement of the mandatory connection requirements contained in this section may be had by the city in accordance with Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.12571 et seq., MSA 12.15(12751) et seq.) incorporated in this article by reference, or some other statute or rule of the state, after the expiration of 90 days from the date notice is given. 
(Code 1975,  21-23) 
Sec. 62-64. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 62-63, the building sanitary sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with health department regulations. 
(b)  At such times as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 62-63, direct connection shall be made to the public sanitary sewer in compliance with this article. 
(c)  When a structure is to be connected to a public sanitary sewer the following will apply: 
(1)  The septic tank or cesspool, or both, shall be disconnected from the structure and shall be pumped and thoroughly cleaned and its contents removed and properly disposed of by a licensed tank cleaner. 
(2)  The septic tank or cesspool shall be abandoned, and shall then be collapsed and filled with earth, preferably sand, and the earth or sand or both shall be compacted. 
(3)  If the collapsing of the tank is impractical, the tank shall be filled with sand or earth, or both, to at least the tank outlet level, and the inlet to the tank shall be filled with concrete. 
(Code 1975,  21-24) 
Sec. 62-65. - Building sanitary sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, perform any excavation near, make connections with or openings into, alter or destroy any public sanitary sewer, building sanitary sewer, or any appurtenances of either sewer, without first obtaining a written permit from the sewer superintendent. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sanitary sewer permits. A permit shall be issued to the property owner or his authorized agent on a special form furnished by the city after all requirements of section 62-66, pertaining to sewer applications and connection permits, have been fulfilled, in one of the categories below: 
(1)  Residential permit. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial permit. 
(c)  All building sanitary sewers and connections thereto shall comply with the piping code as established by the city council from time to time. The purpose of such code is to prescribe minimum design and construction requirements for wastewater transmission facilities. 
(d)  No building sanitary sewer shall be covered by backfilling until after it has been inspected, tested, location recorded, and approved, according to the amended piping code adopted in this section. 
(e)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and maintenance of the building sanitary sewer to the public sanitary sewer shall be borne by the property owner. 
(f)  If a property owner desires to construct a structure on a lot or parcel that abuts a public sanitary sewer but does not have the house lead portion of the building sanitary sewer available to the property line, then it shall be the responsibility of the property owner, his authorized agent, or his licensed contractor to install the building sanitary sewer service to the structure. All costs shall be borne by the property owner and no credit will be allowed toward the connection charge. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, his authorized agent or licensed contractor to obtain all necessary permits and perform the work in accordance with the current piping code adopted in this section. 
(g)  A separate and independent building sanitary sewer shall be provided for every structure from which sanitary sewage originates, except where one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  One structure stands at the rear of another structure on a lot which has frontage to the public sanitary sewer only on one side, and a building sanitary sewer is not available or cannot be constructed to the rear structure through an alley, court, yard or driveway. 
(2)  Two or more structures already in existence, constructed on a lot which by the current zoning code cannot be divided. 
(h)  The structures which meet the conditions of subsections (g)(1) and (2) of this section may be connected by a single building sanitary sewer if the capacity of the line, conveyance system and treatment system, as determined by the city, is adequate to handle the structures, but the city does not and shall not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from such single building sanitary sewer. If the flow from the structures is greater than a six-inch inside diameter sewer will handle, the building sanitary sewer shall be considered a commercial connection and drawings and specifications shall be submitted to the city and a commercial permit issued. 
(i)  Old building sanitary sewers may be used in connection with the new building sanitary sewer only when they are found on examination and testing to meet all requirements of this article by the sewer superintendent. 
(j)  The size, slope, materials of construction of a building sanitary sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the current piping code adopted by the city and by reference made a part of this article. The sewer superintendent shall have the authority under this article to make revisions in the piping code, within the following guidelines, without city council approval: 
(1)  Revise the dates of issuance of the applicable standards to reflect the most current dates of revisions in section 62-70. 
(2)  Add or subtract acceptable manufacturer's names, as they become known, to or from the list in Appendix B of Ordinance No. 1981-10, on file in the city clerk's office. 
(k)  Whenever possible, it is recommended that the building sanitary sewer shall be brought to the structure at an elevation below the basement floor. In each structure in which any building sanitary drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sanitary sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building sanitary drain shall be lifted by an approved sanitary sewage pump as listed in the piping code and discharged to the building sanitary sewer. 
(l)  All existing structures not able to be served by gravity as indicated by the consulting engineers employed by the city shall be required to utilize an approved sanitary sewage pump. These pumps will be purchased and supplied by the city, at cost, to the property owner or his licensed contractor. The cost of installation, operation and maintenance of the pump shall be borne by the property owner. 
(m)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sanitary drain or building sanitary sewer which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(n)  The connection of the building sanitary sewer into the public sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of the current piping code. 
(o)  No building sanitary sewer connections will be permitted unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, pumping stations, force mains and the POTW. 
(p)  It shall be the policy of the city to maintain a payment fund of sufficient monies from direct connection charges to allow full payment of the city's bond obligation. Therefore, if sufficient connections to the public sanitary sewer are not made to pay the bond obligation, the city council shall have the authority to increase the connection charges to cover such a deficiency. 
(q)  A property owner shall maintain and be responsible for the cost of maintenance of the building sanitary drain, the building sanitary sewer and sewage grinder pumps, if any; and the city shall maintain the public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1975,  21-25; Ord. No. 2003-04,  1, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 62-66. - Sewer applications and connection permits. 
(a)  An application for a permit to connect a residential structure to the public sanitary sewer shall be made in writing by the property owner on a form supplied by the city. At the time of application for the building sanitary sewer permit, the owners of all existing structures shall be required to pay for a preinspection of the structures' existing plumbing system by the plumbing inspector as provided in subsection (b) of this section. A private property owner shall be issued a permit only if the owner hires a licensed contractor or signs an affidavit, supplied by the city, that the applicant is the owner and occupant, or eventual occupant, of the structure where the work is to be performed, and the applicant will, in fact, be doing the work without any help from a licensed contractor. At the time of application, the property owner shall pay the connection charges, as specified in this article, in cash or by installments. To pay for the direct connection by installment, a minimum down payment shall be paid which is equal to the first annual installment, and a payment agreement and lien form shall be signed by all property owners. 
(b)  Before a permit shall be issued for an existing structure to connect to the public sanitary sewer, there shall be a preinspection by the plumbing inspector. A preinspection fee established by resolution of the city council shall be payable on application for the building sanitary sewer permit. The purpose of the preinspection shall be to verify the following: 
(1)  No storm drainage from the ground surface, roofs, foundation drains, or groundwater shall empty into the public sanitary sewer by any method or device. 
(2)  No cross connections between the public sanitary sewer and the water supply shall be allowed. 
(3)  There shall be proper traps and vents provided in the structure in accordance with the current plumbing code approved by the city. 
(4)  If any of the above-listed conditions are prevailing in a structure during the preinspection, the property owner shall be notified by the plumbing inspector that the structure is in violation of the plumbing code and this article, and that repairs or alterations, or both, shall be performed on the plumbing system. 
(5)  A property owner shall obtain a plumbing permit to perform any of the repairs or alterations necessitated by the preinspection, or by the alteration of the plumbing system the owner may deem necessary, before he makes a connection with the public sanitary sewer, or both. 
(c)  Any person desiring to secure permits to perform the construction of building sanitary sewer connections to structures of other persons shall, prior to issuance of such permits, provide the sewer superintendent with the following: 
(1)  A satisfactory cash or corporate surety bond, renewable yearly, in the amount of at least $5,000.00 as security for the faithful performance of the work, in accordance with the city ordinances, public building sanitary sewer specifications, standards, rules and regulations, shall be provided by such person for each permit. The surety bond shall be kept in full force and effect by the licensed contractor until such licensed contractor shall have given ten days' written notice to the sewer superintendent of his intention to terminate such corporate surety bond and shall thereafter have received a written release from the sewer superintendent. 
(2)  The corporate surety bond shall be continued in effect for a period of one year, or such shortened time as shall be allowed by the sewer superintendent, after a final inspection and approval of the building. Only upon final inspection and approval, the same corporate surety bond may be used toward the issuance of another permit, as a blanket bond, if it or the combination of corporate surety bonds are at large in the amount of at least $50,000.00. In this case, the corporate surety bond shall be in effect as to whatever permits the licensed contractor might have made within a period of one year, or such lesser period of time as may be allowed by the sewer superintendent, even though the number of permits allowed over a period of time amounts to more than ten. Therefore, no more than ten building sanitary sewer permits shall be issued in any one period of time that have not had final inspection and approval by the sewer superintendent. 
(3)  The corporate surety bond shall be available to the city council for one or a combination of, or all of, the following: 
a.  Repairs; 
b.  Indemnity for damages; 
c.  Deficiencies caused by the licensed contractor; and 
d.  Deficiencies caused by the property owner done with the knowledge of the licensed contractor. 
(4)  A certificate of insurance indemnifying the city for public liability and property damage, with limits of at least $500,000.00 for each person and $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence, shall be issued to the city. The city shall be an additional named insured on the policy as shown in the certificate of insurance and the policy shall contain a provision that the coverage afforded under the policy will not be canceled or materially changed until at least ten days' written notice has been given to the city. 
(5)  After a licensed contractor has complied with all of the requirements of this subsection (c) and other laws relating to licensing of businesses within the city, he shall be called a licensed contractor and shall be allowed to perform construction of building sanitary sewer lines within the city under the rules, regulations, specifications and ordinances of the city. 
(6)  A contractor's license may be suspended or revoked, or both, upon noncompliance with the city ordinances, public building sanitary sewer specifications, standards, rules and regulations or a finding by the sewer superintendent that work is being done in less than a workmanlike manner or both, or that there are claims from faulty work or materials for which the licensed contractor has failed to promptly respond by making repairs or demonstrating that the claims are unfounded or both. 
(d)  In the application for a building permit for a new structure, the direct connection charge may not be paid before the building permit is issued, and shall be paid in cash prior to the certificate of occupancy being issued for such structure. 
(e)  All building sanitary sewer connection permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(f)  With respect to written or oral agreements, contracts or transactions between property owners and licensed contractors under this article, the city, notwithstanding any provisions contained in this article, shall not be deemed to have knowledge of a contract between such parties, and shall not be deemed a principal or master or the agent or servant of the licensed contractor. The city does not in any way act as guarantor or surety for any licensed contractor under this article and does not extend warranties, expressed or implied, for the licensed contractor's performance, other than duties and obligations assumed by the city in the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Residential building sanitary sewer permits shall be issued by the sewer superintendent to a property owner or his authorized representative upon compliance with the provisions of this section and the payment of the permit fee set by ordinance. There shall be an opportunity provided for inspection and acceptance testing after all piping is in place and before the backfilling of the trench or the covering of any pipe. 
(h)  An application for a permit to connect a commercial or industrial structure to the public sanitary sewer shall be made in writing by the property owner on a form supplied by the city and shall provide the following: 
(1)  A plan of the property showing accurately all building sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water lines now existing. 
(2)  Drawings and specifications covering all work proposed to be performed shall comply with the following: 
a.  If the size of the new building sanitary sewer is six-inch inside diameter, the private building sanitary sewer specifications, along with a sketch, may be sufficient if approved by the sewer superintendent. 
b.  If the size is in excess of the six-inch inside diameter sewer, or if the sewer superintendent requires it, the drawings and specifications must be completed by a registered professional engineer. 
(3)  A complete schedule of all process waters, industrial waste and sanitary sewage produced or expected to be produced at such property, including a description of the character of each waste, the daily volume and the maximum rates of discharge and a representative analysis. 
(4)  An existing commercial or industrial structure shall have a preinspection performed by the plumbing inspector in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(i)  Commercial building sanitary sewer permits shall be issued by the sewer superintendent to a property owner or his authorized representative upon compliance with the provisions of this section and the payment of the permit fee set by ordinance. There shall be an opportunity provided for inspection and acceptance testing after all piping is in place and before the backfilling of the trench or the covering of any pipe. 
(j)  Industrial building sanitary sewer permits shall be issued by the sewer superintendent to a property owner or his authorized representative after all requirements of this article have been met, along with a payment guarantee such as payment bond, cash deposit, escrow agreement, irrevocable bank letter of credit or other similar surety agreement that satisfies the sewer superintendent that all city costs on the drawing, review and inspection of the new building sanitary sewer will be reimbursed to the city. There shall be an opportunity provided for inspection and acceptance testing after all piping is in place and before the backfilling of the trench or the covering of any pipe. 
(Code 1975,  21-26) 
Sec. 62-67. - Use of public sanitary sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, water from any footing drains, or roof water to any public sanitary sewer or building sanitary sewer connection except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Stormwater, groundwater, water from footing drains and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet, except as otherwise provided in this article. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon application and approval of the sewer superintendent and the appropriate state agency to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  Except as provided in this article, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sanitary sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or lower than 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of fat, oil or grease. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the POTW such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes having corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters with a pH lower than 6.0 or greater than 9.0. 
(7)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the POTW. 
(8)  Any sanitary sewage, toxic pollutant or batch discharge in excess of the concentrations of the substances listed or found in 40 CFR 403 and as listed or found in applicable federal or state regulations promulgated pursuant to 40 CFR 307(a). 
(9)  Any waste that contains suspended solids in excess of 500 milligrams per liter or floatable oil in any quantity, or both. 
(10)  Any excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable-tanning solutions, or any unusual biochemical oxygen demand, chlorides, sulfates or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute significant load on the POTW. 
(11)  Any radioactive waste or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug. 
(13)  Any sanitary sewage containing any insoluble substance that will not pass a one-quarter-inch mesh screen. 
(14)  No industrial waste will be permitted into the public sanitary sewers that may cause a deviation from the NPDES permit requirements, pretreatment standards or any other state and federal regulations. These discharge limitations are as provided in NPDES permit MI-0020591, as follows: 
Design parameter Influent characteristics Discharge limitations Five-day CBOD 220 mg/l <25 mg/l Suspended solids 220 mg/l <30 mg/l Total phosphorous  10 mg/l < 1 mg/l  
(15)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to building sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(d)  Grease, floatable oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when sanitary sewage contains grease in excessive amounts, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for single-family or multiple-family structures. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the sewer superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted into place shall be gastight and watertight. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the property owner at his expense, in continuously efficient operation. The property owner shall be responsible for removal and proper disposal of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which may be reviewed by the sewer superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the property owner's personnel shall be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(e)  A major contributing industry shall be required to remove, exclude or require pretreatment of any waste, in whole or in part, if it is deemed to be in the interest of the city or if discharged waste contains substances specifically prohibited in subsection (c) of this section and in accordance with pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR 403 and 307(b) of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation by the property owner at his expense. Drawings, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for approval and construction of any facility shall not be commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing from the city. The city may elect to treat wastes discharged in excess of normal domestic concentrations on a basis prescribed by written agreement and for an established surcharge to cover the added cost. 
(f)  When required by the sewer superintendent or POTW director, or both, the major contributing industry serviced by a building sanitary sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sanitary sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the industrial wastes. Such control manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the sewer superintendent. The control manhole shall be installed by the major contributing industry at its expense and shall be maintained by it so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(g)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of industrial wastes to which references are made shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, and Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants, 40 CFR 136, published in the Federal Register on October 16, 1973, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in subsection (f), or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sanitary sewer to the point at which the building sanitary sewer is connected. 
(h)  No statement contained in subsection (e) of this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement between the city and any major contributing industry whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted, subject to payment therefor by the major contributing industry, provided such agreement shall not violate NPDES requirements, and provided that user charges and surcharge payments are specified in the agreement. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city from entering into other contracts to provide sanitary sewerage treatment extraterritorially; provided, however, that the charges for operation, maintenance and replacement made for such extraterritory service shall be at least the same as those made for such services to city users. 
(i)  The operation, maintenance, alteration, repair and management of the public sanitary sewer shall be under the control and supervision of the city superintendent and administered as a regular department of the city government. The city superintendent may employ such persons in such capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the public sanitary sewer. The city council may make such rules, orders and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the public sanitary sewer. 
(j)  Regulation and control of wastewater discharges. The wastewater discharge from any sewer user is subject to regulation and control by the city. If the wastewater contains any pollutants which interfere or are incompatible with the sewage treatment process, and cause damage to any part of the sewage system or contaminate or reduce the utility of the sludge, the city shall have the right to: 
(1)  Require any industry with significant increases in discharges to submit information on wastewater characteristics and obtain prior approval for discharges. 
(2)  Reject the wastes, in whole or in part, for any reason deemed appropriate by the city. 
(3)  Require pretreatment of such wastes to within the limits of normal sewage as defined in accordance with federal regulations (40 CFR 128). 
(4)  Require control or flow equalization of such wastes so as to avoid any surge loads or excessive loads that may be harmful to the treatment works. 
(5)  Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive flows or loadings discharged to the treatment works to cover the additional costs of having capacity for and treating such wastes. 
(6)  Require a sewer user to install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters, sampling equipment and appurtenances as is deemed necessary by the city to properly monitor a wastewater discharge to the city's sewage system. Such structures, when required, shall be installed and maintained by the sewer user at his expense and shall be safe and accessible to authorized city personnel at all times. 
(Code 1975,  21-27) 
Sec. 62-68. - Protection of sewage works. 
(a)  The sewer superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city and the POTW bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties and structures for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to the discharge to the public sanitary sewer upon written 24-hour notice, by hand delivery or registered mail or both, to the occupants of the structures in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Discharge reports. The city may require any person discharging wastewater into a city sewer to file a periodic discharge report. The discharge report shall include, but need not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of operation, number and classification of employees, or other information which relates to the generation of waste, including wastewater components and characteristics in the wastewater discharge. Such reports shall also include the chemical components and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored onsite even though they may not normally be discharged. In addition to discharge reports, the city may require information in the form of wastewater discharge permit applications and self-monitoring reports. 
(c)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the sewer superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city and the POTW shall observe all safety rules applicable to the structures established by the property owner, and the property owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city and POTW employees, and the city and POTW shall indemnify the property owner against loss or damage to the property by their employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the property owner and growing out of the inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to the discharge to the public sanitary sewer; except as such as may be caused by negligence or failure of the property owner to maintain safe conditions as required in section 62-67, or as required by other local, state and federal laws and regulations, or both. 
(d)  The sewer superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city and POTW bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city or POTW, or both, holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the public sanitary sewer lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  Upon the refusal of a property owner to admit the city sewer superintendent or other duly authorized person upon the premises for the purpose of inspection, the city may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order of the court authorizing the entry and inspection upon such terms as the court may direct, pursuant to MCL 25.527. 
(Code 1975,  21-28) 
Sec. 62-69. - Sewer use charges. 
(a)  Connection charge. Each premises connecting directly to any sewer line of the system shall pay at the time of application for a tap permit a tap charge to bring sewer service from the nearest lateral sewer line to the unit boundary line in an amount as shall be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b)  City user charges. Each unit within the city connected to the sewer system shall pay: 
(1)  A commodity charge in an amount as shall be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(2)  A readiness-to-serve charge, based on the size of the water meter installed and the sanitary use factor unit (SUFU) assigned in an amount as shall be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(c)  Lateral benefit charge. If the premises to be served has never paid the cost of construction of the sewer to which connection is to be made, a lateral benefit charge shall be assessed in an amount equal to the current cost of such construction per foot times the number of feet of frontage of the premises. Current cost shall be based on an estimate by the city engineer. The lateral benefit charge may be made in ten equal annual installments, with interest on the remaining balance as provided by law. 
(d)  Special rates. For miscellaneous or special services other than operation, maintenance and replacement costs or local capital costs, the city may establish special rates by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  Free service prohibited. No free service shall be provided to anyone for any purpose under any circumstances. 
(f)  Pre-inspection charges. All sewer pre-inspection charges shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(g)  Review of rates and notice thereof. The adequacy of the sewer service charge shall be reviewed annually by a certified public accountant for the city in its annual audit report. Whenever necessary, as reflected by that report, the city council shall revise the sewer service charge relating to operation, maintenance and replacement costs or debt service requirements in accordance with all applicable federal regulations. Not less than once annually, the city shall give notice to the users of the system of each element or component of the sewer user charge being made and assessed and the cost or rate of each item thereof. 
(Code 1975,  21-29; Ord. No. 2002-02,  1, 9-26-02) 
Sec. 62-70. - Sanitary use factor assignments. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining the equitable amount of the connection fee which should be collected under the terms of this article for all occupational land uses, the following sanitary use factor assignments shall be based on the single-family dwelling as one unit, and all other occupational uses are based on multiples or fractions of such unit, as follows: 
Occupational Use Sanitary Use Factor Unit 
(SUFU) Multiplication Factor Single-family dwelling 1.0 per residence Auto dealers 1.0 per premises, plus 0.3 per 2,000 sq. ft. Auto wash (coin-operated do-it-yourself, ten gallons or less per car) 2.5 per stall Auto wash (conventional) 12.5  per production line Bar 1.5 per 2,000 sq. ft. Barbershop 1.0 per shop, plus 0.1 per chair Beauty shop 1.0 per shop, plus 0.2 per booth Boardinghouses, rest homes and nursing homes 1.0 per premises, plus 0.2 per resident Bowling alleys (not including bar area) 1.0 per premises, plus 0.2 per alley Churches  0.25 per 2,000 sq. ft. Cleaners (pickup only) 1.0 per shop Cleaners (pressing facilities) 1.0 per premises, plus 0.5 per press Clinics 1.0 per premises, plus 0.5 per exam room Convalescent homes 1.0 per premises, plus 0.2 per bedroom or patient, whichever is greater Convents 1.0 per premises Cottages 1.0 per unit Clubs and fraternal organizations: Bar area 1.5 per 2,000 sq. ft. Dining area and kitchen 1.0 per 2,000 sq. ft. Sales/office 0.3 per 2,000 sq. ft. Storage and nonactive areas 0.1 per 2,000 sq. ft. Department stores 1.0 per each 15 employees or fraction thereof Factories (office and production) 1.0 per 2,000 sq. ft. Garage, private 1.0 per premises, plus 0.3 per 2,000 sq. ft. Garage, public 1.0 per premises, plus 0.3 per 2,000 sq. ft. Greenhouses 1.0 per premises, plus 0.1 per 2,000 sq. ft. Grocery stores and supermarkets 1.1 per 2,000 sq. ft. Hospitals 1.1 per bed Hotels, motels and auto courts with kitchen facilities in units 1.0 per premises, plus 0.3 per bedroom Laundry (self-serve) 1.0 per premises, plus 0.5 per washer Marina 1.0 per boat well or stall, plus 0.2 per boat well or stall Mobile home parks 1.0 per unit (pad) Motel and auto courts with kitchen facilities in units 1.0 per unit Multiple-family dwelling 1.0 per unit Office building (banks, etc.) 1.0 per premises, plus 0.5 per 2,000 sq. ft. Pet store 1.1 per 2,000 sq. ft. Public institutions 0.5 per 2,000 sq. ft. Rectory 1.0 per house Restaurants Dinners only 1.0 per 2,000 sq. ft. Bar area 1.5 per 2,000 sq. ft. School without showers 1.0 per classroom or teaching station School with showers 1.5 per classroom or teaching station Service stations 1.0 per premises, plus 0.1 per fuel pump Slaughterhouses, racquetball clubs, highway information rest stop facilities Gallons per day peak use: 6.1  1,000 12.2   2,000 18.3   3,000 24.4   4,000 30.5   5,000 36.6   6,000 42.7   7,000 48.8   8,000 54.9   9,000 61.0  10,000 Snack bars, drive-in restaurants 1.8 per premises Store, other than listed 1.0 per premises, plus 0.3 per 2,000 sq. ft. Swimming pool, public 3.0 per 2,000 sq. ft. Theater (drive-in) 0.04 per car space Warehouse and storage area (nonactive) 0.1 per 2,000 sq. ft.  
(b)  When the unit factor refers to 2,000 square feet, it shall mean the gross area measured from outside of wall to outside of wall, and the total unit assignment for any particular usage on a single premises shall be rounded off to the nearest tenth of a whole number. 
(c)  The table of sanitary use factors contained in this section will be revised periodically to maintain their equality to all property in the city. 
(d)  The city will periodically review the occupational usage of the premises to determine that the actual use does not exceed the unit assignment previously determined and paid for. Any use in excess of the previous unit assignment paid for shall be computed at the current unit rate and added to the next quarterly sewer bill of the premises. 
(e)  A minimum of one SUFU will be charged if the multiplication factor results in less than one for each premises. 
(Code 1975,  21-30; Ord. No. 1992-04,  1, 5-4-92) 
Sec. 62-71. - Billing and enforcement. 
(a)  Billing. Bills will be rendered quarterly to city users and monthly to noncity users and are due upon receipt, payable without interest, within 30 days after the date thereon. All bills received after such period shall bear a penalty of ten percent in addition to the amount of the bill. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Collection as lien. The charges for services under this article, pursuant to section 21 of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq., MSA 5.2731 et seq.), as amended, are hereby made a lien on all premises served thereby unless notice is given that a tenant is responsible, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien, and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six months, the city official in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually, on August 1 of each year, to the tax assessing officer of the city the facts of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be entered by him upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises, and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general city taxes against such premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced. 
(2)  Tenant liability. Where notice is given that a tenant is responsible for such charges and service as provided by section 21 of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq., MSA 5.2731 et seq.), as amended, no further service shall be rendered such premises until a document maintaining owner responsibility for payment of all costs and charges for service shall have been made as security for payment of such charges and service. 
(3)  Delinquent charges. In addition to the foregoing, the city shall have the right to shut off sewer service to any premises for which charges for sewer service are more than three months delinquent, and such service shall not be reestablished until all delinquent charges and penalties and a turn-on charge, to be specified by the city council, have been paid. Further, such charges and penalties may be recovered by the city by court action in addition to any other remedy provided in this section. 
(Code 1975,  21-31) 
Sec. 62-72. - Fixing of rates. 
    The rates fixed by this article are calculated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation of the system, such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the public sewage system in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of bonds issued by the city to pay for the acquisition of the system, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as this article may require. Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts. 
(Code 1975,  21-33) 
Sec. 62-73. - Receiving funds. 
    The revenues of the system shall be collected in a separate depository account in a bank designated by resolution of the city council, which shall be designated the "receiving funds." 
(1)  Operating, maintenance and replacement account. 
a.  Out of the revenues of the receiving fund, there shall be first regularly set aside a sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of the administration, maintenance and operation of the system in order to preserve the system in good repair and working order. 
b.  There shall also be set aside in a special fund entitled "replacement fund" a sum sufficient to provide all replacements of equipment, meters or otherwise that may be needed to preserve the system in good working order and shall be used for that purpose only. 
(2)  Bond payment fund. There shall next be established and maintained, an account to be designated "bond payment fund," which shall be used solely for the payment of the city's bond obligations. There shall be deposited in such fund quarterly, after requirements of the operation and maintenance fund have been met, such sums as shall be necessary to pay the contractual obligations when due. Should the revenues of the system prove insufficient for this purpose, such revenues may be supplemented by any other funds of the city legally available for such purpose. 
(3)  Improvement fund. There shall be next established and maintained an "improvement fund" for the purpose of making improvements, extensions and enlargements to the system. There shall be deposited in such fund each quarter, after providing for all of the foregoing requirements, such sum as the city council shall determine. 
(4)  Surplus revenues. Revenues remaining in the receiving fund at the end of any operating period after satisfaction of the requirements of all the funds may be transferred to the improvement fund, except those attributable to operation, maintenance and replacement revenues, which shall be used and considered in adjusting the rates charged for those services. 
(5)  Bank accounts. All funds may be kept in one or more bank accounts and allocated on the books and records of the city to the individual funds by accepted accounting procedures. 
(Code 1975,  21-35) 
Sec. 62-74. - Fiscal year. 
    The system shall be operated on the same fiscal year as the city generally. 
(Code 1975,  21-34) 
Sec. 62-75. - Procedures for violation. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this article, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation and setting out a period of time for such person to eliminate such violation. 
(b)  Failure to comply with notice. Any person notified of a violation of this article who shall fail to eliminate such violation within the time stated pursuant to subsection 62-75(a) shall be subject to the penalties and remedies set out in section 62-76 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  21-36; Ord. No. 1997-07,  2, 7-7-97) 
Sec. 62-76. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Violation of any provisions of this article shall be a misdemeanor and upon proof of such violation any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, in addition to criminal prosecution or other sanctions set out in this article, be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or may be prohibited from continuing such violations by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1975,  21-37) 
Secs. 62-77-62-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 62-91. - Construction plan design standards for stormwater systems. 
    Unless otherwise noted, the following design standards and requirements apply to construction plans submitted for review by the City of St. Clair for all types of developments or drain-related construction activities. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-92. - General requirements. 
    The following general stormwater management requirements apply to all new developments and redevelopments in City of St. Clair. 
(a)  The design process shall begin by identifying sensitive areas located on the site and laying out the site to protect the sensitive areas. 
(b)  Best management practices (BMPs) that reduce the amount of stormwater runoff and improve water quality are required and shall be designed on a site specific basis. Rate and volume reduction BMPs shall be used to protect open channel storm drains. All BMPs shall be included on the plans and will be subject to review and approval by the City of St. Clair, the Saint Clair County Drain Office (SCCDO) and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) as necessary for permits. BMP usage shall be monitored and recorded in the weekly Soil Erosion Sedimentation Control (SESC) reports. Areas with potential for significant pollutant loading, as determined by the SCCDO, will require BMPs which address regulation of the specific hazard. 
The developer/owner shall include a long-term operation and maintenance schedule for all permanent BMPs. A maintenance agreement between the applicant and the owners or operators is necessary for permanent BMPs which shall include but not be limited to: inspection of structural or vegetative BMPs, performance of maintenance and corrective actions when BMPs are neglected by the owner, and deed restrictions. 
(c)  Onsite management of stormwater is required first and foremost, unless site constraints preclude this approach. 
(d)  Stormwater shall be managed using four standards: stream protection, flood control, water quality, and pre-treatment to protect both water resources and real property. 
(e)  Stream protection shall be provided for surface water discharges to natural watercourses (directly or through pipes or ditches) by retaining onsite the difference in stormwater runoff volume between pre-development and post-development conditions for the two-year, 24-hour storm as approved by the city engineer. Stream protection for redevelopments shall be provided through retention of the difference in the two-year stormwater runoff volume between existing and post-development conditions. If site constraints preclude meeting the retention standard, extended detention will be considered. Developments which discharge directly to the St. Clair River are exempted from the city's stream protection standards. 
(f)  Flood control shall be provided for all sites through retention or detention. On-site detention or retention of stormwater is required of all new developments or redevelopments to maintain the peak outflow to a rate similar to the pre-development runoff rate. Onsite flood control may be reduced or waived for direct discharges to large lakes and rivers if the developer demonstrates no negative impacts, or if provided in a regional facility with adequate upstream infrastructure. 
(g)  Overland flow routes and the extent of high water levels for the 100-year storm shall be identified for all sites. 
(h)  Water quality treatment shall be provided for all sites. A minimum treatment volume equal to one inch of runoff from the directly contributing impervious area is required. A minimum volume of 750 cubic feet per acre is required for directly connected disturbed pervious areas (i.e. lawns). BMPs shall be designed to reduce post development solids loadings by 80 percent or to not exceed solids loadings of 80 milligrams per liter. 
(i)  Pre-treatment is required for infiltration, filtration and detention BMPs for ease of maintenance and to protect BMP integrity and preserve longevity. 
(j)  Stormwater discharges from activities with a high risk for an accidental spill of pollutants (stormwater hot spots) shall provide spill containment. 
(k)  The design maximum release rate, volume or concentration of stormwater discharged from a site shall not exceed the capacity of existing infrastructure or cause impairment to the offsite receiving area. Evaluation of the existing outlet must be performed and an adequate outlet must be provided. 
(l)  The use of many decentralized low impact development (LID) BMPs is not mandated, but is encouraged on private sites. 
(m)  Unless otherwise noted, hydraulic and hydrologic calculations (including rainfall volumes and distributions) shall be based on current MDEQ standards and procedures in place at the time of application. 
(n)  Construction plans for a phased development shall show the existing and/or proposed drainage systems for all prior phases of the development, unless the drainage system for the current phase is entirely independent of the prior phases. Furthermore, drainage plans for a phase of a development must not be dependent upon work planned to be performed in a future phase. 
(o)  Plans shall include a grading plan showing existing and proposed topographic contour lines and proposed finish floor and basement floor elevations. 
(p)  All existing natural or manmade watercourses shall be shown on the plans. The proposed changes to the site must not interfere with common law natural flow rights. Existing watercourses must be preserved or relocated, or the flow otherwise accommodated by the proposed plans. Provisions for the maintenance of the watercourse must be included in the deed restriction or an equivalent legally binding agreement. MDEQ and/or the Army Corps of Engineers may also require permits for changes made to such watercourses. 
(q)  No construction activities shall be allowed without approval of the City of St. Clair Building Official in a 100-year floodplain as determined by the City of St. Clair. 
(r)  The cover sheet of the plans shall include a "permit status table" indicating the status of all permits being obtained. 
(s)  If an established drain is involved, construction plans shall include a note indicating that "all work performed in the right-of-way of an established drain shall require a permit from the drain commissioner." 
(t)  The engineer's seal shall be affixed to all sheets of the construction plans. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 2017-03,  1, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 62-93. - Established drains. 
    No construction activities shall be allowed without approval from the St. Clair County Drain Commissioner for any development discharging to or otherwise affecting an established county drain. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-94. - Storm sewers. 
(a)  Plans shall show boundaries and acreages of catchment areas contributing runoff to each proposed or existing catch basin and/or inlet. Runoff from off-site tributary areas must be accommodated in design or rerouted. 
(b)  The required discharge capacity for each reach of sewer shall be determined by the rational method. 
(1)  A ten-year design storm shall be used such that rainfall intensity, I = 175 / (T + 25), where T = time of concentration in minutes. 
(2)  The runoff coefficient, C, shall be in conformance with normal design practice. Where a weighted average coefficient is employed, the computations shall be submitted for review. 
(c)  A complete set of storm sewer design calculations shall accompany every set of construction plans submitted for review. 
(1)  Sewer capacities shall be based on the Manning equation. 
(2)  Energy losses from friction shall be based on calculated design storm peak discharges and velocities, not Manning design (i.e. full-pipe) capacities. 
(3)  Energy losses from friction shall be based on typical Manning "n" roughness values as approved by the city engineer. 
(4)  Energy losses through manholes and other appurtenances shall be included in the design calculations or reflected in friction losses through use of conservative Manning "n" roughness values as approved by the city engineer. 
(d)  The storm sewer pipe shall have a minimum diameter of 12 inches when constructed in a public right-of-way or easement. 
(e)  Minimum allowable pipe velocity shall be 2.5 feet/second (except where the minimum diameter requirement makes this unachievable.) Desirable pipe velocity range shall be four to eight feet/second. Maximum allowable pipe velocity shall be ten feet/second. 
(f)  Hydraulic grade lines for the ten-year storm shall be calculated and shown as a part of all storm sewer profiles. In no case shall the elevation of the hydraulic grade line exceed the elevation of a point lying one foot below the rim elevation of a manhole, catch basin or inlet. The hydraulic grade line upstream of a detention or retention storage facility shall be calculated assuming the design high water elevation (e.g., full detention basin). 
(g)  The storm sewer plan and profile drawing shall show the following data: 
(1)  Proper identification and numbering of manholes, catch basins and inlets; 
(2)  Invert and casting elevations for all structures; 
(3)  Pipe length (C/L to C/L to structures); 
(4)  Pipe diameter; 
(5)  Pipe slope; 
(6)  Pipe class or designation; 
(7)  Detail of trench construction and type of backfill material. 
(h)  Generally, manholes shall be placed not more than 400 feet apart for sewers less than 30 inches diameter and 600 feet apart for larger sewers. 
(i)  The minimum inside diameter of all manholes, catch basins and inlets shall be 48 inches, with the following exception: Inlet structures from which water will be discharged directly into a catch basin may be 24 inches inside diameter. The depth of such inlets shall be no greater 5.0 feet and no less than 3.5 feet from the top of frame and cover to the invert. 
(j)  Manholes and inlets structures may be constructed of brick, manhole block, precast concrete (ASTM C478) or cast-in-place concrete. 
(k)  All manhole block or brick structures shall be plastered on the outside with one to 2.5 mix of portland cement mortar, one-half-inch thick. No calcium chloride or other chemical shall be added to lower the freezing point of the mortar, as the strength of the mortar may be lessened. 
(l)  Inlet structures in the public street right-of-way shall be spaced a maximum of 400 feet apart (or a maximum of 400 feet on either side of a high point). The spacing and/or number of inlet structures required to accommodate the design flows in streets and in private drives and parking areas, shall be based on a maximum of one cfs per 90 square inches of opening in an inlet or catch basin cover. 
(m)  All storm sewer pipe, manholes, catch basins, and inlets shall meet MDOT specifications. 
(n)  Generally, drops of over 2.0 feet at manholes, from invert of higher pipes to lower pipes, shall be avoided. 
(o)  Joints in concrete pipe having a diameter of 30 inches or larger shall be pointed up on inside with mortar after backfilling has been completed. 
(p)  Where drainage is discharged to an established drain or natural watercourse, such outlets shall be so designed as to enter the drain or watercourse as an angle of 90 degrees or less, as determined by the upstream centerline. Preformed end sections, grouted riprap or specially designed outlet structures will be required. 
(q)  Unless the storm sewers are to be owned and maintained by a single private entity (i.e. municipal or commercial development, manufactured housing community, etc.), all storm sewers shall be located within an easement. The minimum easement width for a storm sewer shall be 12 feet centered on the sewer centerline. 
(r)  All existing and proposed on-site drainage easements shall be clearly shown. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-95. - Open channels. 
(a)  The peak ten-year flow in each reach of open channel shall remain within the banks of the channel. Off-site tributary area shall be included in the design, or the off-site tributary runoff shall be rerouted around the channel. 
(b)  The values of Manning's "n" shall be no less than 0.040 except where the channel is smooth and paved in which case an "n" value of 0.013 to 0.022 shall be used. 
(c)  The maximum velocity for grass lined channels shall not exceed five feet/second. Where above velocity is exceeded, the channel shall be protected by cobble paving or other means to prevent scour. 
(d)  The minimum acceptable non-siltation velocity should be 1.5 feet/second. 
(e)  Unless the open channels are to be owned and maintained by a single private entity (i.e. industrial/commercial development, manufactured housing community, etc.), all open channels shall be located within an easement. Open channels shall have a minimum right-of-way of 40 feet plus top width of channel centered on the centerline. A consistent right-of-way width shall be maintained along the entire reach of channel on the proposed site. A minimum width of 20 feet must be maintained from the top-of-bank to the edge of the right-of-way to allow for maintenance. The above minimum width shall govern generally; however, wider rights-of-way may be required at the discretion of the city engineer. 
(f)  Side slopes of open channels shall normally be no steeper than one vertical to three horizontal. Where conditions dictate steeper side slopes, consideration should be given to slope paving and fencing. The final decision in such matters rests with the city engineer. 
(g)  All existing and proposed on-site drainage easements shall be clearly shown on the plans. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-96. - Culverts. 
(a)  All culverts should be labeled on the plans as "existing", "proposed", or "to be extended". 
(b)  Plans shall show boundaries and acreages of tributary areas contributing runoff to each proposed or existing culvert on the proposed site. 
(c)  Proposed or extended culverts must be approved by the city engineer. Proposed or extended culverts may also require the approval of the St. Clair County Road Commission, the St. Clair County Drain Commissioner, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and/or the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT). 
(d)  The rational method shall be used to determine the peak design flow for the culvert, if the tributary area to the culvert is less than 20 acres. For larger tributary areas, the SCS method shall be used. The runoff coefficients used should be consistent with those in standard engineering practice, as approved by the city engineer, and selected to reflect the future land use of the tributary area. 
(e)  All culverts shall be designed with consideration of both inlet and outlet control conditions. Calculations of the ten-year and 100-year headwater elevations for all culverts thus designed shall accompany the final plans. 
(1)  The ten-year headwater elevation of each culvert shall not exceed an elevation one foot below the road or driveway centerline elevation. The backwater shall not extend beyond the limits of the proprietor's property. 
(2)  The 100-year headwater elevation of each culvert may overtop the road or driveway centerline elevation, but must remain below proposed finish floor elevations of all nearby existing and proposed structures. 
(3)  The tailwater elevation assumed for each culvert should be estimated as the normal depth of the peak flow in the downstream channel, unless the tailwater is influenced by the headwater of another downstream culvert or the confluence of another watercourse. 
(f)  Wing walls, headwalls, end sections, and all other culvert extremities shall be designed to ensure the stability of the surrounding soil, and to meet the requirements of other governing agencies (e.g., St. Clair County Road Commission, SCCDO, MDOT, MDEQ) if applicable. 
(g)  Roadways over culverts or bridges may be required to be paved or designed in such a way as to prevent the erosion of road material into the established drain or watercourse. 
(h)  The following data shall be provided for all proposed or extended culverts: 
  Length; 
  Diameter; 
  Invert elevations; 
  Material type; 
  Protection for culvert ends. 
(i)  Riprap must be provided for all culverts in established drains or significant watercourses. The rip-rap provided for the protection of culvert ends shall: 
(1)  Extend at least one culvert diameter upstream of the culvert inlet and at least four culvert diameters downstream of the culvert outlet; 
(2)  Extend across the bottom of the channel and up the banks of the channel to at least the elevation of the crown of the culvert; 
(3)  Be inlayed such that it does not cause an obstruction in the watercourse; and 
(4)  Have a minimum dimension no smaller than that consistent with HEC-11 Design Guidelines for Rock Riprap and MDOT standards. (A conservative guideline for water depths less than three feet would be to use eight-inch diameter riprap for flow velocities up to six feet/second, and 16-inch diameter riprap for flow velocities up to 11 feet/second.) 
(j)  Minimum diameter for a driveway or crossroad culvert shall be 18 inches or equivalent pipe arch. 
(k)  The pipe used in culverts shall meet MDOT specifications and St. Clair County Road Commission standards. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-97. - Bioretention. 
    A bioretention system consists of a soil bed planted with native vegetation located above an underdrained sand layer. It can be configured as either a bioretention structure or a bioretention swale. Stormwater runoff entering the bioretention system is filtered first through the vegetation and then the sand/soil mixture before being conveyed downstream by the underdrain system. Runoff storage depths above the planting bed surface are typically shallow. The adopted TSS removal rate for bioretention systems is 90 percent. 
    Bioretention systems are used to remove a wide range of pollutants, such as suspended solids, nutrients, metals, hydrocarbons, and bacteria from stormwater runoff. They can also be used to reduce peak runoff rates and increase stormwater infiltration when designed as a multi-stage, multi-function facility. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-97.1. - Pre-design site evaluation. 
    For infiltration trench and structure practices, a minimum field infiltration rate (fc) of 0.52 inches per hour is required; lower rates preclude the use of these practices. For surface sand filter and bioretention practices, no minimum infiltration rate is required if these facilities are designed with a "day-lighting" underdrain system; otherwise these facilities require a 0.52 inch per hour rate. 
    Feasibility testing is to be conducted to screen unsuitable sites, and reduce testing costs. A soil boring is not required at this stage. However, a designer or landowner may opt to engage concept design borings at his discretion, without feasibility testing. 
    Initial testing involves either one field test per facility, regardless of type or size, or previous testing data, such as the following: 
  On-site septic percolation testing, within 200 feet of the proposed BMP location, and on the same contour which can establish initial rate, water table and/or depth to bedrock, 
  Geotechnical report on the site prepared by a qualified geotechnical consultant, or 
  Natural resources conservation service (NRCS) county soil mapping showing an unsuitable soil group such as a hydrologic group "D" soil in a low-lying area. 
    If the results of initial feasibility testing as determined by a qualified professional show that an infiltration rate of greater than 0.52 inches per hour is probable, then the number of concept design test pits shall be per the following table. An encased soil boring may be substituted for a test pit, if desired. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-97.2. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Storage volume, depth, and duration. Bioretention systems shall be designed to treat the runoff volume generated by the stormwater quality design storm (two-year). The maximum water depth during treatment of the stormwater quality design storm shall be 12 inches in a bioretention structure and 18 inches in a bioretention swale. The minimum diameter of any outlet or overflow orifice is 2.5 inches. The bottom of a bioretention system, including any underdrain piping or gravel layer, must be a minimum of one foot above the seasonal high groundwater table. The planting soil bed and underdrain system shall be designed to fully drain the stormwater quality design storm runoff volume within 72 hours. 
(b)  Permeability rates. The design permeability rate through the planting soil bed must be sufficient to fully drain the stormwater quality design storm runoff volume within 72 hours. This permeability rate must be determined by field or laboratory testing. Since the actual permeability rate may vary from test results and may also decrease over time due to soil bed consolidation or the accumulation of sediments removed from the treated stormwater, a factor of safety of two shall be applied to the tested permeability rate to determine the design permeability rate. Therefore, if the tested permeability rate of the soil bed material is four inches/hour, the design rate would be two inches/hour (i.e., four inches per hour/two). This design rate would then be used to compute the system's stormwater quality design storm drain time. 
(c)  Planting soil bed. The planting soil bed provides the environment for water and nutrients to be made available to the vegetation. The soil particles can adsorb some additional pollutants through cation exchange, and voids within the soil particles can store a portion of the stormwater quality design storm runoff volume. The planting soil bed material should consist of ten to 15 percent clays, a minimum 65 percent sands, with the balance as silts. The material's pH should range from 5.5 to 6.5. The material shall be placed in 12 to 18 inch lifts. The total depth or thickness of the planting soil bed should be a minimum of three feet. As noted above, the design permeability rate of the soil bed material must be sufficient to drain the stormwater quality design storm runoff volume within 72 hours. Filter fabric should be placed along the sides of the planting soil bed to prevent the migration of soil particles from the adjacent soil into the planting soil bed. 
(d)  Vegetation. The vegetation in a bioretention system removes some of the nutrients and other pollutants in the stormwater inflow. The use of native plant material is recommended for bioretention systems wherever possible. The goal of the planting plan should be to simulate a forest-shrub community of primarily upland type. In general, trees should dominate the perimeter zone that is subject to less frequent inundation. Shrubs and herbaceous species that are adapted to moister conditions and expected pollutant loads should be selected for the wetter zones. The number of stems per acre should average 1,000, with tree spacing of 12 feet and shrub spacing of eight feet. 
(e)  Sand layer. The sand layer serves as a transition between the planting soil bed and the gravel layer and underdrain pipes. It shall be a minimum thickness of 12 inches and consist of clean medium aggregate sand (AASSHTO M-6/ASTM C-33 or MDOT Class II). To ensure proper system operation, the sand layer must have a permeability rate at least twice as fast as the design permeability rate of the planting soil bed. 
(f)  Underdrain. The underdrain piping must be rigid Schedule 40 PVC pipe. The portion of drain piping beneath the planting soil bed and sand layer must be perforated. All remaining underdrain piping, including cleanouts, must be nonperforated. All joints must be secure and watertight. The underdrain piping must connect to a downstream storm sewer manhole, catch structure, channel, swale, or ground surface at a location that is not subject to blockage by debris or sediment and is readily accessible for inspection and maintenance. Blind connections to downstream storm sewers are prohibited. 
(g)  Overflows. All bioretention systems must be able to safely convey system overflows to downstream drainage systems. The capacity of the overflow must be consistent with the remainder of the site's drainage system and sufficient to provide safe, stable discharge of stormwater in the event of an overflow. 
(h)  Tailwater. The hydraulic design of the underdrain and overflow systems, as well as any stormwater quantity control outlets, must consider any significant tailwater effects of downstream waterways or facilities. This includes instances where the lowest invert in the outlet or overflow structure is below the flood hazard area design flood elevation of a receiving stream. 
(i)  Maintenance. The following requirements must be included in the system's maintenance plan. 
(1)  General maintenance. All bioretention system components expected to receive and/or trap debris and sediment must be inspected for clogging and excessive debris and sediment accumulation at least four times annually as well as after every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall. Such components may include bottoms, trash racks, low flow channels, outlet structures, riprap or gabion aprons, and cleanouts. 
Sediment removal should take place when the structure is thoroughly dry. Disposal of debris, trash, sediment, and other waste material should be done at suitable disposal/recycling sites and in compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal waste regulations. 
(2)  Vegetated areas. Mowing and/or trimming of vegetation must be performed on a regular schedule based on specific site conditions. Grass should be mowed at least once a month during the growing season. Vegetated areas must be inspected at least annually for erosion and scour. Vegetated areas should also be inspected at least annually for unwanted growth, which should be removed with minimum disruption to the planting soil bed and remaining vegetation. 
When establishing or restoring vegetation, biweekly inspections of vegetation health should be performed during the first growing season or until the vegetation is established. Once established, inspections of vegetation health, density, and diversity should be performed at least twice annually during both the growing and non-growing seasons. The vegetative cover should be maintained at 85 percent. If vegetation has greater than 50 percent damage, the area should be reestablished in accordance with the original specifications and the inspection requirements presented above. 
All use of fertilizers, mechanical treatments, pesticides and other means to assure optimum vegetation health should not compromise the intended purpose of the bioretention system. All vegetation deficiencies should be addressed without the use of fertilizers and pesticides whenever possible. 
(3)  Structural components. All structural components must be inspected for cracking, subsidence, spalling, erosion, and deterioration at least annually. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-98. - Infiltration. 
    An infiltration structure is a facility constructed within highly permeable soils that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff. An infiltration structure does not normally have a structural outlet to discharge runoff from the stormwater quality design storm. Instead, outflow from an infiltration structure is through the surrounding soil. An infiltration structure may also be combined with an extended detention structure to provide additional runoff storage for both stormwater quality and quantity management. The adopted TSS removal rate for infiltration structures is 80 percent. 
    Infiltration structures are used to remove pollutants and to infiltrate stormwater back into the ground. Such infiltration also helps to reduce increases in both the peak rate and total volume of runoff caused by land development. Pollutant removal is achieved through filtration of the runoff through the soil as well as biological and chemical activity within the soil. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-98.1. - Pre-design site evaluation. 
    Infiltration structures can present some practical design problems. When planning for an infiltration structure that provides stormwater quality treatment, consideration should be given to soil characteristics, depth to the groundwater table, sensitivity of the region, and runoff water quality. Specifically, infiltration structures must not be used in the following locations: 
  Industrial and commercial areas where solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded, unloaded, stored, or applied or pesticides are loaded, unloaded, or stored. 
  Areas where hazardous materials are expected to be present in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in the Code of Federal Regulations at 40 CFR 302.4. 
  Areas where infiltration structure use would be inconsistent with an NJDEP-approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan. 
  Areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities. 
  Areas where industrial stormwater runoff is exposed to "source material." "Source material" means any material(s) or machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities, that could be a source of pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source materials include, but are not limited to raw materials, intermediate products, final products, waste materials, by-products, industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater. 
  Areas where their installation would create a significant risk for basement seepage or flooding, cause surficial flooding of groundwater, or interfere with the operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other subsurface structures. Such adverse impacts must be assessed and avoided by the design engineer. 
Infiltration structures must be configured and located where their construction will not compact the soils below the structure. In addition, an infiltration structure must not be placed into operation until the contributing drainage area is completely stabilized. 
General setback requirements for infiltration structures: 
Soil Absorption Systems for Title 5 
Systems:   
50 ft. Private wells: 100 ft. Public wells: 150 ft. Public reservoir, surface water sources for public water systems and their tributaries:   
400 ft. Other surface waters: 50 ft. Property lines: 10 ft. Building foundations: >10 to 100 ft., depending upon soil types and infiltration structure type  
Soils are perhaps the most important consideration for site suitability. In general, county soil surveys can be used to obtain necessary soil data for the planning and preliminary design of infiltration structures. For final design and construction, soil tests are required at the exact location of a proposed structure in order to confirm its ability to function without failure. 
Tests should include: 
  Determination of the textural classification; 
  Permeability of the subgrade soil at and below the bottom of the proposed infiltration structure. 
The recommended minimum depth for subgrade soil analysis is five feet below the bottom of the structure or to the groundwater table. Soil permeability testing can be conducted in accordance with the standards for individual subsurface sewage disposal systems. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-98.2. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Storage volume, depth, and duration. An infiltration structure must be designed to treat the total runoff volume generated by the structure's maximum design storm. This may either be the groundwater recharge or stormwater quality design storm, depending upon the structure's proposed use. An infiltration structure must also fully drain this runoff volume within 72 hours. Runoff storage for greater times can render the structure ineffective and may result in anaerobic conditions, odor, and both water quality and mosquito breeding problems. The bottom of the infiltration structure must be at least two feet above seasonal high water table or bedrock. For surface structures, this distance must be measured from the bottom of the sand layer. The structure bottom must be as level as possible to uniformly distribute runoff infiltration over the subgrade soils. 
To enhance safety by minimizing standing water depths, the vertical distance between the structure bottom and the maximum design stormwater surface in surface infiltration structures should be no greater than two feet. Construction of an infiltration structure must be done without compacting the structure's subgrade soils. Excavation must be performed by equipment placed outside the structure whenever possible. This requirement should be considered when designing the dimensions and total storage volume of an infiltration structure. It is important to note that the use of infiltration structures is recommended only for the stormwater quality design storm and smaller storm events. Use of infiltration structures for larger storm events and the requirements by which such structures are to be designed, constructed, and maintained should be reviewed and approved by all applicable reviewing agencies. 
(b)  Permeability rates. The minimum design permeability rate of the soils below an infiltration structure will depend upon the structure's location and maximum design storm. The use of infiltration structures for stormwater quality control is feasible only where soil is sufficiently permeable to allow a reasonable rate of infiltration. Therefore, infiltration structures designed for storms greater than the groundwater recharge storm can be constructed only in areas with hydrologic soil group A and B soils. 
Maximum Design Structure Location Minimum Design Permeability Rate 
(Inches/Hour) Groundwater recharge subsurface 0.2 Groundwater recharge surface 0.5 Stormwater quality surface and subsurface 0.5  
In addition to the above, the design permeability rate of the soil must be sufficient to fully drain the infiltration structure's maximum design storm runoff volume within 72 hours. This design permeability rate must be determined by field testing (see bioretention pre design). Since the actual permeability rate may vary from test results and may also decrease over time due to soil bed consolidation or the accumulation of sediments removed from the treated stormwater, a factor of safety of two must be applied to the tested permeability rate to determine the design permeability rate. Therefore, if the tested permeability rate of the soils is four inches/hour, the design rate would be two inches/hour (i.e., four inches per hour/two). This design rate would then be used to compute the structure's maximum design storm drain time. 
(c)  Bottom sand layer. To help ensure maintenance of the design permeability rate over time, a six-inch layer of sand must be placed on the bottom of an infiltration structure. This sand layer can intercept silt, sediment, and debris that could otherwise clog the top layer of the soil below the structure. The sand layer will also facilitate silt, sediment, and debris removal from the structure and can be readily restored following removal operations. The sand layer must meet the specifications of a MDOT Class II sand. This must be certified by a certified testing lab. 
(d)  Overflows. All infiltration structures must be able to convey overflows to downstream drainage systems in a safe and stable manner. The capacity of the overflow must be consistent with the remainder of the site's drainage system and sufficient to provide safe, stable discharge of stormwater in the event of an overflow. 
(e)  Subsurface infiltration structures. A subsurface infiltration structure is located entirely below the ground surface. It may consist of a vault, perforated pipe, and/or stone bed. However, due to the greater difficulty in removing silt, sediment, and debris, all runoff to a subsurface infiltration structure must be pretreated. This pretreatment must remove 80 percent of the TSS in the runoff from the structure's maximum design storm. 
(f)  Basis of design. 
The design of an infiltration basin is based upon Darcy's Law: 
Q = KIA 
where: 
Q = the rate of infiltration in cubic feet per second (cfs) 
K = the hydraulic conductivity of the soil in feet per second (fps) 
I = the hydraulic gradient 
A = the area of infiltration in square feet (sf) 
From the variables shown in the figure below: 
Average hydraulic gradient = D avg /d 
Minimum hydraulic gradient = D 1 /d 
Maximum hydraulic gradient = D 2 /d 

(g)  Maintenance. The following requirements must be included in the system's maintenance plan. 
General maintenance. All infiltration structure components expected to receive and/or trap debris and sediment must be inspected for clogging and excessive debris and sediment accumulation at least four times annually as well as after every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall. Such components may include bottoms, riprap or gabion aprons, and inflow points. This applies to both surface and subsurface infiltration structures. Sediment removal should take place when the structure is thoroughly dry. Disposal of debris, trash, sediment, and other waste material should be done at suitable disposal/recycling sites and in compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal waste regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-99. - Detention storage facilities. 
    Detention storage facilities are designed to detain runoff for a short period of time and then release it to a watercourse where it returns to the hydrologic cycle. The objective of detention storage is to regulate the released runoff rate and to reduce the impact on downstream drainage systems. Detention storage should not be confused with retention storage (i.e. retention basins), a facility with no engineered outlet (other than an emergency-type outlet) designed to hold runoff for a considerable length of time. The water in a retention basin is not discharged to surface water, although it may infiltrate in to the ground, evaporate, or be consumed by plants. 
    In keeping with Common Law Natural Flow Rights and the Michigan Drain Code, concentrated discharges of stormwater (such as the outflow from a detention facility) or increased surface water runoff over property owned by others must be pursuant to a valid right-of-way, easement, or other written permission from all property owners affected. The outflow from a detention facility is considered to be such a concentrated discharge of stormwater. 
    All forms of detention storage shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  On-site detention (or retention-See section 4.9[62-100] retention basin below) of stormwater is required of all new developments or redevelopments to maintain the peak outflow to a rate similar to the pre-development runoff rate. The maximum allowable release rate shall be 0.15 cfs per acre, or to a discharge rate approved by the city engineer. In no case shall the outflow from a site exceed the capacity of the receiving watercourse to accept the flow. 
(b)  For development sites greater than five acres, the detention basin volume shall be determined for the 100-year flood volume from all tributary area, including off-site area. 
(1)  The tributary area shall include all acreage contributing runoff to the detention storage facility, including any off-site tributary area in its existing state, whether developed or undeveloped. 
(2)  The following equations shall be used to determine the 100-year detention volume: 
Q a = Allowable release rate, cfs 
Q o = Q a / (A C), where A = Tributary area in acres, C = weighted runoff coefficient 
Detention time in minutes, T = -25 + sqrt(10,312.5 / Q o ) 
Storage volume per impervious acre, V s = 16,500 T / (T + 25) - 40 Q o T 
Required detention volume in cubic feet, V = V s  A  C 
(c)  For development sites five acres and less, the detention basin volume shall be determined for the ten-year flood volume from all tributary area, including off-site area. 
(1)  The tributary area shall include all acreage contributing runoff to the detention storage facility, including any off-site tributary area in its existing state, whether developed or undeveloped. 
(2)  The following equations shall be used to determine the ten-year detention volume: 
Q a = Allowable release rate, cfs 
Q o = Q a / (A C), where A = Tributary area in acres, C = weighted runoff coefficient 
Detention time in minutes, T = -25 + sqrt(6,562.5 / Q o ) 
Storage volume per impervious acre, V s = 10,500 T / (T + 25) - 40 Q o T 
Required detention volume in cubic feet, V = V s  A  C 
(d)  If the site is located near the downstream end of a watercourse or drainage district, the city engineer may require that the proprietor's engineer generate and submit hydrographs of the outflow from the existing site and from the proposed site (i.e. detention facility) and a hydrograph of the flow in the receiving watercourse to verify that the detained outflow would not result in an increase in the peak flow in the receiving watercourse. If the detained outflow would result in an increase in the peak flow in the receiving watercourse, then stormwater detention is not an acceptable stormwater management option. Retention of stormwater or other stormwater management design approved by the city engineer must be provided. See section 4.9[62-100] retention basins for design requirements. 
(e)  Portions of the developing site may be allowed to drain unrestricted (i.e. not through a detention facility) if either of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The areas draining unrestricted are not being disturbed or altered by the construction, such that they will maintain their existing drainage characteristics and patterns. 
(2)  The areas draining unrestricted are being disturbed or altered but will be permanently stabilized to prevent erosion and will not contain any impervious surface post-construction. In this case, the unrestricted flow must be draining to a receiving watercourse with valid rights-of-way, or else written agreement from the affected property owners would have to be obtained per Common Law Natural Flow Rights and the Michigan Drain Code. In addition, the post-construction peak 100-year flow from these areas should be calculated and deducted from the total allowable peak flow from the detention facility (Q a ). The detention outlet(s) should be designed to restrict the basin outflow(s) to this reduced allowable peak flow rate. 
(f)  Where the detention facility is to be equipped with a pump discharge, the proprietor shall be required to furnish design data on pump(s) and discharge force main so that the capacity of the system can be verified. These data will include system curve calculations, the pump performance curves, and a profile of the system piping. The pumping station should be able to release the first flush volume over approximately 24 hours, the bankfull flood volume over 24-48 hours, and the 100-year flood volume at a rate not to exceed 0.15 cfs/ac of tributary area. A back-up generator will be required to ensure the operation of the pumping station in the event of power loss. The city discourages the use of pumped outlets, and will not accept responsibility for damages due to power failure, pump malfunction, or acts of God that result in storm conditions that exceed the design conditions of the pump station. 
(g)  An agreement for acceptance and maintenance of the detention facility, if executed by the proprietor, shall be submitted to the City of St. Clair prior to final approval. The agreement both as form and content shall be subject to the approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-99.1. - Detention basins. 
    A detention basin is a form of detention storage where the stormwater is detained above ground as surface water. In addition to the general requirements indicated above in section 4.8[62-99], detention basins shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Detention volume in a gravity-outlet detention basin must be located: 
(1)  Above the invert of the lowest row of orifices in the outlet standpipe; 
(2)  Above the elevation of the dry weather base flow in the receiving watercourse; 
(3)  Above the elevation of the groundwater table. Soil boring data used to determine the groundwater table elevation shall be submitted with the plans. 
(b)  The detention basin outlet shall consist of a vertical standpipe with multi-level orifices to control the release of stormwater from the basin, including the first flush volume, bankfull flood volume, and 100-year flood volume (or ten-year flood volume for sites less than five acres). 
(1)  The standpipe shall not be less than 36 inches in diameter. 
(2)  The standpipe shall contain multiple rows of orifices (i.e. holes) to control the release of the first flush runoff volume, the bankfull flood volume, and the 100-year flood volume (or ten-year for sites less than five acres). 
  First flush orifices shall be located at the elevation of the basin floor (or permanent pool water level, if a wet basin); 
  Additional bankfull flood orifices shall be at the elevation of the first flush volume in the basin, where the first flush volume is calculated as the first one inch of runoff over the site; or 
Vff (cf) = 3630  A(acres)  C, where C is the runoff coefficient 
  Additional 100-year (or ten-year for sites less than five acres) flood control orifices shall be located at the elevation of the bankfull flood volume in the basin, where the bankfull flood volume is calculated as the rainfall from a 1.5-year storm; or 
Vbf (cf) = 8170 x A(acres)  C 
To promote improved filtering of runoff sediment from smaller, more frequent storm events, the bankfull flood and first flush volumes shall be based on the developing tributary site area only, and not include off-site tributary area. 
(3)  Orifices should not be less than one inch in diameter or greater than four inches in diameter. 
(4)  The top of the standpipe shall consist of a grating at or above the design (high) water level to serve as an overflow mechanism, in addition to the overflow spillway/berm. 
(5)  The standpipe shall be encased in stone extending to the design (high) water level to allow for filtering of the stormwater prior to discharge from the basin. The encasement stone size shall be large enough so as not to plug or pass through the orifices in the standpipe. 
(6)  The standpipe shall contain a sediment sump with a depth of at least one foot. 
(7)  Double standpipes (e.g. a 36-inch diameter inner standpipe within a 48-inch diameter outer standpipe) are encouraged. Double standpipes are believed to be less prone to blockages of the control orifices, and therefore require less maintenance. The inner standpipe should contain the appropriate number and configuration of orifices to provide the controlled release of the first flush volume, the bankfull flood volume, and the 100-year (or ten-year for sites less than five acres) flood volume. The outer standpipe should contain at least several times the orifice area as the inner standpipe over the entire height of the standpipe, such that the head loss across the outer standpipe orifices is negligible. 
(8)  The outlet pipe extending from the standpipe to the receiving watercourse shall be sized to convey the calculated 100-year (or ten-year for sites less than five acres) peak inflow to the detention basin. 
(9)  The location of the outlet pipe extending downstream of the standpipe shall be indicated on a profile drawing of the receiving watercourse, whether or not the receiving watercourse is an established drain. The receiving watercourse profile shall extend at least from the upstream end of the site to the downstream end of the site. 
(c)  A sediment sump shall be provided within the basin, below the lowest orifice elevation but above the groundwater table, to provide for sediment accumulation. 
(1)  The volume of the sump shall be equivalent to the first flush volume, or one inch of runoff over the site area. (Sump Volume, cf = V ff = 3630  A  C) 
(2)  Appropriate precautions shall be taken to protect public safety and to ensure that the sump does not constitute a nuisance. 
(d)  All detention basins must have standpipe overflow grates and spillways berms for emergency overflow at the high water level. 
(1)  The standpipe overflow grate and spillway must provide adequate capacity to overflow the peak 100-year (or ten-year for sites less than five acres) basin inflow with no more than one foot of head (i.e. water level must not exceed the one foot of freeboard). 
(2)  Downstream of the overflow spillway, the stormwater overflow must be directed (either by overland flow or via a swale or ditch) to the receiving watercourse. 
(e)  A minimum of one-foot freeboard shall be provided above the design high water elevation. 
(f)  The side slopes shall not be steeper than six feet horizontal to one foot vertical. Slope protection shall be provided as necessary. Basin side slope elevation contours shall be shown on the plans. 
(g)  Unless the detention basin contains a permanent pool, the bottom of all detention basins shall be graded in such a manner as to provide positive flow to the outlet. A minimum bottom slope of one percent shall be provided. 
(h)  A 12-foot-wide minimum access easement shall be provided for all detention basins, as measured from the top of bank. 
(i)  A 25-foot-wide minimum setback from property lines shall be provided for all detention basins, as measured from the top of bank. 
(j)  Detention basin configurations where stormwater must "back-up" into the basin (i.e. stormwater enters the conveyance system downstream of the basin) will not be permitted. 
(k)  Multiple detention basins serving a single development should function independently. If the outflow from one basin passes through another basin before being discharged to the receiving watercourse, a full hydraulic analysis (i.e. a computer model simulation) will be required to ensure that the system functions satisfactorily. 
(l)  If at any time the detention basin is to function as a sediment basin (for use during the construction phase), an outlet filter shall be provided. Such an outlet filter is to be designed in accordance with criteria established by the St. Clair County Department of Public Health for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control. Such use of a detention pond shall be considered a temporary measure only. The proprietor shall be responsible for sediment removal upon completion of construction. 
(m)  Detention basins shall meet all local ordinances and/or requirements for "ponds." 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-99.2. - Underground storage. 
    Underground storage is a form of detention storage where the stormwater is detained in underground pipes. Like a detention basin, the water is released at a controlled rate to a receiving watercourse. 
    In addition to the general requirements indicated above in section 4.6[62-99], underground detention facilities shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Detention volume in an underground detention facility shall be located above the elevation of the dry weather baseflow in the receiving watercourse and above the elevation of the groundwater table. Soil boring data used to determine the groundwater table shall be submitted with the plans. 
(b)  To minimize sedimentation in the downstream drainage district, sediment shall be removed from the stormwater before water enters the underground storage facility (e.g. in first flush forebay or within the catch basins using removable filtration inserts). 
(c)  The pipe material used for the underground storage facility shall have an expected life of at least 50 years. 
(d)  Access manholes shall be provided along the underground storage facility to allow for maintenance. 
(e)  A minimum of one foot of freeboard shall be provided between the design hydraulic grade line in the underground storage facility and the rim elevations of all access manholes. 
(f)  A 25-foot-wide setback from property lines shall be provided for all underground storage facilities. 
(g)  An access easement shall be provided to and above the underground storage facility. 
(h)  No permanent structures shall be constructed above the underground storage facility. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-100. - Retention basins. 
    A "retention basin" is a facility with no engineered outlet (other than an emergency-type outlet) designed to hold runoff for a considerable length of time. The water in a retention basin is not discharged to a natural watercourse, although it may be consumed by plants, evaporate, or infiltrate into the ground. A retention basin should not be confused with a "detention basin," a facility designed to detain runoff for a short period of time and then release it to a watercourse. 
(a)  On-site retention (or detention-See section 4.8[62-99] detention storage facilities) is required of all new developments or redevelopments to prevent an increase in peak flows downstream in the drainage district. 
(1)  Retention basins are an acceptable stormwater management practice on sites where the soil has an infiltration rate of at least 0.52 inches per hour and a clay content of less than 30 percent (per recommendations in Guidebook of Best Management Practices for Michigan Watersheds). The required storage volume of a retention basin is that of the runoff from a 100-year design storm as determined using the SCS method. On sites with soils having a lower infiltration rate and/or higher clay content, the city engineer may allow retention basins with storage volume for the runoff from two consecutive 100-year design storms. 
(2)  Retention basins shall accommodate runoff from off-site areas that drain onto/across the developing site. (An exception to this rule would be if off-site runoff were to be routed around the site to a receiving watercourse, if done in a manner such that runoff from the developing site would not contribute to this off-site flow. If the off-site flow were to be concentrated from overland flow to a point discharge into an receiving watercourse without valid rights-of-way, written agreement from the affected property owners would have to be obtained per Common Law Natural Flow Rights and the Michigan Drain Code.) 
(b)  One foot of freeboard shall be provided above the design high water elevation. 
(c)  Retention volume must be provided above the elevation of the groundwater table. Soil boring data used to determine the groundwater table elevation shall be submitted with the plans. 
(d)  All retention basins must have a spillway for emergency overflow at the high water level. 
(1)  The spillway must provide adequate capacity to overflow the peak 100-year basin inflow with no more than two feet of head (i.e. water level must not exceed the two feet of freeboard). 
(2)  The plans must identify where the overflow would be directed to flow or stored in the event of an overflow. 
(e)  The side slopes shall not be steeper than six feet horizontal to one foot vertical unless fenced in accordance with city requirements. Slope protection shall be provided as necessary. Basin side slope elevation contours shall be shown on the plans. 
(f)  A 12-foot-wide access easement shall be provided to and around all retention basins. 
(g)  An agreement for acceptance and maintenance of the retention basin system, if executed by the proprietor, shall be submitted to the City of St. Clair prior to final approval. The agreement both as form and content shall be subject to the approval of the city. 
(h)  If at any time during the construction period the retention basin is to function as a sediment basin, the proprietor shall be responsible for sediment removal prior to completion of construction. (See St. Clair County Department of Public Health for requirements regarding soil erosion and sedimentation control during construction.) 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-101. - Wetlands and low lying areas. 
(a)  In order to help in analyzing site hydrology and the pre-development runoff rate, soil types, the normal groundwater table, and an accurate delineation of wetlands must be provided as part of preliminary plats/plans. The city engineer may require confirmation of the absence or presence of regulated wetlands from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) through its wetland assessment program. Construction activities to be performed within a regulated wetland may require a permit from the MDEQ. 
(b)  Any regulated wetlands or other wetlands that will be part of the drainage system shall be designated as a common area and placed within a conservation easement. 
(c)  If existing wetlands or low lying areas are to be used for stormwater storage, all requirements under either section 4.8.1[62-99.1] detention basins or section 4.9[62-100] retention basins would apply, depending on whether the wetlands/area would have an outlet. 
(d)  If any disturbed or impervious surfaces will drain into an existing wetland or low lying area, calculations may be required to be submitted indicating that the wetland will accommodate runoff from a 100-year design storm without exceeding the finished grade elevation of any adjacent existing or proposed structure. 
(e)  If a wetland will be used for stormwater storage, a sediment forebay shall be provided upstream of the wetlands to reduce the stormwater velocity and encourage sedimentation. Additionally, a permit from the MDEQ may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-102. - Oil separators. 
    Oil must be removed from stormwater as appropriate prior to discharge to a receiving watercourse. The city engineer will consider means of oil removal on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 62-103. - First flush basins and sediment collection units. 
    When stand-alone BMPs such as permanent first flush basins and prefabricated sediment collection units are proposed or required for a specific site, the following design standards shall apply: 
(a)  A first flush basin or pre-fabricated sediment collection unit shall contain storage volume for the first one inch of runoff from the on-site impervious tributary area. The storage volume of a first flush basin can be calculated as: 
V ff (cf) = A  C  3630 cf/ac-impervious 
(b)  The outlet of a first flush basin or sediment collection unit shall be designed to release the first flush volume over 24-36 hours. 
(c)  The outlet of a first flush basin or sediment collection unit shall not be submerged by the receiving watercourse at a ten-year design level. 
(d)  The first flush basin or sediment collection unit shall contain a bypass structure and/or berm to allow the ten-year peak flow to bypass without hydraulic interference. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07,  1, 12-2-13) 
Chapters 63-65 - RESERVED 
Chapter 66 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; subdivisions, ch. 54. 
State Law reference- Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq., MSA 9.631(1) et seq.; obnoxious plants and trees, MCL 124.151 et seq., MSA 12.270(1) et seq.; deposit of noxious weeds on highways, MCL 247.51, MSA 28.181. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public grounds means all property which is owned or its use controlled by the state, its agencies or its municipal subdivisions. 
(Code 1975,  20-11) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 66-27. - Administration of article; rules and regulations. 
    The city superintendent shall administer this article and shall make such rules and regulations as the council may approve for the administration of this article. 
(Code 1975,  20-12) 
Sec. 66-29. - Contents of notices required by article. 
    Any notice required by this article shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  The action taken, and the reasons therefor; 
(2)  The remedy; 
(3)  The time in which the remedy shall be completed; 
(4)  The right to appeal to the city council, together with the steps necessary for such an appeal; and 
(5)  Any further information which will fairly appraise the person of the proceedings. 
(Code 1975,  20-14) 
Sec. 66-30. - Appeals from orders issued under article. 
    Any person who wishes to appeal to the city council an order issued under the provisions of this article may do so by filing, in writing, a notice of the appeal and a statement of the grounds therefor, with the city clerk at least 14 days prior to the next regularly scheduled council meeting and within 30 days from the date of service of the order appealed from. 
(Code 1975,  20-15) 
Secs. 66-31-66-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ON PUBLIC GROUNDS 

Sec. 66-41. - Permission to plant. 
    No tree, shrub or plant shall be planted on public grounds in the city without the prior written permission of the city superintendent. Any tree, shrub or plant which is planted without such permission may be removed by the city superintendent or his agent, at the discretion of the superintendent. 
(Code 1975,  20-26) 
Sec. 66-42. - Planting of certain trees prohibited. 
    The planting on public grounds in the city of softwood trees and other trees which, due to their wood or fruit, require more maintenance than other trees is prohibited. The following list of trees represent some but not all of those types of trees which are prohibited: soft and silver maple, American basswood, horse chestnut, catalpa, willow, poplar, box elder, Chinese elm and fruit trees, except flowering crab. 
(Code 1975,  20-27) 
Sec. 66-43. - Minimum size of trees to be planted. 
    The trees to be planted on public grounds in the city shall have a trunk of not less than 11/2 inches in diameter, when measured six inches from the ground, and shall not be less than eight feet high, after planting, from ground to the top. 
(Code 1975,  20-28) 
Sec. 66-44. - Location of trees. 
(a)  No tree shall be planted nearer than 40 feet to any other tree or building, or nearer than four feet to the edge of any sidewalk or to the curb of any street or alley. 
(b)  No tree shall be planted nearer than 25 feet to the intersection of the curblines at a street intersection or nearer than six feet to the edge of a driveway or alley. 
(Code 1975,  20-29) 
Sec. 66-45. - Permission for and supervision of maintenance or removal. 
    No tree, shrub or plant on public grounds in the city shall be maintained or removed without the prior written permission of the city superintendent. The city superintendent, in his sole discretion, may require that he or his agent be present to advise or supervise the maintenance or removal. 
(Code 1975,  20-30) 
Sec. 66-46. - Removal for convenience of landowner. 
    Any tree, shrub or plant on public grounds in the city which is removed for the convenience of any landowner shall be replaced by such landowner, or an amount equal to the value of the removed tree, shrub or plant shall be contributed by such landowner to a special fund which shall be used for the planting and/or maintaining of trees, shrubs or plants on public grounds in the city. The city council shall determine the value of the removed tree, shrub or plant, if such determination is made under this section. 
(Code 1975,  20-31) 
Sec. 66-47. - Mutilating, girdling, etc. 
    No tree, shrub or plant on public grounds in the city shall be mutilated, girdled or used for any purpose, except by the prior, written permission of the city council. 
(Code 1975,  20-32) 
Sec. 66-48. - Impeding passage of air or water into ground at trunk. 
    No person shall place or cause to be placed concrete or other impervious material, which will impede the passage of air and water into the ground, upon the ground at the trunk of a tree, shrub or plant within an area which, for trees, shall be determined by the following scale: nine square feet for every three inches of diameter of the trunk at a height of six inches above the ground; and for shrubs and plants, such area as shall be sufficient for their healthful growth. 
(Code 1975,  20-36) 
Sec. 66-49. - Protection from excavating or tunneling. 
    No person shall excavate or tunnel within six feet of a tree, shrub or plant on public grounds in the city without the prior, written permission of the city superintendent. 
(Code 1975,  20-33) 
Sec. 66-50. - Protection from burning. 
    No person shall burn or cause to be burned material in a manner or in a position which will cause injury to trees, shrubs or plants on public grounds in the city. 
(Code 1975,  20-35) 
Sec. 66-51. - Protection from chemicals. 
    No person shall place or expose or cause to be placed or exposed chemicals, in any form or state, which are injurious to trees, shrubs or plants, in a position which will cause injury to trees, shrubs or plants on public grounds in the city. 
(Code 1975,  20-34) 
Sec. 66-52. - Penalty for violating sections 66-47 through 66-51. 
    A violation of the provisions of sections 66-47 through 66-51 shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  20-37; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 66-53-66-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 66-66. - Maintenance, treatment or removal of diseased trees by property owner. 
    Any tree located on private property, which is diseased in part or in whole, or is dead in part or in whole, shall be maintained, treated or removed by the property owner. 
(Code 1975,  20-50) 
Sec. 66-67. - Shrubs and plants not to interfere with view at street intersections. 
    Any shrub or plant located on private property near an intersection shall be maintained by the property owner to allow an unobstructed view of the intersecting streets from a height of three feet to 12 feet above the ground. 
(Code 1975,  20-49) 
Sec. 66-68. - Trimming tree branches which extend over public grounds. 
    Any tree located on private property adjacent to public grounds which has branches extending over such public grounds shall be maintained by the property owner so as to allow a clear passage of such public grounds to a height of eight feet, except that where such branches extend over a street or alley, clear passage shall be maintained to a height of 12 feet. 
(Code 1975,  20-48) 
Sec. 66-69. - Inspections. 
    The city superintendent or his agent shall inspect the trees, shrubs and plants on private property in the city and is hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of carrying out an inspection. 
(Code 1975,  20-51) 
Sec. 66-70. - Nuisances; abatement. 
(a)  Any tree, shrub or plant which, in the opinion of the city superintendent, violates this division, or because of its diseased or dead condition, endangers public property or members of the public while on public property, shall be declared a nuisance. The property owner on whose land such nuisance exists shall be notified of the condition constituting the nuisance, his obligation to abate the nuisance condition and the time in which he shall abate the nuisance. 
(b)  The city superintendent shall, upon the property owner's failure to act as directed within the terms of the notice prescribed by subsection (a) of this section, take such action as shall abate the nuisance. 
(c)  The cost, if any, which the city superintendent incurs under subsection (b) of this section shall be certified by him, sent by him to the property owner who refused or failed to act as directed, and if not paid within one year, the city superintendent shall refer the amount to the city assessor who shall place such amount on the tax roll, for collection in the same manner as any tax assessed against real property. Such amount shall become a lien against the property when certified by the city superintendent. The amount may also be referred to the city attorney for collection as a debt for services rendered. 
(Code 1975,  20-52) 
DIVISION 4. - TREE PLACEMENT 

Sec. 66-71. - Definitions. 
    Activity shall mean any new residential construction caused by any person located specifically in zoning districts R-1, R-1A and R-3. 
    City shall mean the City of St. Clair. 
    Department shall mean City of St. Clair Building or Zoning Department. 
    D.B.H. shall mean diameter at breast height or the diameter in inches of a tree measured at four and one half (4") feet above the existing grade. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind conducting operations within the city, including all tree removal companies and persons removing trees on behalf of others. 
    Qualifying tree shall mean a tree meeting the minimum size and type requirements listed elsewhere in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03,  1, 6-4-01) 
Sec. 66-72. - Findings. 
    The city finds that growth and the spread of development have had the effect of eliminating many trees in the city. Specifically, the city finds: 
That trees protect the public health through the absorption of air pollutants and contamination, by the reduction of excessive noise and through their cooling effect in the summer months; 
That trees area an essential component of the general welfare of the city by maintaining natural beauty, recreational opportunities, wildlife habitat, and irreplaceable heritage for existing and future city residents; 
That trees play a role in filtering waste water which passes through the ground from surface to groundwater tables and lower aquifers; 
That trees, through their root systems, stabilize the soil and play an important and effective part in city-wide soil conservation, erosion control and flood control. 
That trees appreciably reduce carbon dioxide content and increase the oxygen content of the air and play a vital role in purifying the air. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03,  1, 6-4-01) 
Sec. 66-73. - Tree placement. 
    On any vacant lot or condominium site where construction activity occurs, trees shall be planted as follows: 
One tree (minimum) shall be planted on the site for every 60 feet of frontage abutting a public or private road. If the width of the building lot, as measured at the road is more than 60 feet, one tree shall be planted for every additional 60 feet or portion thereof. If there are existing qualifying trees located in the right of way or within 15 feet of any private road abutting the site no additional trees shall be required to be placed to meet the requirements of this division. 
These trees shall be planted in the boulevard area between the street and sidewalk in the road right of way or within 15 feet of any private road abutting the site unless circumstances prohibit in the determination of the department; in this case the trees will be planted in the front yard area. 
Trees must be nursery stock, large deciduous trees of 11/2" minimum caliper, from the following list or other trees as established by resolution of the city council: 
Oak 
Hop Hornbean 
Sweet Gum 
Beech Linden 
Ginko (male) 
Honey Locust (thornless) 
Sycamore Hackberry 
Hard Maple 
Birch 
Ash (seedless)  
(Ord. No. 2001-03,  1, 6-4-01) 
Sec. 66-74. - Deposit required. 
    Whenever a person shall engage in activity as defined in this section, said person shall first place on file with the department a deposit of $250.00 per tree or an amount as established by resolution of the city council, which deposit shall be held by the department as follows: 
Prior to the issuance of the final certificate occupancy permit the person shall supply evidence of the trees required by this section to be planted. Having been planted and the department upon inspection determines that the trees are alive and healthy and that the requirements of this division have been complied with, the department shall refund the deposit. 
If at the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy no such evidence of compliance with the terms of this division shall have been received by the department, the department shall remit the said deposit to a city account which use shall be solely for the purchase of and planting of trees in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03,  1, 6-4-01) 
Sec. 66-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WOODLAND AND TREE PRESERVATION 

Sec. 66-76. - Findings. 
    The city finds that rapid growth, the spread of development and increasing demands upon natural resources have had the effect of encroaching upon, despoiling, or eliminating many of the trees, woodlands and other forms of vegetation and natural resources and processes associated therewith which if preserved and maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, constitute important physical, aesthetic, recreational, health, and economic assets to existing and future residents of the city. Specifically, the city finds: 
(1)  That trees and woodlands protect the public health, through the absorption of air pollutants and contamination, by the reduction of excessive noise and mental and physical damage related to noise pollution and through their cooling effect in the summer months. 
(2)  That trees and woodlands are an essential component of the general welfare of the city by maintaining natural beauty, recreational opportunities, wildlife habitat, and irreplaceable heritage for existing and future city residents. 
(3)  That trees and woodlands play a role in filtering waste water which passes through the ground from surface to groundwater tables and lower aquifers. 
(4)  That trees and woodlands, through their root systems, stabilize the soil and play an important and effective part in city-wide soil conservation, erosion control and flood control. 
(5)  That trees and woodlands appreciably reduce carbon dioxide content and increase the oxygen content of the air and play a vital role in purifying the air. 
(6)  That the protection of such natural resources is a matter of paramount public concern, as provided by Article IV, Section 52 of the Constitution of the State of Michigan and the Michigan Environmental Protection Act M.C.L.. 324.1701 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 66-77. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this section are: 
(1)  To provide for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance and use of trees and woodlands located in this city in order to minimize disturbance to them and to prevent damage from erosion and siltation, a loss of wildlife and vegetation, and/or from the destruction of the natural habitat. 
(2)  To protect the trees, woodlands, and other forms of vegetation of this city for their economic support of local property values when allowed to remain uncleared and/or unharvested and for their natural beauty, wilderness character, ecological or historical significance; 
(3)  To provide for the paramount public concern for these natural resources in the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of this city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 66-78. - Definition of terms. 
    The following definitions shall apply in this section: 
    Activity shall mean any use, operation, development, or action caused by any person, including but not limited to, constructing, operating or maintaining any use or development; erecting buildings or other structure; depositing or removing material; dredging; ditching; land balancing; draining or diverting of water, pump or discharge of surface water; grading; paving; tree removal or other vegetation removal; excavation, mining or drilling operation. 
    Caliper shall mean the trunk diameter measured six inches above the ground on trees that are four inches in caliper or smaller. 
    City shall mean the City of St. Clair. 
    Construction zone means areas on the site where disturbance will occur including but not limited to cleaning, grubbing and grading activity, street right~of-way improvements and any activity involved in utility, parking lot, retention and building construction. 
    Department shall mean the city building and zoning department. 
    Development shall mean man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures. mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    D.B.H. shall mean diameter at breast height or the diameter in inches of a tree measured at four and one-half feet above the existing grade. 
    Drip line shall mean an imaginary vertical line that extends downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
    Grubbing shall mean the effective removal of understory vegetation from a site. 
    Land clearing shall mean those operations where trees and vegetation are removed and which occur previous to construction or building; e.g road right-of-way excavation, utility excavation, grubbing, and any other necessary clearing operation. 
    Landmark tree shall mean a tree of the Genus and/or species and diameter listed in the section of the division regulating landmark trees, and any tree of 24 inches D.B.H. or greater, which meet the health/condition criteria set forth elsewhere in this division. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or legal entity of any kind conducting operations within the city, including all tree removal companies and persons removing trees on behalf of others. 
    Protected tree shall mean any tree having a DBH of six inches or greater or any tree designated as a landmark tree. 
    Remove or removal shall mean the act of removing a tree by digging up or cutting down, or the effective removal through damage to the tree or its root system. 
    Replacement tree means any wood plant having, and least one well-defined stem at least three inches in caliper for deciduous trees, and ten-foot height for evergreen trees. 
    Transplant shall mean the digging up of a tree from one place on a property and the planting of the same tree in another place on the same property, in accordance with city tree transplanting standards and specifications. 
    Tree shall mean a woody plant with an erect perennial trunk, which at maturity is 13 feet or more in height, which has a more or less definite crown of foliage. 
    Woodland shall mean either: 
(1)  An area of land two contiguous acres or larger which is covered by at least 50 percent tree canopy from one or more groups of trees which have a natural understory and the remainder of the area not within the tree canopy is covered by other natural vegetation, or: 
(2)  An area meeting the requirements, of the subparagraph with no less than one-half acre and up to two acres in size and which also meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  The area acts a major buffer for residential property. 
b.  The area is a significant entry landmark to a residential subdivision or other prominent public area which in its absence would have a significant negative impact on the area. 
c.  The area is an important greenbelt linkage between other natural areas for pedestrians, recreational activities and/or wildlife 
d.  The area has high environmental value due to unusual topography, diversity of habitat, unique beauty, rare plant species or unusually large quality trees. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
TREE PROTECTION, REMOVAL, AND REPLACEMENT 
Sec. 66-79. - Tree permit required. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this division for any person, except as otherwise provided herein, to remove, relocate or destroy any protected tree in the city or construct any structure, deposit any materials, clear land, grub or grade within the drip line of any protected tree, without a tree permit issued by the department in accordance with this division unless specifically exempted elsewhere in this division. 
(b)  Where a tree permit is required, a zoning application shall be filed with the department for review and approval. The application shall be submitted together with the following: 
(1)  A fee as established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(2)  Any additional items specified in the division as required by the department or the planning commission. 
GENERAL PERMIT EXEMPTIONS OR REQUIREMENTS 
Property Requirements* Any vacant or occupied residential property with one-half acre or less in area. No more than six protected trees per calendar year may be removed without a permit or replacement as required per the specifications of the division. Any vacant or occupied residential property with more than one-half acre in area. No more than 30 percent of the total number of protected trees on the lot per calendar year may be permitted to be removed without a site plan review and a permit or replacement as required per the specifications of the division. Any non residential property of one-half acre or more. No more than 40 percent of the total number of protected trees on the lot, whichever is less, may be permitted to be removed (or where removal has occurred) without site plan review and a permit, with the requirements as set forth else where in the division. All property within the city limits. A permit is required to remove any tree 24 inches or greater in diameter. * Where the city is required to install utilities that remove trees in excess of the amounts listed, they shall replace the trees at the same ratio required as listed in the division.  
(c)  Where a permit is required, an on site examination shall be required by the department. Landmark trees will not be required to be replaced if they do not meet the minimum score listed in the health/condition standard chart. 
(d)  Tree permits shall be issued for only the following reasons: 
(1)  Trees which pose a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or threaten to cause disruption to public utility service. 
(2)  Trees which pose a safety hazard to buildings or structures. 
(3)  Trees which unreasonably prevent access to a lot or parcel. 
(4)  Trees which unreasonably prevent development of a lot or parcel or a physical use thereof. It is the intent of this provision that a permit shall not be granted for the removal of any tree where a reasonable alternative design solution exists consistent with the permitted use of the property under the city zoning ordinance. 
(5)  Where a landmark tree is proposed for removal and there is no reasonable alternative that would allow preservation of the tree while still meeting other city requirements. 
(6)  Diseased trees or trees so weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury so as to pose a danger to persons, property, improvements, or other trees and trees which are determined by the department to have a health condition factor ranking less than 16 per the division. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 66-80. - Site plan application and review. 
(a)  Determine if the plan removes an excessive number of trees in regards to the spirit of this division or if the site may be classified as a woodland under the definition of this division. If either of the above are determined to be true, a tree location survey shall be required by the commission. 
(b)  Where a tree location survey is required, it shall be submitted along with the site plan and accompanying documentation as a part of the review process. Site plan approval shall precede issuance of a tree permit. 
(c)  When a tree location survey is not required, the department shall review the application and other documentation as required within 15 working days of the site plan approval for issuance of a tree permit. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 66-81. - Tree location survey guideline. 
(a)  When a tree location survey is required, it shall be submitted in a form acceptable to the department and shall bear the following information and details: 
(1)  Minimum scale of 1" = 50' The scale shall be the same as the site plans. 
(2)  The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, together with the existing and proposed locations of the structures and improvements, including existing and proposed utilities. 
(3)  Locations and dimensions of all setbacks and existing or proposed easements. 
(4)  All trees shall be tagged in the field with identifying numbers, using non-corrosive metal tags. 
(5)  Locations of all existing trees six-inch D.B.H. or more including trees within the adjoining street right-of-way, trees within 25 feet of the property lines and all trees to be erected by the development such as trees located within areas of right-of-way improvements or off site utility work. All such trees proposed to remain, to be relocated or to be removed, shall be so designated. The survey shall be accompanied by a separate key identifying the numbered trees by size, existing and proposed grade at the base of each tree shall be indicated on the tree location survey. 
(6)  Tree location surveys are to be performed by actual field survey by a registered land surveyor and verified on site by a registered landscape architect, certified arborist or forester. Both professionals must verify the contents by seal or signature, whichever applies. 
(7)  If existing trees are to be relocated the proposed location for such trees, together with a statement as to how such trees are to be protected and/or stored during land clearance and construction and how they are to be maintained after construction. 
(8)  A statement showing how trees to remain are to be protected during land clearance, construction and on a permanent basis including the proposed use of tree wells, protective barriers, tunneling or retaining walls. 
(9)  The number of trees to be removed which are six inch DBH or more. 
(10)  The requirement for a tree location survey may be waived by the department for areas 50 feet or more outside the construction zone. If waived, a statement indicating predominant species and estimated number and size of trees in this area will be required. The area to remain undisturbed shall be snow fenced prior to any activity. 
(b)  For tracks of land ten acres or larger, where a tree location survey meeting the conditions of the ordinance is required, it shall be submitted with the following supplemental documentation: 
An aerial photograph or copy thereof, of suitable quality 1" = 100' minimum. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 66-82. - Tree protection during land development. 
(a)  Prior to the land clearing stage of development and before a tree permit will be issued, the owner, developer or agent shall do the following: 
(1)  All trees for which application is being made for removal shall be so identified on site by fluorescent orange spray paint (chalk base) or by red flagging tape prior to field inspection by the department. 
(2)  Erect barriers of four foot high fencing or similar material staked with metal stakes ten feet on center which will shield and protect trees, no closer than six feet from the trunk or at the drip line, whichever is greater, of all such trees or groups of trees. 
(3)  Keep clear all debris or fill, equipment and material from within the required protective barrier. 
(b)  During construction the owner, developer or agent shall not cause or permit any activity within the drip line of any protected tree or group of trees including but not limited to the storage of equipment, dumpsters, boulders, dirt and excavated material, building or waste material or any other material harmful to the life of a tree. 
(c)  No damaging attachment, wires (other than cable wires for trees), signs or permits may be fastened to any tree protected by this division. 
(d)  The department shall conduct periodic inspections of the site during land cleaning and construction in order to ensure compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 66-83. - Tree replacement or relocation during land development. 
(a)  As a condition of granting a tree permit, the applicant will be required to replace protected trees being removed, in excess of the amount allowed for removal as follows: 
(1)  The permit grantee shall either relocate or replace protected trees at a ratio of 30 percent of the amount of trees removed in excess of the amount allowed for removal. All replacement trees shall measure three-inch caliper for deciduous trees, ten-foot height for evergreen trees, or greater. Where it is not feasible and/or desirable to replace or relocate trees onsite, the city may substitute greater size for replacement trees or require replacement trees at another location on public property in city. 
(2)  Replacement trees shall have shade potential and other characteristics comparable to the trees proposed for removal and shall be State Department of Agriculture Nursery Grade No. 1 stock or better. Replacement trees shall be staked, if necessary, wrapped and mulched and shall be guaranteed for one year. Trees must be nursery stock, large deciduous trees of three inch minimum caliper from the following list or other trees as established by resolution of the city council: 
Oak 
Hop Hornbean 
Sweet Gum 
Beech 
Ash(seedless) Linden Pine 
Ginko (male) 
Birch 
Sycamore 
Honey Locust (thornless) Hackberry 
Hard Maple 
Evergreen  
(3)  As an alternative or partial alternative to the above, the city may approve trees which are smaller in caliper size in situations where the intent is to recreate or create a densely wooded area. Such groupings of trees shall consist of tightly grouped trees and shall be a minimum of three-quarter inch caliper and shall be used only in situations and locations where it is appropriate to create a densely wooded effect. Spacing between trees shall be approved by the planning commission. When this alternative is used, the sum of the caliper of the replacement trees shall be equal to the sum of the caliper of the trees which are being replaced. (Landscape Design Principles for Densely Wooded Areas adopted by the Planning Commission shall be used as guidelines for this alternative). 
(4)  When landmark trees are permitted to be removed, replacement trees shall be provided to a minimum of 25 percent of DBH of the trees to be removed. Replacement trees measured in DBH or calipers, shall be provided either individually or on an accumulative basis to meet the 25 percent DBH requirement. 
(5)  The applicant shall be required to replace trees originally indicated and intended to be saved when such trees are excessively damaged or removed in violation of an approved site plan during construction to the extent that it puts the tree at risk of death as determined by the department. The replacements shall have at least equal shade potential and other characteristics comparable to those of the damaged trees and be a minimum five inch caliper, excluding landmark trees. Landmark trees shall be replaced at 100 percent DBH on an individual or a cumulative basis using minimum five inch caliper stock. 
(6)  Trees required to be planted in accordance with this division shall be in place and properly supported prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. Center of said trees shall not be located closer than four feet to any property line or ten feet to any utility line. 
(7)  All trees replaced or planted as replacements must exhibit a normal live growth cycle in compliance with all other requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 66-84. - Emergency tree removal. 
(a)  When it is necessary to expedite the removal of damaged or destroyed trees in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare following high winds, storms, tornadoes, floods, freezes, fires or other natural or man-made disasters the requirements of this division may be suspended by the department for a period of 30 days in the affected areas. 
(b)  The public works department of the city shall be exempt from the permit process for the purposes of performing their required duties during an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 66-85. - Penalties. 
(a)  Each unauthorized activity regarding trees protected by this ordinance shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction as defined in this Code, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than an amount adopted by resolution of the city council, plus costs for the replacement of all trees affected by such activity and any other costs associated with each infraction. Repeat offenses under this ordinance shall also be subject to increased fines as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 66-86. - Landmark trees. 
    The following is the list of landmark trees according to common name, species and DBH which are protected as listed in the enclosed chart. 
(1)  The listed DBH for the landmark trees represent the minimum size protected for each species. 
(2)  Landmark tree list; 
a.  All trees 24" DBH or greater are considered landmark trees. 
b.  The following trees listed in the enclosed chart shall also be considered landmark trees. 
LANDMARK TREE CHART 
Common Name Species Size DBH Ash Frazinus spp. 18" American Beech Fagus grandifolia 18" American Chestnut Castanea dentata 8" Birch Betula spp. 18" Black Alder Alnus gultinosa 12" Black Tupelo Nyssa sylvatica 12" Black & White Walnut Juglans nigra, J. cinerea 20" Buckeye Aesculus glabra 18" Cedar, Red Juniperus spp. 12" Crab Apple (cultivar) Malus spp 12" Douglas Fir Pseudotsuga menziesii 18" Eastern Hemlock Tsuga canadensis 12" Flowering Dogwood Cornus florida 8" Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba 18" Hickory Carya spp. 18" Horsechestnut Aesculus carnea 18" Kentucky Coffeetree Bymnociadus dioicus 18" Larch/Tamarack Larix laricina (Eastern) 12" London Planetree/Sycamore Plantanus spp. 18" Maple Acer spp. 18" Oak Quercus spp. 16" Pine Pinus spp. 18" Sassafras Aassafras albidum 15" Spruce Picea spp. 18" Tuliptree Liriodendron tulipifera 18" Choke Cherry Prunus spp. 18"  
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
Sec. 66-87. - Tree health/condition standard. 
    The department shall be responsible for determining the health/condition standard for trees as listed in the enclosed chart. 
(1)  By field inspection of trees, the department shall evaluate the trunk condition, growth rate, structure, insects, and diseases, crown development and life expectancy. From the evaluation, the department shall determine a point value which describes the trees health/condition. 
(2)  Any listed landmark tree or any 24-inch or greater DBH tree with a score of 16 or higher is protected under this section. 
HEALTH/CONDITION STANDARD CHART 
FACTOR 5 OR 4 2 OR 3 1 RANKING Trunk Sound & Solid Sections of bark missing Extensive and hollow Growth/Rate More than 6" twig elongation 2"-6" twig elongation Less than 2" twig elongation Structure Sound One major or several minor limbs dead 2 or more major limbs dead Insects/Diseases No pests present One pest present Two or more pests present Crown/Development Full and balanced Full but unbalanced Unbalanced and lacking a full crown Life expectancy Over 30 years 15-20 years Less than 5 years TOTAL:  
(Ord. No. 2001-06,  1, 10-15-01) 
ARTICLE III. - NOXIOUS WEEDS 

Sec. 66-91. - "Noxious weeds" designated. 
    For the purpose of this article, "noxious weeds" shall include Canada thistle (circium arvense), dodders (any species of cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of brassica or sinapis), wild carrot (daucus carota), bindweed (convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior), poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix), milkweed, golden rod, ox-eyed daisies, burdock, or other plant which in the opinion of the city council is regarded as a common nuisance. 
(Code 1975,  20-63) 
Sec. 66-92. - Eradication. 
    The city superintendent, or other city employee designated by the city superintendent, shall investigate the existence of noxious weeds in the city. If any are found growing therein, the city superintendent or his designee shall apply such remedy to prevent their spread and to eradicate the noxious weeds. 
(Code 1975,  20-64) 
Sec. 66-93. - Owners' duty; notice; contents; destruction by city; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all owners of lands on which noxious weeds are found growing to destroy such weeds before they reach a seed-bearing stage, and to prevent the regrowth of such weeds, or to prevent such weeds from becoming a detriment to public health. Except as provided in this section, the city superintendent shall notify by certified mail, with return receipt requested, the owner, agent or occupant of any lands on which noxious weeds are found growing. Such notice shall contain methods of treating and eradicating such noxious weeds and a summary of the provisions of this section. Failure of the city superintendent to give such notice shall not, however, constitute a defense to any action to enforce the payment of any penalty provided for or debt created under the provisions of this article. If any such owner, agent or occupant shall refuse to destroy such noxious weeds or cause the weeds to be destroyed, it shall be the duty of the city superintendent or his designee to enter upon such lands and to destroy such noxious weeds or cause such weeds to be destroyed. Express power to so enter upon such lands and destroy such noxious weeds is hereby conferred upon the city superintendent or his designee. 
(b)  Any expense incurred in such destruction shall be paid by the owner of such lands, and the city shall have a lien against such lands for such expense, which lien shall be enforced in the manner now provided by law for the enforcement of tax liens, or the city may commence an action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection thereof, or resort to any other lawful procedure or remedy for collection, satisfaction or enforcement of such lien. 
(c)  The owner, agent or occupant of any subdivided land in any subdivision in which buildings have been erected on 60 percent of the lots included in that subdivision, or the owners, agents or occupants of lots along all improved streets in common usage, for a depth of ten rods or the depth of the lots, whichever is the lesser, shall destroy such noxious weeds or cause the weeds to be destroyed. If such person shall have failed to do so, after notice as provided in this section, the city superintendent, or any official, inspector or other agent authorized by the city superintendent, may enter upon such subdivided lands or lots and destroy by cutting, with or without mechanical equipment, which will not damage the property or the sidewalk adjacent thereto, any such weeds, and all expenses incurred in such destruction shall be paid by the owners of such subdivided lands. 
(d)  The city shall have a lien upon the subdivided lands or lots on which work has been done by the city pursuant to subsection (c) of this section for the expense of the destruction of noxious weeds thereon, and such lien shall be enforced in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens, and the city can commence an action in any court of competent jurisdiction for collection thereof, or resort to any other lawful procedure or remedy for collection, satisfaction or enforcement of such lien. 
(e)  Any owner who shall refuse to destroy such noxious weeds, as provided for in this section, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1-12. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall apply to weeds in fields devoted to growing any small grain crop such as wheat, oats, barley or rye. 
(g)  In the case of easements, properties such as abandoned subdivisions, strip mines, gravel pits, and public properties such as forest preserves and all other lands where definite ownership is not known to the city superintendent and cannot be established, it shall be the duty of the county board of supervisors to cause the destruction of noxious weeds in accordance with the provisions of MCL 247.61 et seq., MSA 9.631(1). 
(h)  In the case of noxious weeds growing on any state-owned lands, the city superintendent shall notify the department of natural resources in case there are lands in this city belonging to the state under the jurisdiction of the department of natural resources. It shall be the duty of the department of natural resources to cut all noxious weeds growing on any lands under their jurisdiction within 165 feet of any privately owned improved property, upon receipt of such notification. If the department of natural resources shall fail to cut such weeds, it shall be the duty of the city superintendent to enter upon such lands and to destroy such noxious weeds or cause such weeds to be destroyed, the expense thereof to be a proper charge against the department of natural resources, and may be recovered in an action therefor in the state court of claims. 
(Code 1975,  20-65) 
Sec. 66-94. - Alternative notice by publication; cutting weeds at expense of property owner; exemption as to railroads. 
    In lieu of the notice required by section 66-93, the city superintendent may publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county during the month of March that weeds not cut by June 1 of that year will be cut by the city, and the owner of the property charged with the costs under the provisions of section 66-93. The publication shall also contain all other information required of the notice provided for in section 66-93. The city may cut weeds as many times as is necessary and charge the costs actually incurred by the city to the property owners. The provisions of this article relative to entering of property for the cutting of weeds shall not be applicable to railroads which shall continue to be subject to MCL 247.71, MSA 9.631(11). 
(Code 1975,  20-66) 
Sec. 66-95. - Limitation upon expenses. 
    The city superintendent shall charge and collect the costs actually incurred by the city in eradicating noxious weeds, in such amount as is established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The costs to be collected and charged shall include actual labor costs, the costs of using equipment, materials and supplies, and any other administrative cost incurred by the city. The city council shall establish by resolution a minimum and a maximum amount that shall be charged and collected by the city superintendent, unless prior consent of the city council is obtained to incur a greater amount. 
(Code 1975,  20-67) 
Sec. 66-96. - Annual report; contents. 
    The city superintendent shall, annually, before December 1, make a written report to the department of agriculture and to the city council. Such report shall be made out upon blank forms furnished by the department of agriculture and shall contain such information with reference to the existence and growth of noxious weeds as such department may require. 
(Code 1975,  20-69) 
Sec. 66-97. - Prosecution of violators. 
    It shall be the duty of the city superintendent to prosecute or complain to the proper authorities of any person who may violate any law or ordinance on the subject of noxious weeds. 
(Code 1975,  20-68) 
Sec. 66-98. - Violation of article; penalty. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1975,  20-70; Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
Chapters 67-69 - RESERVED 
Chapter 70 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Marine safety act, MCL 281.1001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Obstructing navigation on Pine River. 
(a)  No person shall place or cause to be placed any boom, raft, piles, timber, vessel or other obstructions in, upon or across Pine River, within the limits of the city, so as to hinder, impede or obstruct the free navigation thereof of ships, boats and vessels which may be passing up and down such river. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police, to require any person obstructing or impeding the navigation of the Pine River, or the owner of any such obstruction, to remove such obstruction immediately. Every person who shall neglect or refuse to remove such obstructions, and every person violating this section, shall, on conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  10-1) 
Sec. 70-2. - Speed limit for vessels on Pine River. 
(a)  Definitions. All words and phrases used in this section shall be construed and have the same meanings as those words and phrases defined in Act No. 303 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 281.1008). 
(b)  Speed restriction. On the waters of the Pine River within the city limits, it shall be unlawful for an operator of a vessel to exceed a slow-no wake speed, which means a very slow speed whereby the wake or wash created by the vessel would be minimal. 
(c)  Violations. Violations of this section are a misdemeanor and may be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975,  10-2) 
Sec. 70-3. - Vessel parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, dock, or moor a boat, vessel, commercial watercraft, or personal watercraft on any city temporary, floating dock located on the north shore of the pine river for a period in excess of five hours. 
(b)  Overnight parking, docking, or mooring of any boat, vessel, commercial watercraft, or personal watercraft on any city temporary, floating dock is prohibited. 
(c)  The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not extend to vessels so stationed due to weather or mechanical emergencies. 
(d)  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as prescribed in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04,  1, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 70-4. - Launch ramp fees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to launch or retrieve a boat, vessel, commercial watercraft, or personal watercraft from the City of St. Clair Boat Harbor without first having paid a launch ramp fee to the city harbormaster. 
(b)  The harbor commission shall establish launch ramp fees, and shall amend them from time-to-time, as necessary. Said fees and any amendments thereto shall be approved by city council. A copy of said fees shall be on file both at the harbormaster's office at the St. Clair Boat Harbor and at city hall. 
(c)  A violation of subsection (a) is a misdemeanor punishable as prescribed in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-11,  1, 8-15-16) 
Secs. 70-5-70-25. - Reserved. 
Sec. 70-26. - Lots established; authority to lease. 
    The properties adjacent to the Pine River, owned by the city and designated by numbers on the maps on file in the city clerk's office and made a part of this section are hereby established as boathouse lots and dock lots. Such lots may be leased by the city for the purpose of erecting and maintaining facilities for the dockage and storage of boats upon the terms and conditions set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1999-11,  1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 70-27. - Lease term. 
(a)  Leases under this article shall be for a term of five years. Lease payments shall be on or before April 1st of each year in an amount which shall be established by the city council and may be changed from year to year at council discretion. 
(b)  Transfer of lease shall be for the remaining lease period only and approval of transfer shall not be construed as a new five-year lease grant. 
(c)  The lease is not transferable without prior approval of council and may not be subleased except that transfer to an immediate family member shall be automatic upon written notification to the city clerk. Immediate family shall include and be limited to husband, wife, son, daughter, brother, sister, son-in-law, daughter-in-law and father or mother of the lessee. 
(d)  An administrative fee will be assessed upon processing of a lease transfer as set by resolution of city council. 
(e)  The lessee shall provide the city, upon payment of each annual installment, with a copy of the current boat registration and proof of insurance in the owner's name. 
(Ord. No. 1999-11,  1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 70-28. - Qualifications of lessee. 
    In order to lease a lot, a person must: 
(1)  Be a resident of the city; and 
(2)  Own a boat which will be docked or stored on such lot; and 
(3)  Not be the lessee of any other lot. 
As used in this section, "boat" means every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
(Ord. No. 1999-11,  1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 70-29. - Application for lease; priority in granting lease. 
    Applications for lease of lots under this article shall be made to the city clerk in writing. Such application shall be dated by the clerk as of its date of receipt. The clerk shall maintain a register of applications for lease of lots in chronological order as to their receipt, and those applications that are first in time shall be given the first consideration as to lots as they become available. 
(Ord. No. 1999-11,  1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 70-30. - Sales procedure. 
    Should any lease holder determine to sell his interest or should the lease be cancelled in accordance with section 70-32, the owner shall take the following actions: 
(a)  A lessee must give notice to the city and to all persons on the register of applications maintained by the city clerk of his intent to sell his interest. The notice shall state the asking price and provide that a response must be made within 15 days of the notice date. The notice required by this section shall be given by registered mail, return receipt requested, and proof of such notice given to the city clerk. 
(b)  The lessee shall accept offers for purchase in the order the prospective purchasers appear on the register of applications. 
(c)  Upon acceptance of an offer to purchase the lessee shall make application to the city council for approval of the lease transfer. 
(d)  If the lease is canceled pursuant to the provisions of section 70-32 herein, lessee shall have six months to complete the transfer of the interest after which time said lease shall be finally revoked and the improvements thereon shall revert to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1999-11,  1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2000-03,  1, 3-20-00) 
Sec. 70-31. - Compliance with building regulations; maintenance of lots. 
    Prior to granting the initial five-year lease and not less than annually thereafter, the city shall inspect buildings and docks constructed on the leased property for compliance with: 
(1)  All city codes and ordinances applicable to land and buildings constructed on a leased lot; and 
(2)  Proper maintenance of the land building and docks; and 
(3)  Proper maintenance of lawn and grass areas and removal and proper cutting of weeds. 
(Ord. No. 1999-11,  1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 70-32. - Cancellation of lease. 
(a)  The city council is hereby authorized to revoke and cancel any lease whenever the council is satisfied there has occurred a violation of this article or any other ordinance of the city, or of any of the laws of the state, or that the lessee does not meet the requirements of section 70-28 of this article. 
(b)  Upon the cancellation of any lease under this article, the lessee shall, within 90 days thereafter, remove all buildings and other improvements made on the lot. If such buildings and improvements are not removed within such period, they shall become the property of the city, provided that the city, in its discretion, may demolish such buildings and remove such improvements at the expense of the lessee. 
(Ord. No. 1999-11,  1, 9-7-99) 
Sec. 70-33. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    A violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 1999-11,  1, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 70-34-70-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSING AND REGULATION OF TUGBOATS OPERATING ON PINE RIVER 

Sec. 70-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Anchorage or moorage means the act of securing, tying, fastening or attaching any tugboat, vessel or watercraft to any other object, including other such vessels, buoys, seawalls, pilings, bridges or the earthen river bottom or shoreline, by any rope, chain, cable, anchor, drag, pike or other device so as to immobilize, anchor or make stationary such vessel against movement in the water. 
    Riverbank means that portion of the raised slope of land lying at either edge of the watercourse of the Pine River, and for purposes of this article shall be deemed to be located at the ordinary high watermark of such river on such slope, except that where a seawall has been constructed, such seawall shall be considered the riverbank. 
    River mouth means that part of the Pine River lying east of the M-29 drawbridge where the Pine River flows into the St. Clair River. 
    Tugboat means and includes any boat or vessel which is designed, constructed, intended or used for the towing, pulling or moving of larger boats, ships, vessels, barges or other watercraft when such act or service is performed for hire, profit, compensation or other remuneration, direct or indirect. 
(Code 1975,  10-40) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 70-57. - Acts prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to anchor or moor any tugboat in the Pine River within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided in this article. It shall further be unlawful for any person to anchor or moor a tugboat, whether or not licensed, in the Pine River within the corporate limits of the city except as follows: 
(1)  Any tugboat shall be so anchored or moored so that the longest hull dimension is parallel to the riverbank. 
(2)  No tugboat shall be so anchored or moored for more than five consecutive hours, except between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Further, this subsection shall not apply during the months of December through March, inclusive. 
(3)  No tugboat in excess of 65 feet at its longest hull dimension, nor more than 35 feet in width at its beam, shall be anchored or moored in such river. 
(4)  Any tugboat shall be so anchored or moored so that there is not more than 15 feet between the riverbank and the side of the hull of such tugboat nearest the riverbank. 
(5)  A tugboat shall be anchored or moored so that no obstruction to navigation is created. 
(Code 1975,  10-41) 
Sec. 70-58. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    A violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1999-09,  1, 9-7-99) 
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES 
    Following is a list of resolutions and ordinances granting franchises which are still outstanding: 
(1)  Ordinance No. 1981-05, adopted May 18, 1981, granting a franchise for the installation and operation of a cable television system for a period of 30 years effective June 3, 1981. 
(2)  Ordinance No. 1987-10, adopted October 5, 1987, granting a franchise to Southeastern Michigan Gas Company for the distribution of gas for public and private use in the city for a period of 20 years effective following its confirmation by the voters of the city. 
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2011-12,  10, adopted October 3, 2011.) 
(3)  Ordinance No. 2000-01, adopted January 3, 2000, granting a limited electric franchise to Nordic Electric for a period of five years effective January 24, 2000. 
(4)  Ordinance No. 2000-05, adopted June 19, 2000, granting an electric franchise to Detroit Edison Company for a period of 30 years effective following its confirmation by the voters of the city. 
(5)  Ordinance No. 2000-06, adopted August 7, 2000, granting a limited electric franchise to DTE Energy Marketing, Inc. for a period of five years effective August 16, 2000. 
(6)  Ordinance No. 2000-07, adopted October 7, 2000, granting a limited electric franchise to CMS Marketing Services and Trading Company for a period of five years effective August 16, 2000. 
(7)  Ordinance No. 2000-08, adopted October 2, 2000, granting a limited electric franchise to Quest Energy, L.L.C. for a period of five years effective October 11, 2000. 
(8)  Ordinance No. 2011-12, adopted October 3, 2011, granting SEMCO Energy Gas Company, a division of SEMCO Energy, Inc., a Michigan corporation, "grantee," the right, power and authority to construct, operate, maintain and replace in the public streets, highways, alleys, bridges, waterways, and other public places in the City of St. Clair, Michigan, all needful and proper gas pipes, mains, conductors, service pipes and other apparatus and facilities requisite for the transmission and distribution of gas for a period of 30 years. 
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the zoning regulations of the city adopted in October 1991 and subsequently revised in April 1993, November 1996, on May 21, 1999, in January 2000, April 2001 and November 2001. The ordinance has been printed as adopted, except that obviously misspelled words and typographical errors have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. Amendments are indicated by a history note immediately following the amended section. 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE, PURPOSE, CONSTRUCTION, RULES APPLYING TO TEXT AND ENABLING AUTHORITY 

Section 1.1. - Title. 
    This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of St. Clair, Michigan. 
Section 1.2. - Purpose. 
    The zoning districts and regulations specified for each district established by this chapter have been constructed in accordance with a general plan for the physical development of the City and its surrounding land area. This plan, called the Community Comprehensive Plan for the City, provides thoroughly considered objectives for the sound and orderly development of the City. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate and restrict the use of land and structures; to meet the needs of the City's residents for food, fiber, energy, and other natural resources, places of residence, recreation, industry, trade, service, and other uses of land; to insure that uses of the land shall be situated in appropriate locations and relationships; to limit the inappropriate overcrowding of land and congestion of population and transportation systems and other public facilities; to facilitate adequate and efficient provision for transportation systems, sewage disposal, water, energy, education, recreation, and other public service and facility needs; and to promote public health, safety, and welfare, and for those purposes may divide the City into districts of the number, shape, and area considered best suited to carry out this section. For each of those districts, regulations shall be imposed designating the uses for which buildings or structures shall or shall not be erected or altered, and designating the trades, industries, and other land uses or activities that shall be permitted or excluded or subjected to special regulations. 
Section 1.3. - Construction. 
    This Ordinance shall be liberally construed in such manner as to best effectuate its purpose. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, the requirements shall be held to be minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. Where any condition imposed by any provision of this Ordinance upon the use of any lot, building, or structure is either more restrictive or less restrictive than any comparable condition imposed by any other provision of this Ordinance, or by the provision of an ordinance adopted under any other law, the provision which is more restrictive or which imposes a higher standard or requirement shall govern. 
Section 1.4. - Rules applying to text. 
    The following rules shall apply to the text and language of this Ordinance: 
1.4.1.  The particular shall control the general. 
1.4.2.  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any caption, the text shall control. 
1.4.3.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
1.4.4.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
1.4.5.  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
1.4.6.  The word "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
1.4.7.  The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual. 
1.4.8.  The word "used" or "occupied", as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
1.4.9.  Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of common or standard utilization. 
Section 1.5. - Validity and severability clause. 
    If any Court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this Ordinance to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in said ruling. 
    If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this Ordinance to a particular land, parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure not specifically included in said ruling. 
Section 1.6. - Enabling authority. 
    This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Act 207 of 1921, as amended, of the State of Michigan. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 2.1. - Purpose. 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words and terms are herewith defined. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; any words not defined below shall be considered as to convey their normally accepted meaning. 
    Accessory Buildings. A supplementary building or structure on the same lot or parcel of land as the main building or buildings or part of the main building occupied by or devoted exclusively to any accessory use. 
    Accessory Use. For purposes of this Ordinance, an accessory use is stated in terms of general criteria. Under such criteria, accessory uses must meet the following tests: 
A.  Must be related to the principal use; 
B.  Must be subordinate and normally incidental to the principal use; 
C.  Must be located on the same lot as the principal use and must be in the same ownership; 
D.  Must not alter the character of the area or be detrimental thereto; 
E.  Such use serves the comfort, convenience, and needs of the occupants therein. 
    Adult Businesses. Shall include but not be limited to the following businesses: Adult book store, adult motion picture theater, massage parlor, sauna, nude modeling studio, premises for nude entertainment or similar type of business. 
    Agriculture. The use of land for tilling of the soil, the raising of tree and field crops, or animal husbandry as a source of income. 
    Alley. A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Altered. Any change in the location or use of a building, or any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, joists, girders, and similar components, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls, or any change in the type of occupancy. Also includes the words "reconstructed" and "alteration." 
    Appeal. An entreaty or demand for a hearing and/or review of facts and/or actions. 
    Architectural Features. Architectural features of a building shall include cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative ornaments. 
    Area, Net Site. The total area within the property lines of a project excluding external streets. 
    Area, Building. The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps. 
    Automobile Repair. General repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair, overall painting, and vehicle rustproofing. 
    Automobile Service Station. A building or structure designed or used for the retail sale of fuel (stored only in underground tanks), lubricants, air, water and other operating commodities for motor vehicles, aircraft or boats, and including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such vehicles, and including space for facilities for the storage, minor repair, or servicing, but not including bumping, painting, refinishing, major repair and overhauling, steam cleaning, rustproofing, where the primary use of the premises is such, or high-speed washing thereof. 
    Automobile Wash Establishment. A building, or portion thereof, the primary purpose of which is that of washing vehicles. 
    Awning. Any covered projection attached to the face of a building which is supported entirely by the building and projects beyond the building wall. 
    Basement. A basement shall be counted as a story if over fifty (50) percent of its height, or five feet is above the level from which the height of the building is measured, or if it is used for business purposes 
    Bed & Breakfast. A use in which transient guests are provided a sleeping room and or board in return for payment. 
    Bedroom. A bedroom is a dwelling room used for or intended to be used solely for sleeping purposes, by human beings. 
    Block. The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Boardinghouse. A building other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodgings and meals are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons. 
    Building. Any structure other than a boundary wall or fence and includes the word "structure." 
    Buildable Area. The buildable area of a lot is the space remaining after the minimum setback and open space requirements of this Ordinance have been complied with. 
    Building, Bulk. The volume of a structure in cubic feet as determined by the dimensions taken from the outer surfaces of the exterior of the structure. 
    Building Envelope. Shall mean the principal structure intended for a building site, together with any attached accessory structures, e.g., in a residential development, the building envelope would refer to the house and any attached garage. 
    Building Height. The building height is the vertical distance measured from the established grade reference level to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof; to the deck of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. Where the building may be situated on sloping terrain, this height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall. 
    Building Setback Line. The line formed by the outer surface of a structure or enclosure wall at or with the finish grade or surface of the ground; pertaining to and defining those minimum (building) setback lines which are established, in general, parallel to the front street or right-of-way, and within which setback area no part of a building shall project or be located, except as otherwise provided for by this Ordinance. 
    Building Site. Shall mean the condominium unit, including the building envelope and the contiguous limited common area or element under and surrounding the building envelope, and shall be the counter-part of "lot" as used in connection with a project developed under the Subdivision Control Act, Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended. 
    Building, Main or Principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
    Canopy. Any covered structure attached to a building which projects beyond the building wall and is carried by a frame partially supported by the ground or sidewalk below it. 
    Child Care Facilities. 
A.  Family Day Care Home: A private home in which one (1) but less than seven (7) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 
B.  Group Day Care Home: A private home in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 
C.  Child Care Center or Day Care Center: A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one (1) or more preschool or school age children for care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. Child care center or day care center includes a facility which provides care for not less than two (2) consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, or drop-in center. Child care center or day care center does not include a Sunday School, a vacation bible school, or a religious instructional class that is conducted by a religious organization where children are in attendance for not greater than three (3) hours per day for an indefinite period, or not greater than eight (8) hours per day for a period of not to exceed four (4) weeks, during a twelve (12) month period, or a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for not greater than three (3) hours, while persons responsible for the children are attending religious services. 
    Condominium Act. Refers to Michigan Act 59 of 1978, as amended. 
    Condominium-Front Yard Setback. Shall be at least the required distance between the front line of the building site and the condominium dwelling. 
    Condominium-General Commons Area. Shall mean the common elements of a site condominium development other than the limited common elements. 
    Condominium-Limited Common Elements. Shall mean a portion of the site condominium common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all the co-owners. 
    Condominium-Rear Yard Setback. Shall be at least the required distance between the rear line of the building site and the condominium dwelling. 
    Condominium-Side Yard Setback. Shall be at least the required distance between the side line of the building site and the condominium dwelling. 
    Convalescent or Nursing Home. A convalescent home or nursing home is a home for the care of children or the aged or the infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering serious bodily disorders. Said home shall conform to, and qualify for license under applicable State laws. 
    Coverage. That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the building area. 
    Drive-In Establishment. A business establishment so developed that its principal retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle (e.g., restaurants, cleaners, banks, theaters). 
    Drive-Through. A business establishment whose method of operation involves the delivery of a product or service directly to a customer inside a motor vehicle, typically through a window or other appurtenance to a building for use or consumption off-premises. 
    Dwelling. A building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters for one or more families having their own cooking facilities but not including automobile chassis, tents, or portable buildings, or mobile homes outside of a mobile home park. 
    Dwelling, Multiple. A building used for and designed as a residence for three (3) or more families living independently of each other and each having their own cooking facilities therein, including apartment houses, townhouses, and apartment hotels, but not including mobile homes. 
    Dwelling, One-Family. A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family. Also known as a single-family dwelling. 
    Dwelling, Two-Family. A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. Also known as a duplex dwelling. 
    Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit is any building or portion thereof having cooking facilities, which is occupied wholly as the home, residence or sleeping place of one (1) family, either permanently or transiently, but in no case shall a travel trailer, motor home, mobile home, trailer coach, automobile chassis, tent or other portable building be considered a dwelling in single-, multiple-, or two- family residential areas. In cases of mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling unit for the purpose of this Ordinance and shall comply with the provisions thereof relative to dwellings. 
    Efficiency Unit. An efficiency unit is a dwelling unit consisting of one (1) room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off the principal room providing not less than three hundred and fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area. 
    Enforcing Officer. The City Superintendent of the City or his duly authorized representative, nominated by the City Superintendent and appointed by the City Council. 
    Essential Services. The phrase "essential services" means the erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, police call boxes, towers, poles, and other similar equipment or accessories reasonably in connection therewith (not including buildings) for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions or for the public health or general welfare, but not including buildings other than such buildings as are primarily enclosures or shelters of the above essential service equipment. An essential service shall not include cellular telephone facilities including cellular telephone transmitting towers or commercial broadcast televisions and radio facilities. 
    Facing, or Surface. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign. 
    Family. One or more persons living together in one dwelling unit and interrelated by bonds of marriage, blood, or legal adoption (additionally may include up to a total of three persons not so related who are either domestic servants or gratuitous guests), comprising a single housekeeping unit (sharing one kitchen facility for normal meal preparation; sink, oven, refrigerator); as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, motel, boarding house, club, fraternity or sorority house, or tourist home. Every additional person or group of two or more persons not related or included in the family as herein defined, shall be considered a separate family for the purpose of this Ordinance. 
    Farm. Any parcel of land containing at least ten (10) acres which is used for gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry and daily products. It includes necessary farm structures within the prescribed limits, and the storage of equipment used. It excludes the raising of furbearing animals, riding academies, livery or boarding stables, and dog kennels. 
    Filling. The depositing or dumping of any matter onto, or into, the ground, except common household gardening. 
    Floor Area, Gross (GFA). The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings. The "floor area" of a building shall include the basement floor area when more than one-half (1/2) or five feet of the basement height is above the established curb level or finished lot grade, whichever is higher. Any space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be included in "floor area." Areas of dwelling basements, unfinished attics, utility rooms, breezeways, porches (enclosed or unenclosed) or attached garages are not included. 
    Floor Area, Usable (UFA). The measurement of usable floor area shall be that portion of floor area (measured from the interior face of the exterior walls) used for or intended to be used for services to the public as customers, patrons, clients, or patients; including areas occupied by fixtures or equipment used for display or sale of goods or merchandise, but not including equipment rooms, or sanitary facilities. In the case of a half-story area, the usable floor area shall be considered to be only that portion having a clear height above it of four (4) feet or more. 
    Garage, Private. An accessory building intended or designed to be used for the storage of noncommercial motor vehicles. 
    Grade, Finished. The completed surfaces of lawns, walks, and roads brought to grade as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto. 
    Greenbelt. A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for planting of shrubs, trees, or both, to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer in carrying out the requirements of this Ordinance. 
    Home Occupation. Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof. 
    Hospital. An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices. 
    Hotel. A building containing rooms for sleeping purposes for more than twenty (20) transients and where only a general kitchen and dining room are provided. 
    Incombustible Material. Any material that will not ignite and burn when subjected to fire or as additionally defined by the National Fire Prevention Association (NFPA). 
    Junkyard. Any land or building used for abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting, or baling of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarded materials, or for abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, machinery, or parts thereof. 
    Kennel. Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs are kept or boarded temporarily or permanently, for the purpose of breeding, for sale, or otherwise. It shall also include any lot or premises on which other furbearing household or domestic pets or like number or more are bred or sold. 
    Loading Space. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and/or unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot. A lot is a place or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building, structure or use, or by other activity permitted thereon and including the yards and open spaces required under this Ordinance. A lot need not be a lot of existing record or otherwise specifically so designated on any public record. 
    Lot-Condominium. A lot is a parcel of land separated from other parcels of land by description on a recorded plat or by metes and bounds description. This would include a condominium unit site in a site condominium subdivision; having frontage upon a public or private street and having sufficient size to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance for; minimum area, setbacks, coverage, and open space. 
    Lot Area, Net. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
    Lot Area, Gross. The net lot area, plus one-half (1/2) of the area of that right-of-way directly adjacent to and abutting any side of the lot. 
    Lot, Corner. A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this Ordinance if the arc is of less radius than one hundred and fifty (150) feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear lot line; or in the case of a waterfront lot, from the river frontage line to the street frontage line; or in the case of an acreage lot, from the front right-of-way line to the rear lot line. 
    Lot, Double Frontage. A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, one street will be designated as the front street for all lots in the plat and in the request for a zoning compliance permit. If there are existing structures in the same block fronting one or both of the streets, the required front yard setback shall be observed on those streets where structures presently front. 
    Lot, Interior. An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot with only one lot line fronting on a street. 
    Lot, Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, as measured between the two points where the front yard setback or building setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
    Lot Lines. Any line dividing one lot from another or from right-of-way, and thus constitutes the property lines bounding a lot. 
    Lot Line, Front. In the case of an interior lot, abutting upon one public or private street, the front lot line shall mean the line separating the lot from such street right-of-way. In the case of a corner or double frontage lot, the front lot line shall be that line separating said lot from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat and/or in the request for a zoning compliance permit (see Double Frontage Lot, and Waterfront Lot). 
    Lot Line, Rear. Ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line of the lot shall be considered to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining depth of rear yard. In cases where none of these definitions are applicable, the Planning Commission shall designate the rear lot line (see "Double Frontage Lot" and "Waterfront Lot"). 
    Lot Line, Side. Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot Line, Street or Alley. A lot line separating the lot from the right-of-way of a street or an alley, respectively. 
    Lot of Record. A lot of record is a lot, the dimensions of which are shown on a map recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds for St. Clair County, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the accuracy of which is attested to by a Professional Engineer or Registered Surveyor, so designated by the State of Michigan, and said description so recorded or on file with the County. 
    Lot, Waterfront. A lot which abuts, adjoins, or is contiguous to a private or public body of water or live stream. 
    Lot, Zoning. A single tract of land, located within a single block which, at the time of applying for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control and which tract satisfies the applicable requirements of this Ordinance in every respect. A zoning lot may, therefore, not coincide with a lot of record, but may include one or more lots of record. 
    Marina. A boat basin with facilities for berthing and securing all types of recreational water craft, as well as providing adequate supplies, provisions, and services and fueling facilities. 
    Marquee. A permanent canopy usually of metal and glass, brightly lighted and displaying the title of an attraction which projects over an entrance to a building (as a theater or hotel). 
    Master Deed. Means the condominium document recording the condominium project as approved by the City to which exhibits are attached. It also includes the approved bylaws for the project and the approved condominium subdivision plan for the project. 
    Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. "Mobile Home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Mobile Home Condominium Project. Means a condominium project containing mobile homes which are intended to be located upon separate sites and are individual condominium units. 
    Mobile Home Park. A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon which three or more mobile homes are located on a continuous non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with a building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incidental to the occupancy of a mobile home and which is not intended for use as a temporary trailer park. 
    Motel. A motel is a business comprising a dwelling unit or a group of dwelling units so arranged as to furnish overnight lodging accommodations for transient guests, open to the traveling public for compensation. 
    Non-Conforming Building. A non-conforming building is a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the height, bulk, area or yard regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Non-Conforming Use. A non-conforming use is a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the provisions of the Ordinance in the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Occupied. The word "occupied" includes arranged, designed, built, altered, converted to, rented or leased, or intended to be inhabited; not necessarily for dwelling purposes. 
    Off-Street Parking Lot. A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles. Adequate maneuvering space shall be provided which allows unrestricted ingress and egress plus on-site parking space for at least (2) vehicles. 
    Open Air Business Uses. Open air business uses as used herein shall be deemed to include any of the following businesses when said business is not conducted from a wholly enclosed building. May include but shall not be limited to any of the following businesses: 
A.  Trailer, motor vehicle, boats or home equipment sale or rental services. 
B.  Outdoor display and sale of garages storage buildings, swimming pools, and similar uses. 
C.  Outdoor retail sale of fruits, vegetables, food items, topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellis, lawn furniture, playground equipment, and other home garden supplies and equipment. 
    Open Storage. All outdoor storage of building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, equipment, and other supplies. 
    Poolroom. Any place open to the public for playing pool or billiards, with two or more pool or billiard tables operated as a business establishment. 
    Porch, Enclosed. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is totally enclosed, and projects out from the main wall of said building or structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal building or structure to which it is attached. 
    Porch, Open. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is unenclosed except for columns supporting the porch roof, and projects out from the main wall of said building or structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal building or structure to which it is attached. 
    Public Utility. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing, and under Federal, State or municipal regulations, to the public; electricity, gas, steam, communications, telegraph, transportation, or water. A public utility shall not however include cellular phone operations or commercial broadcast television and radio facilities. 
    Right-of-Way. A street, alley, or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles. 
    Rooming House. A building where lodging only is provided for compensation. 
    Setback. The minimum horizontal required distance measured from the front, side, or rear lot line. The required setback area is that area encompassed by the respective lot lines and setback lines. 
    Sign. Every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof sign, illuminated sign, projecting sign, temporary sign, marquee, awning and canopy which includes any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is placed out-of-doors in view of the general public. 
    Sign, Ground. Any sign supported by uprights or braces placed in or anchored to the ground and not attached to any building. 
    Sign, Illuminated. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outlines illuminated by an electric light or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper. 
    Sign, Portable. A temporary freestanding sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground. 
    Sign, Projecting. Any sign which is attached to a building or other structure and extends beyond the line of the building or structure or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached. 
    Sign, Roof. Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with the principal support on the roof structure. 
    Sign, Temporary. A sign or other advertising device constructed of light, temporary materials with or without a structural frame, intended to be used for a limited time for display, demonstration, or announcement. 
    Sign, Wall. All flat signs of solid face construction which are placed against a building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear, or side wall of any building or other structure. 
    Site Condominium Plan. Shall mean the site, survey and utility plans; floor plans, and sections, as appropriated, showing the existing and proposed structures and improvements including the location thereof on the land. The condominium subdivision plan shall show the size, location, area, vertical boundaries and volume for each unit comprised of enclosed air space. A number shall be assigned to each condominium unit. The condominium subdivision plan shall include the nature, location, and approximate size of common elements. 
    Site Condominium Project. Shall mean a condominium project proposed to be developed under Act 59 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended. 
    Special Use. A use that, owing to some special characteristics attendant to its operation or installation is permitted in a district subject to approval by the Planning Commission (see Section 3.5). 
    Story. That portion of a building, other than a mezzanine, included between the surface of any floor and the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, Mezzanine. A mezzanine floor may be used in this definition of a full story when it covers more than fifty (50) percent of the area of the story underneath said mezzanine, or, if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above is twenty-four (24) feet or more. 
    Story, Basement. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a basement shall be counted as a story if over fifty (50) percent of its height or five feet, is above the level from which the height of the building is measured, or if it is used for business purposes. 
    Story, Half. The part of a building between a pitched roof and the uppermost full story, said part having a floor area which does not exceed one-half (1/2) the floor area of said full story, provided the area contains at least two hundred (200) square feet with a clean height of at least seven feet six inches (7 ft. 6 inches). 
    Street. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street Grade. That officially established grade of the street upon which a lot fronts at the midpoint of the frontage of the lot thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade. 
    Street Line. The legal line of demarcation between a street and the abutting land. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected, excluding driveways, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground. When the structure is divided into separate parts by an unpierced wall, each part shall be deemed a separate structure. 
    Structural Alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial changes in the roof and exterior walls. 
    Swimming Pool. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over twenty-four (24) inches deep; including in-ground, above ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
    Temporary Building and Use. A building or use permitted by the Building Inspector to exist during periods of construction of the main building or use or for special events, said period not to exceed six (6) months. 
    Tourist Home. A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are offered to transients for compensation. 
    Trailer Court, Campground. Any parcel or tract of land upon which two (2) or more travel trailers, truck campers, tents or other similar portable units are placed, regardless of whether a charge is made thereof. The term also includes any building, structure, enclosure, driveway, equipment, or facility used or designed and intended for use incident to temporary living purposes in connection with the recreational pursuits or mode of travel of the general public. 
    Use. The lawful purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is occupied, maintained, let or leased. 
    Use, Change of. A modification or deviation from the original purpose, occupancy, utilization or classification of a building, structure or parcel or tract of land. The term is inclusive of: 
A.  A discernible increase in the intensity of use which by ordinance imposes more restrictive parking requirements or other more restrictive characteristics of use, or 
B.  An alternation by change of use in a building heretofore existing to a new use group, as defined in the City's building code, which imposes other special provisions of law governing building construction, equipment or means of egress. 
    Use, Legal Non-Conforming. Existing use of land and structures, as of the effective date of this Ordinance, which does not conform to the uses specified as permitted in a District. 
    Use, Illegal Non-Conforming. Existing use of land and structures, created after the effective date of this Ordinance, and which does not conform to the uses specified as permitted in a District. 
    Use of Record. A permitted or special use of land or building arrangement which complies with the terms or conditions of the current ordinance or previous ordinance. 
    Yard, Required, Side/Rear/Front. Open space of prescribed width or depth adjacent to a lot or property line on the same land with a building or group of buildings, which open space lies in the area between the building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. This regulation shall not exclude eaves when an eight (8) foot height clearance is provided above the adjacent ground level. 
    Yard, Side. Required side yard is an open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard and of a uniform width (setback) measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line; and unoccupied from the ground upward except as herein otherwise specified. 
    Yard, Rear. Required rear yard is an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a uniform depth (setback) measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line and unoccupied from the ground upward as herein otherwise specified. 
    Yard, Front. Required front yard is an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a uniform depth (setback) measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line and unoccupied from the ground upward except as hereinafter specified. 
    Yard, Side/Rear/Front. General term applied to the space on a lot or parcel, which lot or parcel contains a building or group of buildings, lying between the building or group of buildings, and the nearest respective lot or property line facing each building. 
    Zoning Administrator. A City official charged with enforcing the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Within the context of this Zoning Ordinance, Zoning Administrator shall also be known as the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09,  1, 5-2-16) 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 3.1. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator and any of his aides or assigns responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Section 3.2. - Duties of zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance. It shall be unlawful for the zoning administrator to approve any plans or issue a zoning compliance permit or a building permit for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them in conformity with this Ordinance. To this end, the zoning administrator shall require that every application for zoning compliance permit for excavation, construction, moving or alteration or change in type of use or the type of occupancy be accompanied by written statements and plans or plats drawn to scale, in duplicate and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the zoning administrator to ascertain whether the proposed work or use is in conformance with this Ordinance. 
A.  The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot. 
B.  The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved, and of any buildings or other structures already on the lot. 
C.  The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in the residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
D.  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed. 
3.2.1.  If the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration, or use of land, as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, the zoning administrator shall issue a zoning compliance permit. If any application for such permit is not approved, the zoning administrator shall state in writing on the application, the cause for such disapproval. Issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provisions of this Ordinance. No alteration of approved plans are allowed without the written consent of the zoning administrator. 
3.2.2.  The zoning administrator is under no circumstance permitted to grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, order or regulation, contained in this Ordinance to any person making application to excavate, construct, move, alter, or use either buildings, structures or land within the City. 
3.2.3.  The zoning administrator is under no circumstance permitted to make changes to this Ordinance nor to vary the terms of this Ordinance in carrying out his duties as zoning administrator. 
3.2.4.  The zoning administrator shall record all non-conforming uses existing at the effective date of this Ordinance within six (6) months after the adoption of this Ordinance for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of Article 5. 
3.2.5.  The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the City of St. Clair Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau) as provided in the St. Clair City Code of Ordinances. 
Section 3.3. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
3.3.1.  Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence excavation for, or construction of any building or structure, or moving of an existing building without first obtaining a zoning compliance permit and building permit from the zoning administrator. No permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration or remodeling of any building or structure until an application has been submitted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, showing that the construction proposed is in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and with the building code. 
No plumbing, electrical, drainage, or other permit shall be issued until the zoning administrator has determined that the plans and designated use indicate that the structure and premises, if constructed as planned and proposed, will conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
"Alteration" or "repair" of an existing building or structure shall include any changes in structural members, stairways, basic construction, type, kind or class of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress or any other changes affecting or regulated by the building code or this Ordinance, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid provisions. (See definition of term "altered" in previous article.) 
3.3.2.  Permits Not Required. No permit is required for any of the following, provided that all provisions of this Ordinance are complied with: 
A.  An accessory structure of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) in value. 
3.3.3.  Permits for New Use of Land. A building permit shall also be obtained for the new use of land, whether presently vacant or a change in land use is proposed. 
3.3.4.  Permits for New Use of Building or Structures. A building permit shall also be obtained for any change in use of an existing building or structure to a different class or type. 
3.3.5.  Basis of Denial for Permit Application. No permit applicant shall have outstanding, ongoing, or uncorrected violations of any city code; or, owe a debt to the city, including, but not limited to, outstanding tax liability or unpaid utility bills. An applicant's permit shall be denied until those outstanding issues are resolved. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03,  1, 8-3-15) 
Section 3.4. - Certificates of occupancy. 
    It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any land, building, or structure for which a building permit is required, and to use or permit to be used any building or structure hereafter altered, extended, erected, repaired, or moved, until the zoning administrator shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that the provisions of this Ordinance have been complied with. 
A.  Certificate Validity. The certificate of occupancy as required for new construction of, or renovations to existing buildings and structures, in the building code, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this Ordinance. 
B.  Certificates for Existing Building. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if after inspection it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
C.  Temporary Certificates. Temporary certificates of occupancy may be issued for a part of a building or structure prior to the occupation of the entire building or structure, provided that such temporary certificate of occupancy shall not remain in force more than six (6) months, nor more than five (5) days after the building or structure is fully completed and ready for occupancy and, provided further, that such portions of the building or structure are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
D.  Records of Certificates. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept in the office of the zoning administrator, and copies of such certificates of occupancy shall be furnished upon request to a person or persons having a propriety or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
E.  Certificates for Accessory Buildings to Dwellings. Accessory buildings or structures to dwellings shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy, but rather may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling, building, or structure on the same lot when such accessory buildings or structures are completed at the same time as the principal use. 
F.  Application for Certificates. Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for in writing to the zoning administrator on forms provided by the zoning administrator, and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the receipt of such application, if it is found that the building or structure or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall be notified of such refusal and the cause thereof within the aforesaid ten-day period. 
G.  Certificates for Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses. Reference is made to Article 5, Section 5.09. 
Section 3.5. - Special approval uses. 
3.5.1.  Application Requirement. Applications for special use approval authorized in the Ordinance shall be submitted to the zoning administrator in compliance with the requirements of the Ordinance regulating Site Plans and the following requirements. 
3.5.2.  Notice. When the Zoning Administrator receives an application for a special approval use, notice shall be provided as specified in Section 3.11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
3.5.3.  Public Hearing. A public hearing with public notification shall be held by the Planning Commission. 
3.5.4.  Planning Commission Action. Upon receipt of a site plan, the Planning Commission shall review the plan at a regularly scheduled meeting and recommend approval, approval with conditions, denial or shall table the site plan with stipulations as to any information that will be required to be provided from the applicant prior to a decision or recommendation being made at a subsequent meeting. The Planning Commission shall make a written statement of findings and conclusions relative to the special approval use which specifies the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed. 
3.5.5.  Basis of Determination. The Planning Commission shall review the proposed special approval use in terms of the standards stated within this Ordinance and shall establish that such use and the proposed location: 
A.  Will be harmonious and in accordance with the general objectives or any specific objectives of the Master Plan of Land Use. 
B.  Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character of the area. 
C.  Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future nearby uses. 
D.  Will be an improvement in relation to property in the immediate vicinity and to the community as a whole. 
E.  Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities or that the persons responsible for the establishment of the proposed use will provide adequately any such service or facility. 
F.  Will not create excessive additional public costs and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
G.  Will be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Ordinance. 
3.5.6.  City Council Approval. The City Council shall review the recommendation of the Planning Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. The Council may impose such additional conditions and safeguards as recommended by the Planning Commission and/or other conditions deemed necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of the City of St Clair, for the protection of individual property rights and for insuring that the general spirit and purpose of the Ordinance and the District in which the special approval use is proposed, will be observed. 
3.5.7.  Effect of Approval. Any approval given by the City Council shall remain in effect in as specified in section 9.1.6 of the ordinance regulating Site Plan approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 4-16-07) 
Section 3.6. - Amendments. 
    The City Council may, from time to time, amend this Ordinance by changing or supplementing the district map, the districts on said map or the boundaries of such districts, district regulations or other provisions of this Ordinance. An amendment may be initiated by the City Council, by an interested person(s) or their agent(s), or by the Planning Commission, and when requested by an interested party shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
3.6.1.  Public Hearing and Notice. Before any amendment shall become effective, one public hearing shall be held thereon by the Planning Commission with notice as provided in Section 3.11 of this Zoning Ordinance. The City Council shall require a report from the City Planning Commission on any proposed amendment before taking final action hereon. The Commission shall thereupon submit its final report which shall include a summary of comments submitted at the public hearing. The City Council may hold additional public hearings if it considers it necessary. 
3.6.2.  Procedures for Rezoning. When the Zoning Administrator receives an application for a rezoning, a public hearing and notice shall take place as specified in Section 3.11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
3.6.3.  Vote, After Protest. Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting, the requirements of this subsection, an amendment to the zoning ordinance which is the object of the petition shall be passed only by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the City Council. The protest petition shall be presented to the City Council before final council action on the amendment, and shall meet signatory requirements of the following subparagraphs (a) or (b): 
A.  The owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of land included in the proposed change. 
B.  The owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of land included within an area extending outward one hundred (100) feet from any point on the boundary of the land in the proposed change. 
For the purposes of the subsection, publicly-owned land shall be excluded in calculating the twenty (20) percent land area requirement. 
3.6.4.  Publication of Amendment. Following adoption of a zoning ordinance amendment by the City Council, one notice of adoption shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City within fifteen (15) days after adoption. The notice shall include the following information: Either a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment; the effective date of the amendment; the place and time where a copy of the Ordinance may be purchased or inspected. The filing and publication requirements in this section shall supersede charter provisions relating to the filing and publication of City ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 4-16-07) 
Section 3.7. - Enforcement. 
3.7.1.  Violations: Any firm, corporation or person who violates any provision of this zoning ordinance is responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined in St. Clair City Code of Ordinances, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than an amount adopted by resolution of the City Council, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. Repeat offenses under this ordinance shall also be subject to increased fines as provided in the St. Clair City Code of Ordinances. 
3.7.2.  Public Nuisance, Per Se: Any building or structure which is erected, altered, or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this Ordinance and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
3.7.3.  Rights and Remedies: The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
3.7.4.  General Responsibility: The City Council or its duly authorized representative is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing the Ordinance and said Council is hereby empowered to commence and pursue any and all necessary and appropriate actions and/or proceedings in the Circuit Court of St. Clair County, Michigan, or any other court having jurisdiction, to restrain and/or prevent any non-compliance with or violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, and to correct, remedy and/or abate such non-compliance or violation. And it is further provided that any person aggrieved or adversely affected by such a non-compliance or violation may institute suit and/or join the City Council in such a suit to abate the same. 
Section 3.8. - Performance guarantees. 
    As used in this section, "improvements" means those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the City to protect natural resources or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage. "Improvements" does not include the entire project. 
3.8.1.  To insure compliance with the City of St. Clair Zoning Ordinance and any condition imposed thereunder, a cash deposit, certified check, or surety bond equal to a percentage as determined by the City Council of the site improvement costs may be required to insure faithful completion of the improvements. 
3.8.2.  The performance guarantee shall be deposited with the City Treasurer at the time of the issuance of the permit authorizing the project. The City shall rebate to the applicant, as the work progresses, amounts of such deposit equal to the ratio of work satisfactorily completed to the entire project. Such rebates shall be based on the report and recommendation of the Code Enforcement Officer. 
Section 3.9. - Fees. 
    The City Council shall, by resolution, determine and set the fees to be charged for all permits, certificates and copies thereof, fees for appeals to the Board of Appeals, fees for application to the Planning Commission for special approval uses or site plan review, fees for rezoning applications, and fees for all other applications and services provided for in this Ordinance. 
Section 3.10. - Records. 
    A complete record and copy of each application for each certificate or permit, and each permit or certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be filed with the City Clerk and be a part of the City records. 
Section 3.11. - Public notification. 
    All applications for development approval requiring a public hearing shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, and the other provisions of this Section with regard to public notification. 
A.  Responsibility: When the provisions of this ordinance or the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act require that notice be published, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for preparing the content of the notice, having it published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of St. Clair and mailed or delivered as provided in this Section. 
B.  Content: All mail, personal and newspaper notices for public hearings shall: 
1.  Describe the nature of the request: Identify whether the request is for a rezoning, text amendment, special approval use, planned unit development, variance, appeal, ordinance interpretation or other purpose. 
2.  Location: Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the subject property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used such as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross street, or including a map showing the location of the property. No street addresses must be listed when eleven (11) or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, or when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not involving a specific property. 
3.  When and where the request will be considered: Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing(s). 
4.  Written comments: Include a statement describing when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. Include a statement that the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel. 
5.  Handicap Access: Include information concerning how handicap access will be accommodated if the meeting facility is not handicap accessible. 
C.  Personal and Mailed Notice: 
1.  General: When the provisions of this Ordinance or state law require that personal or mailed notice be provided, notice shall be provided to: 
a.  The owners of property for which approval is being considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner(s) of the property. 
b.  Except for rezoning requests involving eleven (11) or more adjacent properties or an ordinance interpretation request that does not involve a specific property; to all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property subject to the request, regardless of whether the property or occupant is located within the boundaries of the City of St. Clair. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice maybe given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
c.  All neighborhood organizations, public utility companies, railroads and other persons which have requested to receive notice pursuant to Section 3.11E, Registration to Receive Notice by Mail. 
2.  Notice by mail/affidavit: Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed, postage paid. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a list of property owners and registrants to whom notice was mailed, as well as of anyone to whom personal notice was delivered. 
D.  Timing of Notice: Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, or this Ordinance where applicable, notice of a public hearing shall be provided on an application for a rezoning, text amendment, special approval use, planned unit development, variance, appeal, or ordinance interpretation: not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will be considered for approval. 
E.  Registration to Receive Notice by Mail: 
1.  General: Any neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person may register with the Zoning Administrator to receive written notice of all applications for development approval pursuant to Section 3.11C, Personal and Mailed Notice, or written notice of all applications for development approval within the zoning district in which they are located. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing this notification. Fees may be assessed for the provision of this notice, as established by the legislative body. 
2.  Requirements: The requesting party must provide the Zoning Administrator information on an official form to ensure notification can be made. All registered persons must re-register biannually to continue to receive notification pursuant to this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 4-16-07) 
ARTICLE 4. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 4.1. - District designations. 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of St. Clair is hereby divided into the following districts: 
R-1 Single-Family Residential (low density) R-1A Single-Family Residential (medium density) R-2 Two-Family Residential R-3 Multiple-Family Residential MHP Mobile Home Park PUD Planned Unit Development MD Mixed Use OS Office Service C-1 Local Commercial C-2 General Commercial M-1 Light Industrial M-2 Heavy Industrial PRPF Parks, Recreation and Public Facilities  
Section 4.2. - Zoning district map. 
4.2.1.  Identified. The zoning districts as provided in Section 4.1 are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled "Zoning District Map of the City of St. Clair." The Zoning District Map, along with all notations, references, and other explanatory information, shall accompany and be made a part of this Ordinance. 
4.2.2.  Authority. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Zoning District Map which may be published, a true and current copy of the Zoning District Map available for public inspection shall be located in and maintained by the office of the Clerk. The Clerk's copy shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of any land, parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure in the City. 
4.2.3.  Interpretation of District Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts indicated on the Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  A boundary indicated as approximately following the centerline of a highway, alley, or easement shall be construed as following such centerline. 
B.  A boundary indicated approximately following a recorded lot line or the line bounding a parcel shall be construed as following such line. 
C.  A boundary indicated as approximately following a municipal boundary line of a city, village, or township shall be construed as following such line. 
D.  A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be construed as being located midway in the right-of-way. 
E.  A boundary indicated as following a shoreline shall be construed as following such shoreline, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as following the shoreline existing at the time the interpretation is made. 
F.  The boundary indicated as following the centerline of a stream or river, canal, lake or other body of water shall be construed as following such centerline. 
G.  A boundary indicated as parallel to, or an extension of, features in paragraphs (A) through (F) preceding shall be so construed. 
H.  A distance not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
I.  Where a physical or cultural feature existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the Official Zoning Map or any other circumstances not covered by (A) through (H) preceding, the Board of Appeals shall interpret the location of the zoning district boundary. 
J.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which is in single ownership at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, the Board of Appeals may permit an extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot to the nearest lot line, but not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
Section 4.3. - Application of district regulations. 
    The regulations herein established within each zoning district shall be the minimum regulations for promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare and shall be uniform for each class of land, buildings, structure, or uses throughout each district. Wherever the requirements of this Ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other adopted rules or regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher standards shall govern. Except as hereinafter provided, district regulations shall be applied in the following manner: 
4.3.1.  No building shall hereafter be erected, altered, or moved, nor shall any building or premises hereafter be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which said building or premises is located, except by appeal as herein described by this Ordinance. 
A.  Permitted Uses. Uses shall be permitted by right only if specifically listed as principal permitted uses in the various zoning districts or are similar to such listed uses. All other uses are prohibited. 
B.  Accessory Uses and Buildings. Accessory uses are permitted only if such uses are clearly incidental to the permitted principal uses. 
C.  Special Approval Uses. Special approval uses are permitted as listed or if similar to the listed special uses. 
4.3.2.  No building shall hereafter be erected or altered except by appeal as herein described by this Ordinance, to: 
A.  Exceed the height limit specified for the district in which such building is located. 
B.  Occupy a greater percentage of lot area than is specified for the district in which such building is located. 
C.  Intrude upon the required front, rear, or side yards, as specified for the district in which such building is located. 
D.  Accommodate or house a greater number of families than is specified for the district in which such building is located. 
E.  Provide less living space per dwelling unit than is specified for the district in which such building is located. 
4.3.3.  No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that yards and other open spaces shall be smaller than specified, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the area regulations, nor shall the area of any lot be reduced below the minimum requirements herein established for the district in which such lot is located. 
4.3.4.  No part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the purposes of compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. 
4.3.5.  Every building erected, altered, or moved shall be located on a lot of record as defined herein, and except in the case of approved multiple dwelling, commercial, and industrial developments, there shall be no more than (1) principal building and its permitted accessory structures located on each lot in any district. 
4.3.6.  Whenever any street, alley or other public way shall have been vacated by official governmental action and when the lands within the boundaries thereof attach to and become a part of lands adjoining such street, alley, or public right-of-way shall automatically and without further governmental action thenceforth acquire and be subjected to the same zoning regulations as are applicable to lands to which same shall attach, and the same shall be used for the same use as is permitted under this Ordinance for such adjoining lands. 
Section 4.4. - Intent of districts. 
    The intent and purpose of each district is set forth as follows: 
4.4.1.  Single-Family Residential District, R-1 and R-1A. The intent here is to provide districts in which the main use is single-family residential, plus its normal accessory and compatible supportive uses. A reasonable range of lot sizes is envisioned which will provide a choice of desirable and economically feasible development opportunities for all members of the general public. Certain other private and public uses are permitted but subject to conditions which will insure their compatibility with the main use and character of these districts. 
4.4.2.  Two-Family Residential District, R-2. The intent here is to provide a district in which the main uses include both single-family and two-family residential development, plus normal accessory and compatible supportive uses. 
4.4.3.  Multiple-Family Residential, R-3. The R-3 multiple-family residential district is designated to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures and related uses which will generally serve as zones of transition between non-residential districts and lower density single-family districts. Also, the R-3 district is further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise low density single-family community. Due to its buffering characteristic between residential and non-residential uses, the R-3 district is intended to provide a residential area which is low rise in character, yet providing greater density by allowing increased building coverage in the most intense single-family residential district. 
4.4.4.  Mobile Home Park District, MHP. The intent here is to provide districts of such size and location as will encourage good mobile home residential development, adjacent to essential community services, and otherwise protecting the health, safety and welfare of mobile home residents. In addition to the requirements of this Ordinance, all mobile home parks shall comply with the Mobile Home Commission Act (PA 419 of 1976) and the current Mobile Home Code adopted by the Michigan Mobile Home Commission. 
4.4.5.  Planned Unit Development District, PUD. See Article 8. 
4.4.6.  Mixed Use, MD. It is the intent of the MD district to preserve residential uses, while at the same time, allowing a mixture of business uses which will improve property values and the local economy. The MD district is designed to permit certain business and residential uses as a matter of right, while allowing certain public service uses that are compatible with surrounding neighborhoods to be considered as special approval uses. 
4.4.7.  Office Service, OS. The intent here is to provide for research, service, and office uses in a planned development. When located in this district, such uses are to be developed in a manner which will complement neighboring land uses and the community, while at the same time providing for the necessary non-manufacturing uses such as corporate office, service, and research facilities. 
4.4.8.  Local Commercial, C-1. The intent here is to provide a district for commercial, office, and business uses which are located in the central part of the City and neighborhood areas. When located in this district, such uses are prevented from encroaching into other districts where they would be deemed incompatible. The proper development of the uses permitted in this district under special approval are subject to conditions which are designed to promote homogenous and desirable patterns of usage. 
4.4.9.  General Commercial, C-2. The intent here is to provide a district in which the community's overall commercial and business facilities can be centralized to most efficiently and effectively serve the general community and adjacent areas. Other uses are permitted which are generally compatible with the character and requirements of these commercial and business uses. These regulations are designed to reduce possible conflicts with adjacent land uses and to provide conditions which encourage proper development within the district. 
4.4.10.  Light Industrial, M-1. The intent here is to provide the resources and services available and essential to good industrial development, while also guarding against the encroachment of these uses into districts where they would be considered incompatible. 
4.4.11.  Heavy Industrial, M-2. The intent here is to provide a district whose location will permit heavy manufacturing types of use to best utilize essential public and private facilities and utilities. 
4.4.12.  Parks, Recreation and Public Facilities, PRPF. The district is designed to reserve needed and desirable lands for governmental and other public uses. 
Section 4.5. - Schedule of use regulations. 
4.5.1.  R-1 and R-1A-Single-Family Residential Districts. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
2.  Publicly-owned parks and recreation facilities. 
3.  Agriculture, including general farming, truck gardening, fruit orchards, and the customary farm buildings, except slaughterhouses subject to the provisions of 5.30. 
4.  Accessory uses subject to the provisions of Section 5.2. 
5.  Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 5.25. 
6.  Leased rooms by a resident family to non-transient roomers when the total number of roomers does not exceed two (2) in any one (1) dwelling. 
7.  Adult foster care homes for six (6) or fewer residents. 
Special Uses: 
1.  Churches subject to the following provisions: 
a.  A minimum lot area of one (1) acre and lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be required. 
b.  For every foot of height by which the building, exclusive of a spire, exceeds the maximum height limitations of the district, an additional foot of front, side, and rear yard setbacks shall be provided. 
c.  The lot shall be located on a major thoroughfare, minor thoroughfare, or collector street. 
2.  Public and private educational institutions. 
3.  Municipal buildings, facilities, and utility buildings. 
4.  Private non-commercial recreation. 
5.  Hospitals, subject to the following: 
a.  A minimum lot size of ten (10) acres shall be required. 
b.  The lot shall be located on either a major or minor thoroughfare. 
c.  Minimum setbacks for any building shall be one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
d.  Connection to a municipal sewer system or approved sewage treatment system shall be provided. 
6.  Golf courses and country clubs occupying a minimum site of fifty (50) acres. 
7.  Family day care homes for six (6) or less children. 
8.  Funeral homes. 
4.5.2.  R-2-Two-Family Residential District. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  All permitted uses in the R-1 and R-1A Districts. 
2.  Two-family dwellings. 
3.  Accessory uses subject to the provisions of Section 5.2. 
4.  Home occupation subject to the provisions of Section 5.25. 
5.  Adult foster care homes for six (6) or fewer residents. 
Special Uses: 
1.  All special uses permitted in the R-1 and R-1A Districts. 
2.  Rooming houses. 
3.  Boarding houses. 
4.  Public and private educational institutions. 
5.  Convalescent and retirement homes subject to the following provisions: 
a.  A minimum lot area equal to two thousand (2,000) square feet per bed, but in no case less than five (5) acres. 
b.  The lot shall be located on either a major or minor thoroughfare. 
c.  Minimum setbacks for any building shall be one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
d.  Connection to a municipal sewer system. 
6.  Child care centers, day care centers, group day care home. 
7.  Bed & Breakfast uses subject to the provisions of Section of 5.26. 
4.5.3.  R-3-Multiple-Family Residential. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  Two-family dwellings. 
2.  Multiple dwellings of three (3) units or more. 
3.  Accessory uses subject to the provisions of Section 5.2. 
4.  Adult foster care homes for six (6) or fewer residents. 
5.  All single family structures existing on or prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Special Uses: 
1.  All special uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts. 
2.  Convalescent and retirement homes subject to the following provisions: 
a.  A minimum lot area equal to two thousand (2,000) square feet per bed, but in no case less than five (5) acres. 
b.  The lot shall be located on either a major or minor thoroughfare. 
c.  Minimum setbacks for any building shall be one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
d.  Connection to a municipal sewer system. 
3.  Public and private educational institutions. 
4.  Child care centers, day care centers, group day care home. 
5.  Bed & Breakfast uses subject to the provisions of Section 5.26. 
4.5.4.  MHP-Mobile Home Park. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  Mobile home parks subject to the provisions of Section 4.44. 
2.  Public parks and recreational facilities. 
3.  Accessory uses subject to the provisions of Section 5.2. 
Special Uses: [Reserved.] 
4.5.5.  PUD-Planned Unit Development District. 
Permitted Uses: See Article VIII. 
Special Uses: [Reserved.] 
4.5.6.  MD-1-Mixed Use. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  All permitted uses in R-1 and R-1A districts. 
2.  Two-family dwellings. 
3.  Public parks and playgrounds. 
Special Uses: 
1.  Any use charged with the principal function of technical training. 
2.  Office buildings for such occupations as executive, administrative, clerical, accounting, engineering, architecture, drafting, medical offices, and sales functions. 
3.  Data processing and computer centers including sales, service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment. 
4.5.7.  MD-2-Mixed Uses. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  All permitted uses in R-1 and R-1A. 
2.  Two-family dwellings. 
3.  Public parks and playgrounds. 
Special Uses: 
1.  Retail businesses which supply commodities such as groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods, drugs, gifts and notions, or hardware. 
2.  Personal service establishments such as repair shops for watches, small appliances, shoes, televisions, beauty and barber shops. 
3.  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations. 
4.  Professional office of doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, and other similar professions. 
5.  Financial and business service establishments, banks, credit unions, insurance offices. 
6.  Post offices and other similar governmental offices serving nearby residential areas. 
7.  Bed and Breakfast uses subject to the provisions of Section 5.26. 
8.  Marinas. 
4.5.8.  OS-Office Service. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  Any use charged with the principal function of technical training. 
2.  Office buildings for such occupations as executive, administrative, clerical, accounting, engineering, architecture, drafting, medical offices, and sales functions. 
3.  Data processing and computer centers, including sales, service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment. 
4.  Warehousing accessory to the above uses. 
Special Uses: 
1.  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design, and pilot or experimental product development. 
4.5.9.  C-1-Local Commercial District. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  Retail businesses which supply commodities such as groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods, drugs, gifts and notions, or hardware. 
2.  Personal service establishments such as repair shops for watches, small appliances, shoes, and televisions, beauty and barber shops. 
3.  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations. 
4.  Professional office of doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, and other similar professions. 
5.  Financial and business service establishments, banks, credit unions, insurance offices. 
6.  Post offices and other similar governmental offices serving nearby residential areas. 
7.  Passenger terminals, theaters (except drive-in). 
8.  Restaurants, taverns & night clubs (except drive-in) 
9.  Business or trade schools, dancing or music studios. 
10.  Utility installations essential to serve this district. 
11.  No more than (2) amusement devices which are incidental to the main use of a building. 
12.  Hotels & Motels. 
Special Uses: 
1.  Planned shopping centers subject to the following provisions: 
a.  A minimum lot size of one (1) acre and lot width of one hundred and fifty (150) feet. 
b.  Minimum setbacks for any building shall be twenty-five (25) feet from any property line. 
c.  Building composition which can be characterized as an architectural unit. 
2.  Allow more than two (2) amusement devices which are incidental to the main use of restaurant, tavern, or nightclub. 
3.  Vehicle wash establishment subject to the following provisions: 
a.  A minimum lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be required. 
b.  All washing activities must be carried on from within a building. 
c.  Vacuum islands shall be placed a minimum of fifty (50) feet from adjacent property boundaries. 
d.  Overnight parking or storage of vehicles is prohibited. 
4.5.10.  C-2-General Commercial. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  All uses permitted in the C-1 district. 
2.  Private clubs and lodges provided sales and services are to members and guests only. 
3.  Supermarkets. 
4.  Public or private business schools or colleges. 
5.  Health and fitness clubs. 
6.  Theaters. 
7.  Eating and drinking establishments. 
8.  Funeral homes. 
9.  New and used car sales and showroom. 
10.  Hotels and motels with a minimum lot size of one (1) acre and lot width of two hundred (200) feet. 
11.  Assembly and dance halls. 
12.  Bus passenger stations. 
13.  Bowling Alleys. 
14.  Mini-storage, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres located on either a major or minor thoroughfare designated by the Master Plan. 
b.  Minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
c.  Six (6) foot screening, fence, berm or other appropriate method of screening shall be constructed around the perimeter of the development, as approved by the Planning Commission. 
d.  Minimum distance between buildings shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
e.  A front yard setback of no less than fifty (50) feet shall be maintained in landscaped open space. Side yard setbacks shall be no less than twenty-five (25) feet and rear yard setbacks shall be no less than forty (40) feet. 
f.  All areas intended for vehicle travel shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. 
g.  Site development shall be compatible with surrounding area. 
15.  Hospitals, subject to the following: 
a.  A minimum lot size of ten (10) acres shall be required. 
b.  The lot shall be located on either a major or minor thoroughfare. 
c.  Minimum setbacks for any building shall be one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
d.  Connection to a municipal sewer system or approved sewage treatment system shall be provided. 
Special Uses: 
1.  All special uses permitted in the C-1 district. 
2.  Open air businesses when developed in conjunction with a permitted use and subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The Planning Commission may require that outdoor sales areas be screened. 
b.  Outdoor material display areas shall meet all applicable setback requirements. 
3.  Plant nurseries subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Outdoor display areas shall meet all applicable setback requirements. 
b.  The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or any other material shall be contained to prevent any adverse affect on neighboring properties. 
c.  A building of not less than five hundred (500) square feet shall be constructed in conjunction with the plan nursery. 
4.  Vehicle wash establishment subject to the following provisions: 
a.  A minimum lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be required. 
b.  All washing activities must be carried on from within a building. 
c.  Vacuum islands shall be placed a minimum of fifty (50) feet from adjacent property boundaries. 
d.  Overnight parking or storage of vehicles is prohibited. 
5.  Indoor skating rinks, outdoor recreations uses, and similar commercial recreational facilities. 
6.  Veterinary offices including animal hospitals and clinics. 
7.  Drive-in restaurants. 
8.  Drive-in theaters. 
9.  Lumber yards. 
10.  Recreational vehicle storage yards. 
11.  Public and commercial storage garages. 
12.  Automobile repair, gasoline service stations, paint and body shops, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  No building shall be located nearer than forty (40) feet from any road right-of-way and from any property line abutting residentially-used property. 
b.  No more than one (1) curb opening shall be permitted for every fifty (50) feet of frontage along any street. Curb openings shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width measured at the property line and shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet apart. No curb opening shall be located nearer than twenty-five (25) feet from an intersection or adjacent residential property line. 
c.  All repair and maintenance activities are to be conducted entirely with an enclosed building. 
d.  All gasoline pumps shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line. 
e.  The sale of new or used vehicles from the premises is prohibited. 
f.  Minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for gasoline service and repair facilities or ten thousand (10,000) square feet for gasoline service. The storage of disabled or wrecked vehicles for a period exceeding ten (10) days is prohibited e facilities only. 
13.  Marinas and boat yards. 
14.  Poolrooms. 
a.  They shall not be located within 500 feet in any direction from the boundaries of any public, private or parochial school building or church building. 
b.  They shall not be located within 500 feet of each other. 
15.  Adult Business. 
a.  They shall no be located within 500 feet in any direction from the boundaries of any public, private or parochial school building or church building or residential use or zoning district within the city limits. 
b.  They shall not be located within 500 feet or each other. 
16.  New and Used Car Sales and Showrooms. 
a.  A parking lot for the display of vehicles may be permitted to extend to the property line facing a street abutting a non-residential use. 
b.  A parking lot for the display of vehicles facing a street abutting a residential use must provide a minimum five (5) foot greenbelt setback with landscaping not required to exceed eighteen (18) inches in height. 
c.  No outside storage of materials, parts or damaged/dilapidated vehicles shall be permitted on the premises. 
4.5.11.  M-1-Light Industrial. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  Wholesale establishments, warehouses, cartage businesses, and truck or rail terminals. 
2.  Tool, die and machine shops. 
3.  Manufacturing or processing of wood, concrete, cinder block, and brick. 
4.  Manufacturing of automotive parts, metal fabricating, assembly, and other manufacturing processes. 
5.  Production, processing and packaging of such products as candy and baked goods. 
6.  Recreational vehicle storage yards. 
7.  Contractor equipment and other material storage yards. 
8.  Municipal equipment and material storage yards. 
9.  Manufacturing or processing of plastic, fabric, and synthetic products. 
10.  Farms. 
11.  Kennels and animal shelters. 
12.  Veterinary clinics. 
13.  Hospitals and urgent care centers. 
14.  Workshops and studios. 
15.  Government offices and facilities. 
16.  Vehicle service centers. 
17.  Greenhouses, nurseries and farmer's market. 
18.  Commercial recreation - indoor and outdoor. 
19.  Commercial catering business. 
Special Uses: 
1.  Municipal waste or water treatment facilities. 
2.  Production, processing, and packaging of such products as cosmetics, toiletries and pharmaceuticals. 
3.  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design, and pilot or experimental product development. 
4.  Cellular telephone and commercial broadcast radio and television towers and equipment subject to Sec. 5.20. 
5.  Professional and medical offices. 
6.  Motor vehicle repair business. 
7.  Child care or day care center. 
8.  Crematoriums, provided that the property is located a minimum 500 feet from a residentially used or zoned property. 
4.5.12.  M-2-Heavy Industrial. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  All permitted uses in the M-1 District. 
2.  Production, manufacturing, processing, and packaging of such products as cereals, salt, petroleum products, soft drinks, and distillation of grains and fruits. 
3.  Drop forges, heavy stamping, and oil refineries. 
4.  Lumber and planing mills. 
5.  Municipal waste or water treatment facilities. 
6.  Central dry cleaning plants. 
7.  Production, processing and packaging of such products as cosmetics, toiletries, and pharmaceuticals. 
8.  Farms. 
9.  Kennels and animal shelters. 
10.  Veterinary clinics. 
11.  Hospitals and urgent care centers. 
12.  Workshops and studios. 
13.  Government offices and facilities. 
14.  Vehicle service centers. 
15.  Greenhouses, nurseries and farmer's market. 
16.  Commercial recreation - indoor and outdoor. 
17.  Commercial catering business. 
Special Uses: 
1.  Salvage and used materials yards subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres. 
b.  The front yard setback for the material storage area shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
c.  All material storage areas shall be enclosed by an obscuring fence between eight (8) and twelve (12) feet in height. 
d.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all property lines. 
e.  Material shall not be stored in manner exceeding the height of the obscuring fence. 
2.  Tanneries, slaughter houses, stock yards, or soap factories. 
3.  Cellular telephone and commercial broadcast radio and television towers and equipment subject to Sec. 5.20. 
4.  Professional and medical offices. 
5.  Motor vehicle repair business. 
6.  Child care or day care center. 
7.  Crematoriums, provided that the property is located a minimum 500 feet from a residentially used or zoned property. 
4.5.13.  PRPF-Parks, Recreation and Public Facilities. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  Publicly owned building, structures or uses. 
2.  Public education facilities. 
3.  Parks. 
4.  Accessory building incidental to the establishment or conduct of uses permitted. 
5.  Public and semipublic utilities. 
6.  Parking lots or structures. 
7.  Concessions catering to public facilities. 
8.  Cemetery. 
Special Uses: 
1.  Cellular telephone and commercial broadcast radios and telephone towers and equipment subject to Sec. 5.20. 
CITY OF ST. CLAIR ZONING ORDINANCE 
Schedule of District Regulations 
Minimum Lot Size Per Unit Minimum Floor Space Per Unit Building Width Maximum Building Height Minimum Yard Setback Required Maximum % Lot Area Side Yard ZONING DISTRICT Area Width Bldg. Site Square Feet First Floor Minimum Stories or Feet Front Yard Least One Total Two Each Rear Yard Coverage/All Buildings Additional Regulations R-1 Single-Family 10,000 75' 1200 20' 21/2 or 35' 40' 5' a. 15' - 30' 30 R-1A Single-Family 7,500 60' 900 20' 21/2 or 35' 25' 5' a. 15' - 25' 30 R-2 Two-Family c. 60' 700 20' 21/2 or 35' 20' 5' 15' - 25' 35 R-3 Multiple-Family c. - b. 20' 21/2 or 35' 25' 10' 20' - 25' 40 c. & d. MHP Mobile Home Park - - - - - - - - - - - See 44.4. PUD Planned Unit Development - - - - - - - - - - - See Article 8 MD Mixed Use 7,500 50' 500 20' 21/2 or 35' 25' 5' 15' - 25' 40 OS Office Service 5,000 50' - - 21/2 or 35' 30' 5' 15' - 20' 40 C-1 Local Commercial - - - - 21/2 or 35' - - - - - - C-2 General Commercial 10,000 80' - - 21/2 or 35' 35' 5' 10' - 30' 40 M-1 Light Industrial 12,000 100' - - 21/2 or 35' 35' 10' 20' - 35' 40 M-2 Heavy Industrial 20,000 100' - - 21/2 or 35' 40' 20' 40' - 50' 40 PRPF Parks, Recreation & Public Facilities - - - - - 25' 10' 20' - 10' -  
a.  The side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than ten (10) feet, when there is a common rear yard. In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an adjacent lot, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Where multiple dwellings, including row and terrace dwellings, apartments, and efficiency units are permitted in an R-3 District, the required floor space per unit shall be as follows: 
One-bedroom unit ..... 600 sq. ft. floor space
Two-bedroom unit ..... 800 sq. ft. floor space
Three-bedroom unit ..... 1,000 sq. ft. floor space
plus eighty (80) square feet for each bedroom over three bedrooms in dwelling unit. 
c.  No two-family or multiple-family dwellings shall be permitted on a lot or parcel of land unless they comply with the lot requirements per unit as listed below: 
One Bedroom Unit ..... 3,400 sq. ft. 
Two Bedroom Unit ..... 3,800 sq. ft. 
Three Bedroom Unit ..... 4,200 sq. ft. 
Each Additional Bedroom ..... 400 sq. ft. 
(includes a den, library or similar extra room) 
In the case of a single-family dwelling in an R-2 or R-3 District, the minimum lot area requirement per unit shall be 7,500 sq. ft. 
d.  The minimum distance between any two (2) buildings on the same parcel of lot shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02,  1-3, 3-6-06; Ord. No. 2010-02,  1, 4-19-10) 
ARTICLE 5. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 5.1. - Purpose. 
    In addition to the preceding district regulations relating to special use permits, the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the modifications, additions, exceptions, or limitations as provided by the supplementary regulations specified in this article. 
Section 5.2. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Except as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance, accessory buildings shall be subject to the following regulations: 
5.2.1.  Limitations. By definition an accessory building is clearly incidental to the principle building housing the main use; therefore a Building Permit shall not be issued for an accessory building prior to the issuance of a building permit for the main or principal building, and no rough framing of any accessory building shall begin until the rough framing of the principal building has been completed. Accessory buildings can be constructed prior to the construction of the main structure where site plan review and approval has been obtained from the Planning Commission. For the purposes of this ordinance, gazebos, trellises, play structures and other similar structures, not exceeding 120 square feet, shall not be considered accessory structures. 
A building permit may be issued for an accessory structure only when it is found to be in compliance with all requirements of this ordinance including the following: 
A.  The proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements found in the Schedule of Accessory Structures. 
B.  The proposed use is commonly accepted as accessory to the use of the district in which it is located. Accessory structures located in the residential districts shall be used only for storage of items or equipment considered customary or domestic by the Zoning Administrator. 
C.  It shall not be constructed as a habitable space with kitchen or toilet facilities, nor shall it be occupied. 
D.  Exterior access to a second story or loft area shall not be permitted. 
E.  All accessory structures over 120 sq. ft. will be required to provide a minimum 24" rat-wall. A minimum 4" thick concrete slab floor will also be required where gas or oil or machinery is stored. 
F.  Acceptable material for accessory/storage structures are concrete, masonry, wood, and metals. Tents, plastic, membrane or other temporary structures are not acceptable. 
5.2.2.  Attached Structures. Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it must conform to all the regulations of this Ordinance applicable to the main buildings. It may be connected to the principal building by a roofed porch, breeze way, or similar structure. 
5.2.3.  Size. An accessory building shall not exceed the limitations found in the Schedule of Accessory Structures: 
A.  In no instance shall the accessory building exceed the floor area of the main building. 
5.2.4.  Location. Accessory buildings shall be located only as listed below and in the Schedule of Accessory Structures Chart 
A.  All attached accessory buildings shall meet the front and side yard setback requirements of the main building. On a corner lot in any residential district, no accessory building shall be located nearer to the side street lot line than the minimum required side yard setback of the principal building on said lot. 
B.  All detached accessory buildings shall meet the front and side yard setback requirements listed for accessory structures in the Schedule of Accessory Structures Chart. Where detached accessory buildings are located completely to the rear of the principal building, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than ten (10) feet when there is a common rear yard. In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an adjacent lot, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty-five feet. 
C.  An accessory building shall not be located closer than five (5') feet to any separate building or structure. 
D.  In the case of lots with double street frontage, accessory buildings shall observe front yard setback requirements on both street frontages whenever there is a principal building fronting on said streets in the same block or adjacent blocks. 
E.  Carports or garages which may be located at the rear of row townhouse or terrace dwellings and apartment buildings, after review and approval by the Planning Commission providing adequate light and air is assured to the dwelling units. 
F.  In no instance shall an accessory building be located within a dedicated easement or right of way. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01,  1, 5-18-09) 
Section 5.3. - Temporary dwellings. 
    No structure shall be used for dwelling purposes that is not considered a standard dwelling structure as defined in this chapter and in the building code of the City. No garage or other accessory building, trailer, cabin, basement, partial structure, or other temporary structure, whether of a fixed or portable construction, shall be erected or moved onto a lot and used for any dwelling purposes for any length of time unless authorized by the issuance by the Board of Appeals of a temporary permit as provided in this chapter. 
Section 5.4. - Essential services. 
    Essential services shall be permitted in any District as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the City. 
Section 5.5. - Walls and screens. 
5.5.1.  Within a Residential District: 
A.  When permitted, all exposed horizontal and vertical structural members of a fence shall be located facing the inside of the property they are intended to fence. 
B.  Within the limits of the front yard space, ornamental fencing or screening shall be permitted provided it does not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
C.  Within the limits of a side or rear yard, a fence, wall or screen shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
5.5.2.  In a commercial, industrial, or research office district, no fence, wall, or other screening structure shall exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
5.5.3.  Barbed wire, spikes, nails, or any other sharp point or instrument of any kind on top or on the sides of any fence, electric current, or charge in said fences is prohibited. Barbed wire cradles may be placed on top of fences enclosing public utility buildings or wherever deemed necessary in the interests of public safety. 
Section 5.6. - Buffers between conflicting land uses. 
5.6.1.  Upon any improvement, including a structural or use expansion, of property within a zoning classification of OS, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2, or any non-residential special use, an obscuring wall shall be constructed to create a visual screen along all adjoining boundaries of property zoned or used for single-family, two-family or multiple-family residential. This same requirement shall apply to property zoned R-3 along all adjoining boundaries of property zoned or used for single-family residential. 
5.6.2.  A required screening wall shall be six (6) feet in height as measured on the side of the proposed wall having the higher grade, and shall be constructed on both sides with: face brick; poured-in-place face brick; pre-cast brick face panels having simulated face brick; or stone. In lieu of a required screening wall, the developers may request from the Planning Commission the construction of a landscape buffer in accordance with the standards of this section and 5.6.3 or a combination screen wall and landscaping in accordance with this section and 5.6.4. 
5.6.3.  Landscape Buffer: The landscape buffer shall be constructed as follows: 
A.  A strip of land a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width located between the residential use and the conflicting land uses(s). 
B.  One (1) tree for each thirty (30) feet lineal, or fraction thereof, located between the residential use and adjacent conflicting land use(s), located so as not to create a vehicular sight-distance obstruction. 
C.  Between conflicting land uses, a hedge or other plant material barrier, wall, berm, or any combination of these landscape elements shall be planted to form a continuous screen at least six (6) feet in height at all points. If a non-living barrier is used, livingplant material will be required on both sides of the screen. The screen shall be located so as not to create a vehicular sight-distance obstruction and shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from driveway intersections. 
D.  Grass ground cover, gravel, or wood chips shall be established and maintained on all portions of the required landscape strip not occupied by any other landscape material. 
E.  The landscape buffer shall be planted in such a manner as to provide a minimum opacity (visual restriction) of 80 percent in summer and 60 percent in winter. 
F.  A minimum landscape strip of ten (10) feet shall be maintained between roads and interior parking areas or driving lanes. 
5.6.4.  Wall and Landscape Combination: A wall and landscape combination may be constructed in lieu of a solid screen wall or landscape buffer provided the following standards are met. 
A.  The screen wall height shall be six (6) feet. Landscape material may achieve a greater height. 
B.  A complete obscuring effect is achieved through design and installation. 
C.  This application is considered a special land use, must be approved by the Planning Commission and is subject to a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02,  1, 4-19-10) 
Section 5.7. - Landscape site plans. 
    A landscape plan shall be required for sites containing more than twenty (20) parking spaces. The landscape plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a building permit. The plan shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following items: 
5.7.1.  Location, spacing, size and root type (bare root (BR); balled and burlapped (BB); or container plant materials; and descriptions for each plant type proposed for use within the required landscape area. 
5.7.2.  Minimum scale - 1" = 60' 
5.7.3.  Significant construction details to resolve specific site conditions, such as tree wells to preserve existing trees or culverts to maintain natural drainage patterns. 
5.7.4.  North arrow. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07,  1, 5-2-16) 
Section 5.8. - Maintenance. 
    The owner of property shall maintain landscaping in a healthy condition, free from refuse and debris. All unhealthy and dead material shall be replaced within one year or the next appropriate planting period. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available and acceptable water supply. 
Section 5.9. - Landscape design standards. 
5.9.1.  Quality: Plant material and grasses shall be of generally acceptable varieties and species, free of insects and diseases, hardy to St. Clair County, conform to the current minimum standard of the American Association of Nurserymen, and shall have proof of any required governmental regulations and/or inspections. 
5.9.2.  Major Plant Types: The following lists represent plant and landscape materials approved for usage subject to compliance with applicable size and spacing requirements. 
A.  Evergreen Trees (minimum 5 ft. in height): Juniper, Douglas-Fir, Hemlock, Fir, Spruce, Pine. 
B.  Narrow Evergreens (minimum 3 ft. in height): Column Hinoki Cypress, Pyramidal Red-Cedar, Pyramidal White Pine, Douglas Arbor-Vitae, Blue Columnar Chinese Juniper, Swiss Stone Pine, Irish Yew, Columnar Giant Arbor-Vitae. 
C.  Tree-like Shrubs (minimum 4 ft. in height): Flowering Crab, Mountain Ash, Hornbeam, Russian Olive, Redbud, Hawthorn, Dogwood, Rose of Sharon, Magnolia 
D.  Large Deciduous Shrubs (minimum 6 ft. in height): Honeysuckle, Forsythia, Cottoneaster, Privet, Viburnum, Lilac, Hazelnut, Buckthorn, Mock-Orange, Ninebark, Euonymus, Sumac 
E.  Large Deciduous Trees (minimum 8 ft. in height): Oak, Birch, Sweet-Gum, Linden, Hard Maple, Planetree (Sycamore), Beech, Hop Hornbeam, Hackberry, Ginkgo, Honeylocust, Ash 
5.9.3.  Parking Areas: 
A.  Each separate landscaped area within a parking lot shall be adequately planted and maintained and shall be located in such a manner as to promote the following: 
1.  Divide and break up the expanse of pavement. 
2.  Parking areas. 
3.  Designate vehicular circulation. 
4.  Separate parking lots from adjoining uses. 
B.  The minimum landscaped space surrounding parking areas shall be fifty (50) square feet per parking space. Right-of-way areas and retention ponds shall not be included within the required landscape area. For parking lots containing over fifty (50) spaces, there shall be one (1) tree for every ten (10) parking spaces in all areas submitted for site plan review. 
C.  A minimum of three (3) feet shall be established from the backside of the curb or planting edge to the center of the trunk of the proposed tree or shrub. Narrow strips of landscaping incorporated within parking lots should contain sufficient landscaping and landscape buffering to soften large expanses of paved or gravel surfaces. 
Section 5.10. - Intersection visibility. 
    No fence, wall, hedge, screen, sign, or other structure or planting shall be higher than three (3) feet, measured above the center line of either street or pavement, on any corner lot in any residential or business district requiring front and side yards within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and a straight line joining the two (2) street lines at points which are thirty (30) feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along the street right-of-way line. Trees may be planted in this triangular area, provided that the lowest foliage is twelve (12) feet or higher from the ground. 
Section 5.11. - Street access. 
    Any one lot of record created before the effective date of this chapter without any frontage on a street shall not be occupied without access to a street provided by an easement or other right-of-way no less than twenty (20) feet wide. No more than one lot may be served by each such access route. 
Section 5.12. - Unsafe buildings. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent compliance with an order by the Code Enforcement Officer to correct, improve, or strengthen or restore to a safe condition any building or any part of a building declared to be unsafe. 
Section 5.13. - One lot, one building. 
    In all R-1, R-1A and R-2 residential districts, only one (1) principal building shall be placed on a single lot of record. 
Section 5.14. - Grading plan. 
    The following regulations are adopted with the intent of insuring site drainage problems are mitigated through proper planning and review of current and proposed elevations for all new single and two family dwellings prior to issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
5.14.1.  Prior to issuance of any Building Permits the Zoning Administrator shall obtain, at no expense to the City, a grading plan to be reviewed by the City Engineer for all new single and two family dwellings to be constructed on a lot abutting a currently developed lot. A filing fee established by the City Council shall be paid by the applicant at the time of application. 
5.14.2.  The site plan submitted shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: existing and proposed elevations for the lot and proposed structures (elevations to be based on National Flood Insurance Program if within an indicated flood area), including basement; existing elevations for the abutting street; existing elevations for the abutting lots on all sides and the elevation of the structures on the abutting lots; any additional information necessary to determine the adequacy of proposed drainage plans and systems. 
5.14.3.  Site plan shall be compiled by a licensed surveyor or professional engineer. 
5.14.4.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy the applicant shall have the building location and elevation verified by the surveyor or engineer responsible for the original site plan and notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of this verification. 
5.14.5.  If potential drainage problems or variations in proposed and final elevations, beyond four-tenths of a foot on structure grade and two-tenths of a foot on yard grade, are found during this review, the building permit applicant will be held responsible for making necessary improvements prior to the issuing of a certificate of occupancy. 
Section 5.15. - Buildings to be moved. 
    No permit shall be granted for the moving of buildings or structures from without or within the limits of the City to be placed on property within said limits unless the Code Enforcement Officer shall have made an inspection of the building to be moved and has found that it is structurally safe, will not adversely affect the character of existing buildings in the neighborhood of the new location and will fully comply with the Building Code and other codes regulating the health, safety, and general welfare. A performance bond as established by the City Council of sufficient amount to insure cost of completing building for occupancy within a period of not less than six (6) months from date of permit shall be furnished before permit is issued. 
5.15.1.  Any building moved within a district and placed upon a foundation or any building moved into a district from without shall be considered a new building and be subject to all the limitations and requirements herein set forth relating to uses, construction, permits, and certificates. 
Section 5.16. - Dwellings in non-residential districts. 
    No residential dwelling shall be erected in a non-residential zoning district. However, the sleeping quarters of a watchman or caretaker may be permitted by the Planning Commission as a special approval use. 
Section 5.17. - Side yard reduction. 
    For residential lots adjoining an alley in the same subdivision, the least width of a required side yard may be measured to the center line of that alley, provided that no building shall be erected any closer than three (3) feet to the nearer alley right-of-way line. 
Section 5.18. - Rear yard reduction. 
    When a lot of record in any residential district has a depth of less than one hundred fifteen (115) feet prior to the effective date of this chapter, the rear yard of the lot may be reduced one-quarter (1/4) of the distance the lot depth is less than one hundred fifteen (115) feet, provided that no rear yard shall be less than twenty (20) feet in depth. Measurements of the depth of the rear yard of a lot in a residential district may be made in the center line of an alley upon which the lot abuts for its full width, provided the alley is in the same subdivision. 
Section 5.19. - Yard encroachments permitted. 
5.19.1.  Paved terraces and patios shall be permitted to encroach upon the required yard area provided: 
A.  The paved area is unroofed and without walls, parapets, or other forms of solid, continuous enclosure that so link the paved area to the principal building that an enclosed area is formed, appearing functionally a part of the principal building; 
B.  The highest finished elevation of the paved area is not over three (3) feet above the average surroundings finished ground grade; 
C.  No portion of the paved area is closer than four (4) feet from any lot line. 
The paved areas may have an open railing or fence not over three (3) feet high, and may have non-continuous windbreak or visual screen fences or walls not over six (6) feet high and not enclosing more than one-half of the perimeter of the paved area. 
5.19.2.  Unenclosed porches, roofed or unroofed, may project into a required yard area a distance not to exceed eight (8) feet, provided: 
A.  The porch is unenclosed, no higher than one story, and is erected on piers; 
B.  The porch shall not be closer than four (4) feet at any point to any lot line; 
C.  That no building shall have more than one (1) porch in any one yard. 
5.19.3.  Enclosed porches, either one-story, two-story, or an unenclosed porch having solid foundations and capable of being enclosed, shall be considered an integral part of the building and shall, therefore, be subject to all yard and area dimensional requirements established for principal buildings. 
5.19.4.  Special structural elements such as cornices, sills, belt-courses, chimneys, gutters, eaves, pilasters, and similar structural features, may project into any yard area up to a maximum of two and one-half (21/2) feet. 
5.19.5.  Bays, including attached eaves, cornices, and gutters may project into any required yard area up to a maximum of three (3) feet, provided that the sum of such projections on any wall does not exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) the length of the wall. 
5.19.6.  Fire escapes, outside stairways, and balconies, if of open construction, may project into any one required yard up to a maximum of four and one-half (41/2) feet. 
Section 5.20. - Supplementary height regulations. 
5.20.1  The following structural appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the height limitation for authorized uses in any district as allowed by this ordinance. 
A.  Those purely ornamental in purpose such as church, spire, belfry, domes, cupolas, ornamental towers, flag poles, and monuments. 
B.  Those necessary to mechanical or structural functions such as chimneys, smoke stacks, water tanks, elevator and stairway penthouses, ventilators, bulkheads, aerials, and antennae, electronic devices, heating and cooling units and fire towers. 
C.  Those necessary for proper building design such as cornices and parapet walls which shall not exceed the height limitation by more than five (5) feet and shall have no window openings. 
D.  Commercial Broadcast Radio, Television and Cellular Telephone Towers subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Setback. The tower shall be setback from all property lines and adjacent rights-of-way not less than one and a half (1.5) times the total height of each tower as measured from the ground level. 
2.  Fencing. An open weave wire fence at least six (6) feet in height shall be constructed and set away from the base of the tower at least ten (10) feet in all directions. 
3.  Structural Integrity and Inspection. The City Superintendent or his designee may require periodic inspections of towers to ensure structural integrity. Such inspection may be required as follows: 
a.  Monopole towers at least once every ten (10) years. 
b.  Self-support at least once every five (5) years. 
c.  Guide towers - not allowed. 
Inspections shall be conducted by a certified testing agency or by an engineer or architect licensed by the State of Michigan. The results of such inspections shall be provided to the city and based upon results of such inspection, the city may require repair or removal of the tower. 
4.  Equipment Facilities and Accessory Uses. These facilities may not include offices, long tern vehicle storage, or outdoor storage or broadcast studios except for emergency purposes, or other uses that are not needed to send or receive transmissions. 
5.  Lighting and Security. When lighting is required and permitted by the Federal Aviation Administration or other Federal or State authorities, it shall be oriented so as not to project onto surrounding residential property. Prior to site plan review and approval, the applicant shall provide documentation that the proposed communication tower has been review and is not determined to be a hazard the FFA. 
6.  Abandonment. Any such tower standing unused for six months or more may be required to be removed at the expense of the owner. 
7.  Soil Testing. Soil borings shall be conducted by a registered professional engineer, who shall provide written evidence that soil conditions will provide sufficient stability for erection of the tower or antenna. 
8.  Co Locations. Applicants shall design sites and tower to accommodate future co-locations for at least a minimum of four (4) platforms (and the antennas (thereon) and associated accessory buildings, and shall make the tower available for use by public service agencies, provided that public service agency equipment mounted on the tower does not adversely affect any existing equipment and mounting public service agency equipment is technologically possible. 
9.  Equipment Facilities and Accessory Uses/Landscaping/Fencing. For wireless facilities subject to special use applications, a site plan shall also include a detailed landscape plan. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases, fencing of a minimum of six (6) feet in height shall be required for protection of the support structure and security from children and other persons who may otherwise access facilities. 
5.20.2.  The foregoing permitted exceptions may be authorized only when the following conditions are satisfied: 
A.  No portion of any building or structure permitted as an exception to a height limitation shall be used for human occupancy or commercial purposes. 
B.  Any structure permitted as an exception to a height limitation shall be erected no higher than such height as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose for which it is intended to serve. 
C.  Structures permitted as exceptions to height limitations shall not occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the gross roof area of any building upon which they may be located. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02,  1, 4-19-10; Ord. No. 2016-05,  1, 5-2-16) 
Section 5.21. - Unsafe buildings. 
    Nothing within this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent compliance with an order by the appropriate authority to correct, improve, strengthen, or restore to a safe or healthy condition, any part of a building or premises declared unsafe or unhealthy. 
Section 5.22. - Structural damage. 
    Any structure or building which may be in whole or in part destroyed by fire, windstorm, or other such cause, if rebuilt, shall be rebuilt in accordance with this Ordinance and other pertinent codes and ordinances or shall be restored to a safe and healthy condition with all debris removed from the site within ninety (90) days from the occurrence of such damage. 
Section 5.23. - Trash. 
    Trash containers in all zoning districts other than single-family shall be screened on four (4) sides with an opaque fence or wall at least as high as the trash container and shall be constructed of material which is compatible with the architectural materials used in the site development. Gates which provide access to the container for maintenance shall be made of an opaque material also compatible with the architectural materials used in the site development. The location of the dumpster or other trash container unless specific exception is provided by the Planning Commission, shall be fifteen (15) feet from any off-site building or lot line. The container shall not constitute a hazard and shall not be within the required yard setbacks of that zoning district. The Commission may further require internal storage and/or the use of trash compactors where, in the determination of the Commission, the public health, safety, and welfare is served. 
Section 5.24. - Single family dwellings and certain mobile homes. 
    No single-family dwelling, mobile home, modular housing, or prefabricated housing located outside a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall be permitted unless said dwelling unit conforms to the following standards: 
5.24.1.  Square Footage. Each such dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum square footage requirements of this ordinance for the zone in which it is located. 
5.24.2.  Dimensions. Each such dwelling unit shall have a minimum width across any front, side, or rear elevation of twenty (20) ft. and shall comply in all respects with the Michigan State Construction Code Commission, including minimum heights for habitable rooms. Where a dwelling is required by law to comply with any federal or state standards or regulations for construction and where such standards or regulations for construction are different than those imposed by the Michigan State Construction Code Commission, then and in that event such federal or state standard or regulation shall apply. 
5.24.3.  Foundation. Each such dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the Michigan State Construction Code Commission and shall have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable building code for single-family dwellings. In the event that the dwelling is a mobile home, the mobile home shall be securely anchored to the foundation in order to prevent displacement during windstorms. 
5.24.4.  Undercarriage. In the event that such dwelling unit shall be a mobile home as defined herein, each such mobile home shall be installed with the wheels removed. Additionally, no dwelling shall have any exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage, or chassis. 
5.24.5.  Sewage Disposal or Water Supply. Each such dwelling unit shall be connected to a public sewer and water supply or to such private facilities approved by the local health department. 
5.24.6.  Storage Area. Each such dwelling unit shall contain a storage capability area either in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, or in a separate or attached structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to 10 percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 sq. ft., whichever shall be less. 
5.24.7.  Architecture. In the event that such dwelling unit shall be a mobile home as defined herein, each such mobile home shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity, with either a roof overhang of not less than six inches on all sides, or alternatively with window sills or roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the dwelling; has not less than two (2) exterior doors with the second one being in either the rear or side of the dwelling; and contains steps connected to said exterior door areas or to porches connected to said door areas where a difference in elevation requires the same. 
5.24.8.  Compatibility Determination. The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by the City Zoning Administrator. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the character, design, and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks and within 2,000 ft. of the subject dwelling. At least 20 percent of the homes within the neighboring area shall be used for compatibility determination. Where said area is not so developed, the character, design, and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks throughout the City shall be examined. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour, or relief from the common or standard designed home. 
5.24.9.  Additions. Each such dwelling unit shall contain no addition or room or other area which is not constructed with similar quality workmanship as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a foundation as required herein. 
5.24.10.  Code Compliance. Each such dwelling unit shall comply with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile home, all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus, and insulation within and connected to said mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming to the "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards" as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280, and as from time to time such standards may be amended. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. 
5.24.11.  Building Permit. All construction required herein shall be commenced only after a building permit has been obtained in accordance with the applicable Michigan State Construction Code provisions and requirements. 
5.24.12.  Exceptions. The foregoing standards shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in this Ordinance and pertaining to such parks. Mobile homes which do not conform to the standards of this section shall not be used for dwelling purposes within the City unless located within a mobile home park or a mobile home subdivision district for such uses, or unless used as a temporary residence as otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
Section 5.25. - Home occupations. 
    Home occupations which are clearly incidental to the principal residential use are permitted in any residential district. Typical home occupations include hairdressing, accounting, home truck gardening, real estate and insurance sales, appliance and motor repair, and professional offices. Home occupations shall be permitted for the sale of services while the on-premise sale of products shall not be permitted. The following conditions for home occupations shall be met. 
5.25.1.  The occupation shall utilize no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total gross floor area of any one (1) story of the residential structure so used. 
5.25.2.  The home occupation shall involve no employees other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
5.25.3.  All home occupation activities shall be conducted indoors, except gardening. 
5.25.4.  No structural alterations or additions which will alter the residential character of the structure shall be permitted to accommodate a home occupation. 
5.25.5.  Only customary domestic or household equipment, or equipment judged by the Zoning Administrator not to be injurious or a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood shall be permitted. 
5.25.6.  There shall be no external evidence of such occupations except a small announcement sign as specified by Article VI of this Ordinance. 
5.25.7.  No commodity or product shall be sold on the premises in connection with a home occupation. The provision shall not apply to arts and crafts produced entirely within the home. 
5.25.8.  No home occupation shall be permitted which is injurious to the general character of the residential district and which creates a congested or otherwise hazardous traffic or parking condition. 
5.25.9.  All home occupations shall be licensed in accordance with Chapter 11, Article 2 of the St. Clair City Code. 
Section 5.26. - Bed & breakfast accommodations. 
    Bed and breakfast facilities are allowed in selected residential zoning districts, provided the following conditions are met: 
5.26.1.  Any such use shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as a special approval use (Section 3.4). The Planning Commission shall find that at least the following conditions are met before approving the use: 
A.  Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used for bed and breakfast sleeping rooms. 
B.  There shall be no separate cooking facilities used for bed and breakfast stay. 
C.  No sign larger than two (2) square feet identifying the bed and breakfast shall be permitted. 
D.  One (1) parking space shall be provided off-street in the interior side yard or rear yard area for each occupant room. 
E.  Such off-street parking shall meet the design and layout requirements of Article VIII. 
F.  No transient occupant shall reside on premises for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days and not more than thirty (30) days in any one year. 
G.  All such facilities shall comply with all applicable local, county, and state building, occupant living area, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, and health codes. 
Section 5.27. - Swimming pools. 
    All swimming pools erected in the City shall comply with the following requirements: 
5.27.1.  Application. The application for a building permit to erect a swimming pool shall include the name of the owner, the manner of supervision of pool, a plot plan and location of adjacent buildings, fencing, gates, public utilities, specifications, and plans to scale of pool walls, slope, bottom, walkway, and diving boards, type and rating of auxiliary equipment, piping and valve layout, and any other detailed information affecting construction and safety features deemed necessary by the building inspector. 
5.27.2.  Pool Location. Minimum side yard setback shall comply with the provisions of the district. Furthermore, the pool fence must not be built within the required front yard or required corner lot side yard. Rear yard setback shall not be less than six (6) feet between the pool outside wall and the rear property line, or less than the established easement width at the rear property line, or less than six (6) feet between pool wall and any building on the lot. 
5.27.3.  Fence. For the protection of the general public, all swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence of a type described in Section 5.5 not less than four (4) feet in height at least six (6)feet from the outside wall of the pool, except in the following cases: 
A.  If the rear yard is completely fenced in accordance with Section 5.5 of the Zoning Ordinance a fence six (6) feet from the pool will not be required; and 
B.  If a pool is so constructed that the platform around the pool is at least four (4) feet above ground and has an enclosure around the platform, no additional fencing will be required. 
5.27.4.  Openings. All openings in any pool fences or yard fences around a pool shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching gate which shall be securely locked with a tamper proof lock when the pool is not in use. 
Section 5.28. - Waterfront lots. 
    All waterfront lots within the City shall comply with the following regulations: 
5.28.1.  In all single family and two family residential zoning districts, a minimum yard setback shall also be established along the river, for all lots that have frontage on either the Pine River or the St. Clair River. The minimum yard setback shall be established by rendering a straight line between the adjacent dwellings from the two corners that are nearest the river and closest to the proposed construction. If either adjacent lot is unimproved, then the dwelling on the next improved lot having river frontage shall be used. In the event that the proposed dwelling does not exceed one story, and the average elevation of the top of the foundation of either of the adjacent dwellings is more that ten (10) feet above the elevation of the top of the foundation of the proposed construction, then the dwelling on the next improved river frontage lot whose elevation is less than ten (10) feet, as measured above, shall be used. 
5.28.2.  Chain link fence not exceeding four (4) feet in height shall be permitted in the required yard abutting the river in accordance with other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Decks, unenclosed porches, balconies and patios shall be permitted to project in the required yard abutting the river after review and approval of such projects by the Planning Commission. Approval shall be granted to such improvements which do not unreasonably impair the access of adjacent dwellings to light and air, or to a view of the river. 
Section 5.29. - Condominium development standards. 
    All condominiums or site condominiums shall comply with the following regulations: 
5.29.1.  Condominium Site Plan Review. A site plan must be submitted to the Planning Commission showing all buildings, parking areas, recreation areas, limited common elements, general common elements, and landscaping on a scale sufficient to permit study of all elements of the plan. The site plan shall be in compliance with Article 9 of this Ordinance and shall include: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of: 
1.  All persons, firms or corporations with an ownership interest in the land on which the condominium project will be located together with a description of the nature of each entity's interest (for example, fee owner, optionee, or land contract vendee). 
2.  All engineers, attorneys, architects or registered land surveyors associated with the project. 
3.  The developer or proprietor of the condominium project. 
B.  The legal description of the land on which the condominium project will be developed together with tax identification numbers. 
C.  The acreage content of the land on which the condominium project will be developed (acreage to be dedicated as public right-of-way shall be noted). 
D.  The purpose of the project (for example, residential, commercial, industrial, etc.) 
E.  Approximate number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel. 
F.  Preliminary plans for a community water system. 
G.  Preliminary plans for a community sewer system. 
H.  A flood plain plan, when appropriate. 
I.  A site plan showing the location, area and dimensions of all building envelopes, building sites (limited commons area, and general commons areas), roads, driveways, landscaping, and recreational facilities. 
J.  A utility plan showing all sanitary sewer, water, and storm sewer lines and easements granted to the City for installation, repair and maintenance of all utilities. 
K.  Storm water management plan, including all lines, swales, drains, basins, and other facilities including appropriate documentation as well as existing and proposed topographic features. 
L.  All natural areas including trees and wetlands to be preserved or modified shall be indicated on the submitted site plan. 
5.29.2.  Streets and Utilities. 
A.  All streets to be dedicated to the public shall be constructed to the specifications of the City of St. Clair. 
B.  Utilities, including sanitary sewers, shall be constructed in accordance with existing City and public utility requirements and to the specifications of the City of St. Clair. All utilities, except essential services, shall be placed underground. 
5.29.3.  Phased Development. Condominium projects may be constructed in phases. However, any phased plan shall show the total proposed with phases clearly identified. Building permits for a phase thereof will not be issued until all streets and utilities have been constructed for that phase. 
5.29.4.  Setbacks and Lot Areas. All condominium or site condominium projects shall conform to the pertinent zoning district schedule of regulations except as otherwise noted. Setbacks and minimum lot areas for a single family detached site condominium shall be measured from the perimeter boundary of the building site property line. 
5.29.5.  Conformance with Subdivision Regulations. All condominium project plans shall conform to the design, layout and improvements standards and all other requirements as established by the City of St. Clair. 
5.29.6.  Water and Waste Water. The condominium project shall comply with and meet all federal, state and county standards for a fresh water system and waste water disposal. 
5.29.7.  Expansion and Conversion. Prior to expansion or conversion of a condominium project to additional land, any new phase must be approved by the Planning Commission. 
5.29.8.  Master Deed. The project developer shall furnish the Zoning Administrator with copies of the proposed consolidated Master Deed, bylaws, and proposed plans. The proposed plans shall be reviewed for compliance with the City Code of Ordinances. Fees for this review shall be established from time to time by the City Commission. 
5.29.9.  As-Built Plan and Occupancy. Submission of an as-built plan of a condominium unit is required prior to occupancy. The zoning administrator may allow occupancy of the project before all improvements required are installed provided that a bond is submitted to the City Clerk, sufficient in amount and type to provide for the installation of improvements before the expiration of the temporary occupancy permit without expense to the City. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the City Engineer. 
5.29.10.  Final Bylaws, Consolidated Master Deed and Site Plan. Upon approval of the development, a final copy of the bylaws and Consolidated Master Deed shall be furnished to the City. The final site plan shall be provided on a mylar sheet of at least 24 inches by 36 inches. 
5.29.11.  Compliance with other Statutes and Ordinances. All condominium projects shall comply with federal state and local laws, statutes and ordinances. 
5.29.12.  Procedures. The proprietor shall submit a site plan to the Planning Commission as required under Article 9 of the Ordinance. The Planning Commission will act on the site plan either approving or disapproving the plan. An approved Site Plan will regulate development of the property unless otherwise notified by the Planning Commission. 
Section 5.30. - Livestock or farm animals. 
    Raising of livestock or farm animals in the R-1 and R-1A districts shall conform at least to the following regulations: 
A.  A parcel may be used, and a building or structure located thereon for the raising or keeping of livestock or farm animals whether for profit or pleasure upon a lot having an area not less than three (3) acres. 
B.  Up to two (2) animals on the first three (3) acres are allowed and it is required to provide an additional one (1) acre for each animal thereafter. 
C.  There shall be no limit in the number of livestock on a lot having ten (10) or more acres. 
Section 5.31. - Satellite antenna receivers. 
    Satellite antennae shall be located only in the side or rear yard of any lot or on the roof of a principal or accessory structure or on a pole next to such structure or attached to such structure. A roof or pole mounted antenna shall not exceed by more than ten (10) feet the height established for the zoning district in which located. No satellite antenna shall be located in a front yard nor shall it exceed a diameter of twelve (12) feet. 
Section 5.32. - Drains and drainage. 
5.32.1.  No person may alter, divert or block, or cause to be altered, diverted, or blocked, any drain, drainage course, ditch, watercourse, or body of water, whether natural or artificial, public or private, which causes or which is likely to cause an increase in the runoff of water onto adjacent properties, beyond that which would occur without the proposed action, without first obtaining a Zoning Compliance Permit from the Zoning Administrator. 
5.32.2.  All applications for permits under this section shall be accompanied by a written description of the proposed action, the reason for the proposed action, a plan drawn to scale showing the existing and proposed drainage patterns, and payment of the required inspection fee. 
5.32.3.  All plans submitted, except those in connection with single-family dwellings, two family dwellings, or farm buildings, shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
5.32.4.  Prior to the issuance of a permit, the Zoning Administrator shall examine the application and plan, make a site inspection of the property involved and make a determination that the proposed action will not cause an increase in the runoff or flow of water onto adjacent properties beyond that which would occur without the proposed action. 
Official Flood Hazard Boundary and Flood Insurance Rate maps as prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration, and other available and applicable sources of information regarding drainage patterns shall be utilized in making the determination. In cases where an engineered plan would not normally be required, the Zoning Administrator may nevertheless require a plan, prepared by a registered professional engineer to be submitted if the Zoning Administrator deems such information essential in making a determination. 
5.32.5.  Upon completion of the proposed action, the Zoning Administrator shall make an additional visit to the site and make a determination that the proposed action was completed in accordance with the terms of the permit and, if satisfactory, shall issue a Certificate of Completion. 
5.32.6.  In no case shall a Zoning Compliance Permit or Certificate of Completion be issued when, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, the proposed action is likely to cause, or the completed action causes, an increase in the runoff or flow of water onto adjacent properties beyond that which would occur without the proposed or completed action. 
5.32.7.  In cases involving official county drains, sole jurisdiction shall rest with the County Drain Commissioner. 
5.32.8.  In cases involving county road ditches, sole jurisdiction shall rest with the Board of County Road Commissioners. 
5.32.9.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with the installation or alteration of normal, proper, and generally accepted agricultural drainage methods and systems when part of a bona fide farm. 
5.32.10.  Fees for applications made pursuant to this Section shall be paid at the time of application for a permit. The amount of such fees shall be established by Resolution of the City Council of the City of St. Clair and shall cover the cost of the necessary review and inspections. In cases where it is necessary for a review to be made by the City Engineer or other City officials or consultants, the applicant shall be required to pay the City such additional reasonable fees as are necessary to conduct and complete said reviews. 
Section 5.33. - Outdoor storage. 
5.33.1.  Site Plan Required. 
(a)  A site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval for any outdoor storage as part of a new development in a M-1 or M-2 zoning district or for any change of use or for site changes as required in Article 9, Section 9.1, of an existing M-1 or M-2 zoned industrial facility. No site plan shall be required for any facility lawfully existing as of the date of adoption of this Section 5.33, unless otherwise required by the Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  The site plan must include the following information: 
1.  Location of proposed storage on the lot 
2.  Type of materials to be stored 
3.  Height of stored materials 
4.  Screening method 
(c)  If no storage area is to exist on a site, the statement "No Outdoor Storage is Permitted on This Site" shall be placed on the site plan and shall be a signed certified statement to that effect by the owner. 
5.33.2.  Screening. All storage areas shall be screened from adjoining parcels zoned residential. The minimum screening requirement will be six (6) feet in height, as outlined in Section 5.6 of the City of St. Clair Zoning Ordinance. 
5.33.3.  Setbacks and Lot Coverage. 
(a)  All outdoor storage areas shall comply with existing setback requirements in the City's Zoning Ordinance (Article 4) and the applicable Building and Fire Codes. 
(b)  The maximum percentage of lot coverage allowed for structures and storage combined shall be 40%. The amount of storage shall not exceed the square footage of the footprint of the building at grade. 
(c)  No storage is allowed in any part of a front yard. 
5.  33.4. Surface. Open storage surfaces shall be constructed of a surface material appropriate to the material being stored and drained to meet city engineering requirements. 
5.33.5.  Temporary Storage. No temporary storage containers, or temporary storage of boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, cars or trucks shall be permitted unless accessory to the use of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04,  1, 11-7-05; Ord. No. 2006-01,  1, 3-6-06) 
Schedule of Accessory Structures 
District # of Units Location Rear/Side Yard Setback Max. Height Stories/Feet Max Size Not to Exceed % of Allowed Rear Yard Coverage for Total of all Accessory Structures Setback from Other Structures Add. Regs. or Excps. Attached Detached R-1   
  
1 Attached, 1 Detached, 1 Shed or 120 s.f. or less   
  
Side/rear 5/5   
  
11/2 story or 16 foot total height 65% of the ground floor area of the main structure 900 sq. ft. or 65% of the ground floor area of the main structure whichever is less 30% of the actual rear yard area for detached accessory structures 5' minimum A 
B 
C R-1A, R-2 3/3 MD 5/5 R-3 10/10 PC review MHP 1 Detached Shed rear 3/3 1 story/10 Not Permitted 120 SF PUD   
PC review Per District 
setback 
requirements   
Per PC Review   
20' 
minimum OS, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 C PRPF Admin review 10/10 11/2 story/14 Admin review C  
A.  When any such structure exceeds 25 feet in length, the structure shall be set back one (1) additional foot for every 2 feet it exceeds 25 feet in length from the property line adjacent to any side exceeding 25 feet in length. 
B.  The height of the roof ridge of a detached accessory structure may exceed the height limitations listed when the roof pitch is built up to and including the roof pitch of the main structure. It may not however exceed the height or pitch of the roof ridge of the main building. 
C.  Attached accessory structures may be permitted to exceed the height limitations listed to conform to the requirements for the main building and in no case may the height of the roof ridge of the accessory structure exceed the height of the roof ridge of the main building. 
Section 5.34. - Solar panels in a residential zoning district. 
    Solar panels will be considered accessory uses and shall comply with section 5.2 Accessory buildings and uses and the Schedule of Accessory Structures, in addition to the following standards: 
5.34.1.  Solar panels affixed to a wall or roof shall be mounted parallel to the surface of subject wall or roof. Such panels shall not project greater than 12 inches from the roof or wall surface. 
5.34.2.  A freestanding solar panel Is considered a special approval use and must meet the review requirements of section 3.5 of the zoning ordinance. The following additional standards shall be met: 
A.  Prohibited from locating in a side or front yard. 
B.  Area of all free-standing solar panels and accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed the maximum area permitted by the Schedule of Accessory Structures. 
C.  Area of a solar panel is considered the area of the conducting surface. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02,  1, 4-19-10) 
Section 5.35. - Outdoor display and sales. 
    Outdoor display and sales of merchandise are permitted in the C-2 General Commercial and P, R & PF, Parks, Recreation and Public Facilities, zoning districts; and for legal and non-conforming uses in a residential zoning district subject to the following provisions: 
5.35.1.  Seasonal or permanent outdoor display and sales use shall meet the requirements of this section: 
A.  Display and sales area is prohibited in required setback areas. 
B.  A minimum of 50 feet shall be maintained between a display area and a residentially zoned and used property. 
C.  A minimum of five (5) feet of separation shall be maintained from access drives, walks and parking areas. 
D.  Screening meeting the requirement of this ordinance shall be maintained from residentially zoned and used property. 
E.  Off-street parking meeting the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall be met. 
F.  Surface pavement and drainage is required and shall meet the engineering standards of the City. 
G.  Storage and sale of bulk unpacked material, equipment and tools are prohibited. 
H.  Tents are permitted provided the height and bulk requirements of the Zoning Ordinance are met. 
I.  The use of outdoor broadcasting, music and similar audio techniques is prohibited. 
J.  The hours of operation shall be limited to 8 am to 9 pm. 
K.  City Council approves the use of all city property. 
L.  The City of St. Clair shall be held harmless from all liability matters relating to the use of City property. 
M.  All applicable federal, state, county and city codes and ordinances are met. 
5.35.2.  Temporary display and sales of merchandise are permitted in the C-1, C-2, P, R & PF and Downtown Redevelopment Districts; on church or civic property; and, for legal non-conforming uses in a residential zoning district. The building official or city superintendent shall find that the following conditions are met prior to issuing approval. Standards for approval shall conform to Section 5.35.1 except for the following modifications: 
A.  Display and sales may be permitted in a required front, rear and side setback provided a minimum five (5) feet of separation is maintained from a public or private walk. 
B.  Required screening from residentially zoned or used property may be provided by tent walls. Such walls shall be securely anchored to the grade during duration of the use. 
C.  Temporary display and sales shall be confined to two occasions per year. Each occasion shall not exceed three (3) days. 
D.  The Building Official or City Superintendent may approve an extension of the time restrictions for temporary display and sales in a C-2 or DRD zoning district. The following information shall be required: 
a.  A written description of the requested time extension and activity. 
b  A sketch plan describing setbacks, tent or canopy floor area and height and other essential dimensions. 
c  Other support material considered necessary by the Building Official or City Superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02,  1, 2-21-11) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2011-02, adopted Feb. 21, 2011, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as App. A,  5.34. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as App. A,  5.35, at the discretion of the editor. 
Section 5.36. - Ponds. 
    Any soil excavation for the purpose of constructing a pond shall be permitted in any district subject to the following standards upon issuance of a zoning permit: 
5.36.1.  The term "pond" as used in this section is defined as any soil excavation, digging, or grading resulting in substantial accumulation or ponding of surface water or pumped water. Ponds of 100 sq. ft. or more will require a zoning permit. Limit one pond per property regardless of size of parcel. 
5.36.2.  No pond is to be located closer than 6 feet to any adjoining or abutting property line or septic field, nor in the front yard excepting a St. Clair river property. 
5.36.3.  The pond shall not have a steeper slope than one (1) to three (3) on all sides for the first six feet from the bank. Ponds shall not exceed 6' in total depth and shall not encompass more than 15% of the rear yard surface area. Ponds of 100 sq. ft. or less with a depth of 2' or less will not require a zoning permit. 
5.36.4.  Ponds deeper than 2' shall require a fence. Fence required for the protection of the general public. Ponds shall be completely enclosed by a type described in Section 5.5 not less than 4' in height at least 6' from the outside slope of the pond. 
5.36.5.  Construction of a pond shall not cause an increase in runoff or drainage to abutting properties beyond that which may have occurred prior to its construction. The zoning administrator shall require that any plan submitted for pond show an adequate method of preventing overflow or water onto adjacent properties. To accomplish this purpose, the zoning administrator may require a spillway leading to any approved drainage way or grassed berm along one or more sides of the pond or both. 
5.36.6.  There shall be a distance of not less than 10 ft. between the outside edge of the pond and any building. 
5.36.7.  Construction of a permitted pond shall be completed within 6 months of the date of issuance of a permit. Extensions may be granted for just cause shown. All areas disturbed during construction of the pond shall be seeded and maintained in good condition to prevent erosion. 
5.36.8.  Ponds are for fish or decorative use only, not for recreational swimming. 
5.36.9.  Appropriate lifesaving equipment such as ring buoys shall be placed near the pond and be easily seen and accessible for use during an emergency. Appropriate warning signs will be provided and maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06,  1, 5-2-16) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2016-06, adopted May 2, 2016, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as App. A,  5.34. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as App. A,  5.36, at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE 6. - SIGNS 

Section 6.1. - General provisions. 
6.1.1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this Chapter to create the legal framework for a comprehensive system of signage in the City, to facilitate the need for businesses to communicate with the citizens of the community and to provide for the balanced need of the protection of the community environment, property values, traffic and pedestrian safety. It is the intent of this chapter to achieve this purpose through the following objectives: 
A.  To protect the general public welfare by controlling the distractions, hazards and obstructions caused by excessive signage. 
B.  To prevent hazards due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or abandonment of signage. 
C.  To keep the number of signs at a reasonable amount that would be necessary to identify a business and its product's and to ensure that the signs are within a reasonable scale in relationship to the building to which they relate. 
D.  To preserve the value of property by assuring the compatibility of signage with surrounding land uses by regulating the placement and sizes of signs in a manner that will prevent the signs of adjacent businesses from being obscured or concealed. 
E.  To prevent off-premise signs from conflicting with private, public and commercial land uses. 
F.  To protect the aesthetic quality of the City by ensuring that the signage will harmonize with the building upon which it is placed and with the adjacent land uses. 
6.1.2.  Applicability/scope. No sign shall be erected, moved, altered, or maintained, within the limits of the City of St. Clair which is not in compliance with all the requirements of this Chapter. 
A.  Any sign which is not specifically permitted by this ordinance is prohibited. 
B.  All signs permitted by this ordinance may only advertise goods, services or uses that are displayed, sold, or are allowed uses permitted by the ordinance on the parcel or premises on which they are located. 
C.  Any sign already established and previously permitted on the effective date of this Chapter, and which is rendered nonconforming by the provisions this chapter, or subsequent amendments of this chapter shall be subject to the regulations concerning nonconforming signs. 
6.1.3.  Enforcement. The Building Official and/or his or her duly authorized representative is hereby authorized and designated as the persons responsible for the enforcement of this article. The initial determination of any supposed violation of this ordinance shall be made by the Building Official with all appeals or interpretations made by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the authorized representative, may, for the purposes of enforcing this article, enter at reasonable times, any structure, premises or parcel, to perform any duty imposed upon them by the provisions of this chapter. 
Section 6.2. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions will apply in the interpretation, administration, and enforcement of this Chapter: 
    Animation: A rapid display of a sequence of images or blinking lights in order to create an illusion of movement. 
    Area: The entire area within a rectangle, circle, triangle, or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing or pictorial representation emblem or any figure of similar character together with any frame or other material or other color forming an integral of the display or used to differentiate it from the background against which it is placed. Where a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except where two (2) such faces are placed back-to-back, parallel to one another, and less than 24 inches apart, the area of the sign shall be the area of one face. 
    Awning sign: A sign which is attached directly to, or painted, or otherwise inscribed upon, an awning. Awnings must be supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building. Awnings shall have noncombustible frames but may have combustible coverings. Awnings shall be either fixed, retractable, folding, or collapsible. 
    Banner sign: Any sign produced on cloth, paper, fabric or on any other combustible material either with or without a supporting framework. 
    Billboard: Any display sign which contains a message unrelated to or not advertising a business transacted or goods sold or produced on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Building official: The officer or officers charged, pursuant to this Code, with the administration and enforcement of this Chapter and/or their duly appointed deputies, agents, employees, and inspectors. 
    Canopy: A structure or frame covered with canvas, cloth or other soft material usually extending from the wall of a building and designated to provide shelter from sunlight and the elements. 
    Changeable copy: Any sign designed or constructed so as the lettering or message contained thereon is capable of being changed by rearranging or installing new letters or messages without removing and replacing or resurfacing the face of such sign. 
    Clearance: The vertical distance from the lowest part of the face of the sign to the average ground level at the base of the sign. 
    Commercial: A premises used or occupied for transportation, retail sales, or service businesses; wholesale sales facilities; hotels, tourist homes or motels; or commercial recreation. 
    Construction sign: A sign erected at a construction site identifying the architects, engineers, contractors, or other parties responsible for a project, or identifying the intended purposes or uses of the building. 
    Curb line: The line at the back of the curb farthest from the street or roadway. In the absence of a curb, the average area of the alley or street where the gravel begins. In the case of a proposed curb, the Curb Line shall be established by the City Engineer. 
    Development sign: A temporary sign that advertises new housing development of five (5) or more housing units (including vacant lots) or commercial/industrial development over three (3) acres. 
    Directional sign: A sign identifying the exit(s) and entrance(s) of premises, and containing only the name or logo of the premises or information directional thereto. 
    Educational sign: A sign identifying a public or private educational facility. 
    Electronic message sign: A sign with a fixed or changing message composed of a series of lights or light-emitting diodes that may be changed through electronic means. 
    Ground sign: A sign, the principal support of which is independent of any building. 
    Hanging sign: Any sign attached to a building which extends more than twelve (12) inches beyond any vertical surface of the building which supports it. 
    Height of sign: The maximum vertical distance from the uppermost extremity of a sign or sign support to the average ground level at the base of the sign. 
    Indirectly illuminated sign: A sign illuminated with a light source so shielded as to illuminate only the surface of the sign. 
    Interior signage: Signage located on the interior of a structure is visible from the exterior of the structure and may or may not exceed the allowable size permitted by ordinance. 
    Internally illuminated sign: A sign illuminated from the inside of the sign with a continuous translucent surface with no exposed bulbs, tubes or other electrical appurtenances. 
    Marquee sign: A sign which is attached directly to, or painted, or otherwise described upon, a marquee or a digital programmable message board. Marquees shall be permanently roofed structures attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public property. 
    Master sign plan: A site plan prepared by a licensed Architect or Engineer, including elevations, showing the size height, location, of all signage proposed on a business center, structure, or series of abutting structures. that are utilizing a similar design/style to provide continuity of design. 
    Multi-tenant site: A Structure, or series of adjacent structures, which, for the purposes of this ordinance, are collectively operated under common ownership or management and are located in a Commercial, Industrial, or Mixed Use Zoning District. 
    Off-site signage: Signs which direct attention to a use, business, commodity, service or activity not conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located. 
    Political sign: A sign relating to the election of a person or persons to public office or relating to a political party or relating to a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body. 
    Portable sign: A sign, which by its description or nature may be, or is intended to be, moved from one location to another. 
    Premises: Any unit of contiguous real property or buildings under common ownership. 
    Real estate sign: A sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed. 
    Religious sign: A sign identifying the structure, House of Worship, activity or use of structure or land of a religious organization recognized by the government as such and approved as a bona fide non-profit organization. 
    Roof sign: Any sign which is attached to a building and any part of which extends above the lowest point of the bottom line of any portion of the roof surface. 
    Sign: Any name, identification, description, display, illustration, surface, or device (including its structure and component parts) which is affixed to, painted on, or otherwise represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or land; which bears any inscription, notice, motto, or design, or which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business; and which is visible from public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park, or other area open to the public. 
    Shopping center: A commercial site with more than three (3) units, in a C-2 Zoning District with two hundred fifty (250) Lineal Feet of frontage on one road. 
    Shopping center sign: A ground sign which allows for a multitenant site, with more than three units, in a C-2 zoning district to have more than one sign face at the front of the property. The sign would be allowed to have one sign on each side, for each unit in the center and would allow the Anchor Store, or largest store to occupy forty (40) percent of the allowed square footage. 
    Subdivision or development entry sign: A sign which identifies the name of a residential development or the developer or the type of residential structures included in the development, and which is harmonious in appearance with that of the vicinity. 
    Temporary sign: Any sign that is free standing or attached in any manner to the exterior of any building or land other than a window sign, which is not meant to be a sign of a permanent nature as allowed by the "Schedule of Sign Regulations". Such signs may only be intended for special events, sales, and notices. They cannot have permanent footings and may only be constructed of light weight material such as cardboard, plastic, paper and may be of a banner, hanging, swinging or flagpole type of construction. They may include A-frame and freestanding sidewalk signs but strings of flags or lights are not considered allowed temporary signs under this definition. 
    Vacant lot signage: Any sign located on a parcel which does not have a principal permitted use located and in use on the property. 
    Wall sign: A sign which is attached directly to, or painted, or otherwise inscribed upon, a building wall. 
    Window sign: Any sign which is applied, affixed, or attached to the interior or exterior within two feet of any window. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02,  1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 2010-02,  1, 4-19-10) 
Section 6.3. - Permits and general requirements. 
    No person shall erect, move, alter, or maintain any sign, not exempted by this ordinance, without first obtaining a permit to do so in compliance with the following: 
6.3.1.  Permits. 
A.  Application for Sign Permits. Application for such permit shall be filed upon forms provided by the Building Official and shall contain or have attached the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, person, firm, or association, who will be erecting the sign. 
2.  Name, address, and written consent of the owner of the property or building on which the sign is to be erected. 
3.  Location of property or building on which the sign is to be erected. 
4.  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, and property lines. 
5.  Two drawings of the plans, specifications, method of construction and attachment to the building or placement in the ground. 
6.  Liability insurance certificate as required by Federal, State or Local laws or ordinances of the City of St. Clair. 
7.  Such other information as the Building Official may require to show full compliance with this and all other applicable Federal, State or Local law or ordinances of the City of St. Clair. 
8.  When required by the Building Code, the drawings, plans, and specifications required with the application shall bear the certificate or seal of a registered architect or engineer as a condition to the issuance of a permit, including a copy of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary, showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind pressure in accordance with regulations adopted by the City. 
9.  An electrical permit must be issued to a licensed electrician prior to the installation of any sign requiring electrical service. 
B.  Permit Fee. Every applicant is required to pay a fee based on a schedule as adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Administrative and review fees only shall be required for ordinary repairs, maintenance, or change of copy, provided the costs of such do not exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of the sign. 
6.3.2.  General standards. The following shall apply to all signs erected or located within any district unless specifically exempted, or provided for, in this Chapter. 
A.  Construction. All signs are required to be constructed in compliance with the following: 
1.  Size. No sign shall exceed the allowable height or area listed in the Schedule of Sign Regulations. 
2.  Location. No sign shall be allowed in a location not specifically permitted by ordinance. 
3.  Building Codes. All construction shall be in full compliance with the building codes in effect at the time of the issuance of the permit including electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes. This shall also include all regulations regarding the current standards for the type of materials used such as steel, masonry, wood and plastics, as well as calculations for structural stability and resistance to natural pressures such as wind, snow and soil bearing capabilities. 
4.  The allowable height of any sign shall be determined by measuring from the average grade of the area surrounding the sign. Signs may not be placed on berms or other elevated areas that would allow them to exceed the allowable height by such means. 
B.  Maintenance. All signs, including all their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good maintenance and repair and kept in compliance with the plans and specifications approved for the issuance of the sign permit. 
1.  The owner of any sign which has not been properly maintained shall be sent written notification to commence repairs and/or maintenance within 30 days, with completion of repairs to be performed in a reasonable time. 
2.  Failure to comply with the above requirements shall render the sign a nonconforming sign for the purposes of this ordinance and subject the owner to further action as dictated by the ordinance. 
C.  Restrictions. No sign shall be allowed in the following locations: 
1.  The Public Right of way. No sign, unless placed and maintained by the City, County or State, shall be allowed to project into, over, or across any public right of way, except by permission of the City Council or as specifically permitted by this ordinance. (Exception: See the Schedule of Sign Regulations, Hanging/Canopy Signs.) 
2.  Street or Alley Intersections. No sign permitted by this ordinance shall be allowed to exceed two and one-half (21/2) feet in height when placed in the following area of an intersection. This area shall be a triangular area formed on any corner lot by a straight line connecting two (2) points which are to be fifteen (15) feet from the point of the intersection, as measured along an existing or proposed curb, or in the absence of curbs, from the nearest edge of pavement or gravel surface forming the edge of the street or alley. 
3.  Emergency Egress. No sign shall be allowed so as to obstruct any door, means of egress, fire escape or placed in such a manner that it would prevent or obstruct firefighting or health, safety and code related requirements. 
6.3.3.  Illumination. Signs shall be illuminated only as follows: 
A.  Type: Signs shall be allowed to be illuminated by a steady, stationary light, shielded and directed solely at the sign, internally illuminated solid faced signage by interior light (with no visible exposed tubing), or neon lighting. No combination of the afore listed sources of illumination may be utilized for any one sign. Internally illuminated, translucent canopies are specifically prohibited. 
B.  Intensity: No portion of the sign shall have a luminance greater than the Schedule of Maximum Illumination: 
SCHEDULE OF MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION 
District Maximum Luminance R-1-R-4, MHP, P, R&PF Eight (8) foot candles MD1,MD2 Ten (10) foot candles OS, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 Fifteen (15) foot candles MD1, MD2, OS, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 Eight (8) foot candles for sign locations directly adjacent to a residential zoning district. PUD As approved by City during site plan review  
C.  Interior Signage: For Internally illuminated signs placed within a structure that exceed the size of the amount of window space signage and/or luminance allowed by ordinance, it is required that the windows be provided with shading or glazing that restricts the illumination outside of the building to that which would otherwise be normal to the structure or the surrounding area without the signage. 
D.  Hours of Operation: All internally illuminated or neon signs located adjacent to a residential zoning district are required to be shut off between the hours of 10 PM or the closing time of normal business hours, whichever is later, and 7 AM or the opening of business hours, whichever is earlier. 
E.  Internal illumination shall not be permitted for any sign which is located in a historic district or a State or Federal historically designated site. 
F.  The external illumination directed at any signage shall be shielded at its source in a manner that will not shine light on adjacent properties or on or into abutting public streets and/or walkways. 
G.  Flashing, rotating, moving or other light sources not specifically permitted by this ordinance are prohibited unless specifically permitted after review and approval by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02,  1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 2010-02,  1, 4-19-10) 
Section 6.4. - Sign regulations. 
6.4.1.  The schedule of sign regulations. The following schedule and accompanying notes shall apply to all signs erected or located within any district unless specifically excepted by, or provided for in this chapter. The area of each sign, height, location and setback allowed shall be according to the district listed. 
THE SCHEDULE OF SIGN REGULATIONS* 
Type of Sign Ground Wall Canopy 
(note b) Window Time/Temp 
Display (note d) Temporary 
& Misc. notes Districts All signs are subject to corner visibility requirements and may not be located in the right of way 1. 1&2 Family 
Residential 
(note b, d) 
Sq. ft. allowed 
Height 
Setback 1 Subdivision or 
Religious/educ. 
Entrance Sign 
32 sq. ft. total 
6 ft. 
15 ft. from curb. 1 Sign on model 
identifying 
office 
  
6 sq. ft., 
On 1 st story wall or in window Signage not permitted on canopies As noted under Wall section for 1 & 2 Family Residential Not permitted See Temporary Signage, (Note e) 1 additional wall/hanging/canopy sign allowed on each abutting street frontage for religious/educational institutions. 1 sq. ft. of sign allowed per 2 ln. ft. of building frontage. Not to exceed 5% of the 1 st story exterior building wall face or height. 2. Multiple 
Residential 
(note b) 
Sq. ft. allowed 
Height 
Setback 1 Identification 
sign at main 
entrance/island 
32 sq. ft. total 
6 ft. 
15 ft. from curb 1 allowed per structure 
  
4 sq. ft., 
On 1 st story wall Signage not permitted on canopies Not permitted Not permitted See Temporary Signage, (Note e) 1 additional wall/hanging/canopy sign allowed on each abutting street frontage for religious/educational institutions. 1 sq. ft. of sign allowed per 2 ln. ft. of building frontage. Not to exceed 5% of the 1 st story exterior building wall face or height.  
Type of Sign Ground Wall/Canopy 
(note b) Window Time/Temp 
Display (note d) Temporary 
& Misc. notes 3. C-1 Local 
Commercial, 
MD Mixed Use 
(note b, d) 
Sq. ft. allowed 
Height 
Setback 1 ground or wall 
sign allowed on 
main street front 
  
24 sq. ft. 
6 ft. 
15 ft. from Curb 1 wall/hanging/canopy sign allowed on one abutting street frontage. 1 sq. ft. of sign allowed per 2 ln. ft. of building frontage. Not to exceed 5% of the 1 st story exterior building wall face or height. 1 per street frontage 
Not to exceed 15% of/on 1 st story windows only Not permitted without specific review and approval by the Planning Commission See Temporary Signage, (Note e) or as approved by the City Council upon request 4. C-2 General 
Commercial, 
(note b, d) 
Sq. ft. allowed 
Height 
Setback 1 ground or wall 
sign allowed on 
main street front 
32 sq. ft. 
6 ft. 
25 ft. from curb 1 wall/hanging/canopy sign allowed on one abutting street frontage. 1 sq. ft. of sign allowed per 1 ln. ft. of building frontage. Not to exceed 10% of the 1 st story exterior building wall face, height, or 200 sq. ft. maximum. (Note e) 1 per street frontage 
Not to exceed 15% of/on 1 st story windows only Not permitted without specific review and approval by the Planning Commission See Temporary Signage, (Note e) or as approved by the City Council upon request 5. Industrial, 
Office Service 
(note a, b, d) 
Sq. ft. allowed 
Height 
Setback 1 ground or wall 
sign allowed on 
main street front 
32 sq. ft. 
8 ft. 
25. ft. from curb 1 wall/hanging/canopy sign allowed on one abutting street frontage. 1 sq. ft. of sign allowed per 1 ln. ft. of building frontage. Not to exceed 10% of the 1 st story exterior building wall face, height, or 200 sq. ft. maximum. (Note e) Not permitted Not permitted See Temporary Signage, (Note e) 6. Multi-tenant 
Commercial, 
Industrial, 
Office Service 
(note b, c, d) A Master Sign Plan, as outlined in this ordinance, is required for all multi-tenant sites with over 100 lineal feet of frontage on any one individual road right of way. 
One main ground sign permitted with additional signs as determined necessary based on lot size and zoning. As listed above for commercial zoning only. As listed above for commercial zoning. Same as above for Commercial Otherwise, see Temporary Signage, (Note e) 7. P, PR, PF 
(note a, b, d) 
  
Sq. ft. allowed 
Height 
Setback 1 ground or wall 
sign allowed on 
main street front 
32 sq. ft. 
8 ft. 
15 ft. from curb 1 additional wall or canopy sign 
allowed on each street frontage 
1 sq. ft. per 2 ln. ft. of frontage 
Not to exceed 16 sq. ft. each 
Only on 1 st story or canopy Not permitted Not permitted without specific review and approval by the Planning Commission See Temporary Signage, (Note e) or as approved by the City Council upon request  
Type of Sign Ground Wall Canopy 
(note b) Window Time/Temp 
Display (note d) Temporary 
& Misc. notes 8. Mobile 
Home Park 
(note e) 
  
  
Sq. ft. allowed 
Height 
Setback 1 Identification 
sign at main 
entrance/island 
32 sq. ft. total 
6 ft. 
15 ft. from curb 1 Sign on model 
identifying 
office 
  
  
  
6 sq. ft., 
On 1 st story wall 
or in window Signage not permitted on canopies Not permitted Not permitted See Temporary Signage (Note e) 9. PUD 
(note a, b, c) All Signage must be presented with the request for the PUD at the Planning Commission review for the PUD. 10. Gas Station (note b, d) All Signage must be presented with the request for Site Plan Approval as required by the Ordinance.  
*  Further regulations may be listed in this ordinance for the specific districts or signs under the appropriate section. 
a.  Increases in sign sizes are allowed for each district noted according to the chart below. 
Distance of sign from current right of way. 50+ feet 100+ feet 200+ feet 300+ feet 400+ feet Allowable increase in Sign Area due to distance from the right of way. 25% 
( 1.25) 50% 
( 1.5) 100% 
( 2) 200% 
( 3) 300% 
( 4)  
b.  Hanging and canopy signs may erected and utilized as wall signs provided they comply with all of the following: 
1.  Lighting restrictions on Canopies are as follows: 
  Under-lit translucent canopies not permitted 
  Lighting underneath non-translucent canopies may be permitted for pedestrian safety. 
  Lighting over the top of canopies may be permitted provided the style of lighting is in compliance with the architectural style approved for the district by the Planning Commission. 
2.  They may project over the right of way or public walk way provided they are 7 feet or more above the walking surface and do not project into or over a street or alley and do not extend over 5 feet from the face of the building. 
3.  The measurement of the signage for a canopy or hanging sign will be determined by the Building Official and will be based on the actual area encompassing the size of the lettering including any design extenuating the message of the sign as opposed to the architecture or structure of the sign. 
c.  All signs in these districts are required to have material, illumination, type and color meet Planning Commission approval as listed in the ordinance under the requirements of the Master Sign Plan section. 
d.  Time and/or temperature displays may be allowed in the districts noted, provided they are made a part of the square footage allowed for the main sign, in the districts permitted and provided the illumination and type of display is reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and found to be compatible with the general architectural character of the area. 
e.  One additional sign is allowed where there is additional road frontage. The sign may be allowed to be constructed at 50% of the original allowable area calculations for that frontage, as listed for that zoning district. The height and location requirements remain the same. 
6.4.2.  Master sign plan. The purpose of this section of the ordinance is to ensure continuity of design for signage on a business center, structure, or series of structures that were originally designed and built with a similar continuity of design. Nothing in this section is meant to deprive or prohibit individuality or creativity, but is intended to preserve the value of property by assuring the compatibility of signage with surrounding land uses and adjacent businesses. 
A.  Guidelines: Where signs are required to meet the review of a Master Sign Plan, they shall comply with following guidelines regarding material, style and color: 
1.  A site plan must be submitted to the Planning Commission containing all the general information required by the ordinance for Site Plan Review. 
2.  All colors, material and lighting shall be coordinated to provide a consistent theme throughout the site, similar in character and quality with the Architectural design and character of the structures located on the site. 
3.  All proposed signage shall be prepared by a licensed architect or engineer 
4.  No signage may be permitted by the Planning Commission which is not specifically permitted, or is specifically prohibited, by this Ordinance. 
B.  Size Increase: Allowances may be granted by the Planning Commission to allow for up to a 25% increase in the size of allowable signage where the following conditions are met. 
1.  A specific Zoning, Historic, or Overlay District must be designated by resolution of the Planning Commission and the City Council. The District would have to demonstrate a certain architectural, aesthetic, or characteristic style which would be considered by the Planning Commission and City Council as promoting the general welfare of the City. 
2.  An Architectural Study must be submitted for one of the above districts, by a licensed Architect, specifying the area to be included in the District and the style that is to be demonstrated. 
3.  All proposed signage submitted for the increase must be designed by a licensed Architect in compliance with the specific unique style of the District and reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. 
4.  Any subsequent changes in signage may be approved by the Building Inspector provided they comply with all of the above requirements. 
6.4.3.  Gas station signs. In addition to the signs otherwise permitted by this chapter for the District in which it is located each premises used as a gasoline service station shall be permitted the following signs: 
A.  Gasoline pump signs: May not exceed three (3) square feet per pump containing customary information regarding the brand and type of gasoline sold. 
B.  Price Signs: Two (2) wall or double-faced, free-standing signs permanently affixed to the premises indicating the price and grade of gasoline sold, not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in surface display area per face with a maximum height of not to exceed eight (8) feet. A price sign may include light-emitting diode (LED) signs subject to Section 6.4.5. 
C.  Display racks: Up to three racks may be allowed for the orderly display of customary products such as oil, tires, and accessories, not exceeding six (6) feet in height or six (6) feet in length (including attached signs and printed product information) and set back twenty five (25) feet from the nearest curb line. 
6.4.4.  Banner signs. 
A.  Banner signs advertising a public or civic announcement are permitted. The Planning Commission shall approve the use, size, color, means of securing, message content, duration and other applicable features of a banner sign. 
6.4.5.  Electronic message signs. Electronic Message Signs shall be permitted only within the OS, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 and P, R & PF zoning districts, as either a freestanding, wall-mounted or window sign. Such signs shall be allowed subject to the sign regulations for each zoning district and subject to the following additional regulations: 
A.  The electronic display shall not be flashing or pulsing. 
B.  The frequency of the message change shall be restricted to no more than once every ten (10) seconds. 
C.  The maximum area of all electronic message signs shall be considered a part of a wall or freestanding sign and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total permitted sign area. 
D.  The maximum height of an electronic message board shall conform to the height regulations for signs allowed in each zoning district. 
E.  The maximum illumination level must meet standards of Section 6.3.3. 
F.  Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory programmed not to exceed the above listed light levels, and that the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected software or other method satisfactory to the City of St. Clair. 
G.  An electronic message sign located adjacent to a residential zoning district shall be required to be shut off between the hours of 10 PM or the closing time of normal business hours, whichever is later, and 7AM or the opening of business hours, whichever is earlier. 
6.4.6.  Animated signs. Animated Signs shall be permitted only within the C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 and P, R & PF zoning districts, as either a freestanding, wall-mounted or window sign. Such signs shall be allowed subject to the sign regulations for each zoning district and subject to the following additional regulations: 
A.  The display shall not be flashing or pulsing. 
B.  The maximum area of all signs shall be considered a part of a wall or freestanding sign and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total permitted sign area. 
C.  The maximum height of a sign shall conform to the height regulations for signs allowed in each zoning district, as specified in Article 6. 
D.  The maximum illumination level must meet standards of Section 6.3.3. 
E.  Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory programmed not to exceed the above listed light levels, and that the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password protected software or other method satisfactory to the City of St. Clair. 
F.  An animated sign located adjacent to a residential zoning district shall be required to be shut off between the hours of 10 PM or the closing time of normal business hours, whichever is later, and 7AM or the opening of business hours, whichever is earlier. 
6.4.7.  Temporary, special event signage. The following regulations shall apply to temporary, special event signage where it is permitted as set forth within this Article: 
A.  Temporary, special event sign(s) shall be erected only after making application for and receiving a Zoning Permit from the Building and Zoning Department. The Building Official or designee shall determine the total number of temporary, special event signs allowed based upon the total street front footage of the parcel or store front footage in the case of a strip mall or multi-unit business. 
B.  An individual business, company, corporation or property owner shall be entitled to employ temporary, special event signage within a non-residential zoned parcel for a time period not to exceed forty-five (45) calendar days per calendar year. Permits shall be issued in fifteen (15) day increments and may be issued for no more than thirty (30) consecutive day terms. 
C.  No temporary, special event sign shall employ any flashing lights, moving parts. The use of inflatable or air-driven signs shall be prohibited. 
D.  Any and all temporary, special event signs, when connected to an electrical service shall meet the requirements of the State of Michigan Electrical Code. 
E.  Any and all temporary, special event signs shall be securely anchored so as to minimize danger of wind damage, theft or vandalism as determined by the Building Official or designee. No temporary, special event sign shall be placed within the City right-of-way or where such sign shall create a vision obstruction. 
F.  All temporary, special event signs shall be removed by no later than two (2) calendar days after the date of expiration on the Zoning Permit. 
G.  The City, may by written order, demand the immediate removal of any temporary special event sign in violation of this or any other section of this Zoning Ordinance or amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02,  1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 2010-02,  1, 4-19-10; Ord. No. 2011-11,  1, 10-3-11) 
Section 6.5. - Exempted signs. 
    The following Signs are exempted from the requirements of section 6.3.1: 
6.5.1.  General. 
A.  Address numbers of all structures, as required by ordinance. 
B.  One (1) sign, per structure, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, designating only the name/profession of an occupant of the structure. 
C.  Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet which contain only noncommercial messages including designation of rest rooms, telephone location, or direction of door openings. 
D.  Directly or indirectly illuminated signs such as clock faces or barber poles which do not contain illustrations or communicate a message. 
E.  One Plaque or sign designating a historic structure or district, building directory or restaurant menu not exceeding six (6) square feet with a letter height not greater than two (2) inches painted on or attached to the building which contains information pertaining to building occupants only. 
F.  Parking information signs containing only directional information, pedestrian or vehicular warning or control material. Such signs shall have a surface display area not more than two (2) square feet and shall not exceed two and one half (21/2) feet in height. 
G.  Portable open signs as permitted by the Schedule of Sign Regulations. 
H.  Reserved. 
I.  Neon or painted lettering on windows as permitted by the Schedule of Sign Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02,  1, 3-21-05) 
6.5.2.  Window signage. 
A.  Window signage which does not exceed the type, number, size, height, location, length of time, or illumination restrictions permitted by this ordinance. The maximum amount of window sign age is 50% of the total area of any door or window of the business, including neon or painted lettering. Electronic message and animated signs displayed within a window shall comply with the maximum area, frequency of change and illumination standards of this section for such signs. 
6.5.3.  Special events. 
A.  Municipal Seasonal decorations and community event signs, provided the dates and locations have been reviewed and approved by the City Council under the requirements of the ordinance regulating Special Events. Other similar seasonal decorations and also signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area may be placed on private property provided such decorations do not become a nuisance or cause undue hardship to the abutting property owners. 
B.  Civic and charitable event signs. 
1.  Permission to display a sign or banner for civic or charitable events shall require Zoning Administrator and sign permit approval. 
2.  Non-profit community groups may display temporary signs in a C-1 or C-2 zoned district, in an adjacent right-of-way to such district or in any residentially zoned district upon written permission of the property owner. Signs shall not be erected more than twenty-one (21) days prior to an event and shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours after the close of the event. In the case of placement in the C-1 and C-2 districts, civic or charitable signs do not count as part of the allowable business signs 
3.  Event signs shall be ground mounted, not exceed six (6) square feet in size and shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height as measured from the ground. 
6.5.4.  Political/civic. 
A.  Political signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in surface display area or three and one-half (31/2) feet in height per sign are allowed on private property with the permission of the owner. Signs for the promotion of political elections may be erected at any time prior to a proposed election, however all signs must be removed within seven (7) days after the election for which they are erected. Failure to remove the signage as required may result in removal by the City after the allotted time and the cost charged to the owner of the property. 
B.  Signs maintained by a political subdivision of the State of Michigan. 
C.  Signs, traffic signals, or warning devices erected or displayed by, or required or permitted to be displayed by, any public agency. Such signs shall not be counted against the number of signs or against the total sign area permitted on the premises. 
D.  Signs existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Chapter which are maintained by a church, school, community center, or other public building. 
E.  Memorial signs or tablets denoting the name or date of erection of a building when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material. 
F.  Flags bearing the official design of a unit of government, education institution, or civic league or organization, fraternal benefit societies, order or association, or any organization operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes. 
6.5.5.  Construction. 
A.  Residential Districts: Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface display area per face and shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the nearest curb. 
B.  Non-residential Districts: Signs in all other districts shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in surface display area and shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the curb and in no case located in the right of way. 
C.  Display Period: Signs shall only be displayed during the period of actual construction and shall be removed upon completion of final inspection, or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever comes first. In no case shall construction signs be permitted in any district for more than 180 days. 
6.5.6.  Real estate signage. 
A.  For Sale Signs: One (1) wall or free-standing real estate sign per lot, provided that, such signs are removed ten (10) days after the sale, lease, or rental of the property upon which erected, subject to the following: 
1.  Residential Areas: Signs shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in surface display area per face and shall not exceed four and one-half (41/2) feet in height, and if free standing, shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the nearest curb and/or pavement or gravel street surface. The above setback requirement may be waived by the building official after determination that an insufficient area for display does not exist and that the sign may be safely placed at an alternate location. 
2.  Non-residential Districts: Signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in surface display area per face, nor be erected higher than eight (8) feet in total height above the average adjacent grade. Free standing signs shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the nearest existing or future curb line, or in the absence of the curbs, fifteen (15) feet from the nearest edge of pavement or gravel street surface. 
B.  Open House Signs: Directional signage not exceeding six (6) sq. ft. or three (3) feet in height, may be permitted on the dates of the open house, provided the sign is located on private property, and that written permission has been obtained from the owner of the property on which the sign is placed. The sign must be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the nearest curb and/or pavement or gravel street surface. No such sign may be erected regarding any one property for more than 3 consecutive days in a row. 
C.  Garage Sales: Directional signage not exceeding six (6) sq. ft. or three (3) feet in height, may be placed on private property with the owners permission during any three (3) consecutive days provided that no such signage is displayed for more than a total of six (6) days in any, one calendar year from January to December. 
D.  Development Signs: for developments over five (5) individual units or for industrial/commercial development over three (3) acres, one sign allowed at the front of the property with a maximum of sixty (60) square feet. A second sign is allowed if the property has two street accesses. 
6.5.7.  Public and Civic Announcement Signs. 
A.  One (1) electronic message announcement sign meeting the requirements of section 6.4.5 sign shall be permitted on any site which contains a church, school or civic space regardless of the district in which it is located, provided said sign does not exceed 24 square feet in area and a height of 6 feet, and is set back a minimum of 10 feet from the street right-of-way line and contains a maximum of two reader lines. 
B.  The maximum illumination level must meet standards of Section 6.3.3. 
C.  A sign permitted under this section shall meet the following design criteria. 
a.  A sign base rising a minimum one (1) foot above the grade on which the sign is located shall be installed. 
b.  A minimum one side support shall be installed. 
c.  A base and side supports shall be faced with material matching the type, texture and color of the principal building. 
6.5.8.  Light Pole Banners. 
A.  Promotional light pole banners are permitted upon zoning and sign permit approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
B.  Only civic or charitable organizations or municipal banners are permitted within City rights-of-way. 
C.  Light pole banners may be placed on private or public poles located wholly within C-2, or P, R, & PF districts. 
D.  The applicant is responsible for the installation, maintenance and removal of the banners. 
E.  For installation, banners must be attached to banner hardware, which must be attached to the light poles with proper banding materials. Municipal light poles cannot be penetrated, altered or damaged by the installation, wear or removal of banners or banner hardware. 
F.  An applicant is responsible for monitoring and maintaining the safety and attractiveness of banners. An applicant shall remove, replace, repair, or otherwise correct the problem within 48 hours of public notice for non-public safety matters. All banners which are not properly maintained shall be removed at the order of the Zoning Administrator. 
G.  An applicant shall act immediately correct a public safety matter upon notification of the City. Failing to immediately correct such matter may result in the City of St. Clair correcting the matter at the applicant's expense. 
H.  Promotional or business banners shall be displayed for no more than to ninety (90) consecutive days in a calendar year. Civic or charitable organization or municipal banners may be displayed for no more than one hundred-eighty (180) days in a calendar year. 
I.  Banners shall conform to the following dimensional standards. 
1.  Banners shall be a maximum thirty (30) inches in width and one hundred (100) inches length and shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. 
2.  Banners shall be at least 12 feet above grade. 
3.  Banners shall not project more than three (3) feet from the pole on that it is mounted. 
4.  No more than 25% of the banner shall be used for sponsor or business name or logo identification. 
5.  Banners shall be constructed of lightweight, pliable and durable fabric or similar material especially designed for outdoor display and use and shall be mounted at one or more edges. 
6.  Banners shall be attached to light poles capable of withstanding wind loads generated by banner attachments. Civic, charitable, or municipal banners shall only be placed on City approved poles. 
J.  Civic, charitable or municipal banners are allowed to cross streets subject to written approval from the Director of Public Services to the Zoning Administrator. Street crossing banners shall not be erected more than thirty (30) days prior to an event, and shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours following the event. 
K.  Flags shall not be considered banners. 
L.  All other promotional banners, pennants, streamers or inflatable devices are strictly prohibited. 
6.5.9.  Cross-Street Banners. 
A.  Civic, charitable or municipal banners are allowed to cross streets subject to written approval from the Director of Public Services to the Zoning Administrator. Street crossing banners shall not be erected more than thirty (30) days prior to an event, and shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours following the event. 
B.  The applicant is responsible for the installation, maintenance and removal of the banners. 
C.  For installation, banners must be attached to banner hardware, which must be attached to the City approved poles with proper banding materials. Municipal light poles cannot be penetrated, altered or damaged by the installation, wear or removal of banners or banner hardware. 
D.  Banners shall conform to the following dimensional standards. 
1.  Banners overhanging a street shall be at least 15 feet above the immediate grade. 
2.  Banners shall be constructed of lightweight, pliable and durable fabric or similar material especially designed for outdoor display and use and shall be mounted at one or more edges. 
3.  Banners shall be attached to light poles capable of withstanding wind loads generated by banner attachments and shall only be placed on City approved poles. 
E.  An applicant is responsible for monitoring and maintaining the safety and attractiveness of banners. An applicant shall remove, replace, repair, or otherwise correct the problem within 48 hours of public notice for non-public safety matters. All banners which are not properly maintained shall be removed at the order of the Zoning Administrator. 
F.  An applicant shall act immediately correct a public safety matter upon notification of the City. Failing to immediately correct such matter may result in the City of St. Clair correcting the matter at the applicant's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02,  1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 2010-02,  1, 4-19-10; Ord. No. 2011-06,  1, 8-1-11) 
Section 6.6. - Prohibited signs. 
    Any sign not specifically permitted by this ordinance shall be considered prohibited for the purposes of this section. The following signs are also specifically prohibited: 
6.6.1.  General. 
A.  Traffic: Signs which resemble or are meant to be an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal, which may mislead or be confused with a traffic signal or which bear the words "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger," "warning," or similar words used in traffic control. 
B.  Roof Signs: No sign shall be erected at or above the bottom roof line of a structure, except for the following. False Mansard roof fronts, erected on 1 story structures not greater than three (3) feet above the adjacent flat roof surface of the structure may have signs at or below the height of the top of the roof line of the structure. 
C.  Banner Signs: Advertising a product, service or entertainment venue that is not a public service or civic announcement. 
D.  Content: Signs which may contain or present material or a message which is considered obscene, immoral, indecent or illegal. 
6.6.2.  Specific. 
A.  Billboard/off Site Signage; which advertises goods, services or uses not located on site on which the sign is located. 
B.  Vacant Lot Signage; with the exception of signs advertising the sale of the property or political signage as allowed by ordinance. 
C.  Internally Illuminated Canopies or Awnings; which are translucent or permit the transfer of light. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02,  1, 4-19-10) 
Section 6.7. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Any sign in existence on the effective date of this Chapter which is rendered nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter or subsequent amendments of this chapter shall be subject to the following regulations: 
6.7.1.  Nonconformity. All of the following shall be considered nonconforming signs for the purpose of this ordinance. 
A.  Signs that are not in compliance with any of the regulations listed in the Schedule of Sign Regulations for the district in which they are located. 
B.  Signs which advertise a product or use, or is located on the site of a use, that has ceased, or is vacant for a period of six (6) months or more. 
C.  Signs which have not been properly maintained and which the owner of has failed to commence repairs and/or maintenance within thirty (30) days after written notification, or where completion of repairs are not performed within a reasonable time. 
D.  Signs which have been determined by the Building Official to be an immediate threat or hazard to the safety or welfare of the general public, owner of the sign, or occupants of the site on which the sign is located. 
E.  Signs which are damaged for any reason beyond 50% of the value of the existing sign. 
F.  Signs on which repairs for any reason would be estimated to exceed 50% of the value of the existing sign. 
G.  Signs which are structurally altered so as to change the shape or size of the sign. 
6.7.2.  Regulations. No non-conforming sign may be: 
A.  Moved to a different location on the same or different site. 
B.  Changed to another type of sign which is not in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
C.  Repaired for any reason where the costs of such repairs would be estimated to exceed 50% of the value of the existing sign. 
D.  Structurally altered so as to change the shape or size of the sign. 
6.7.3.  Compliance. 
A.  Any lot, premises, or structure on which a nonconforming sign is located, shall not be allowed to increase signage, or provide additional signage without bringing the site into compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
ARTICLE 7. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Section 7.1. - Parking requirements. 
    In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees, and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered, or extended after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be provided as herein prescribed. Such space shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as said main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this Ordinance. 
7.1.1.  Area for Parking Space. For the purpose of this Section, parking lot area, shall be in accordance with Section 7.3.8. 
7.1.2.  Fractional Requirements. When units or measurements determining number of required parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to, and including one-half may be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one (1) parking space. 
7.1.3.  Location of Parking for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. The off-street parking facilities required for one- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building they are intended to serve, but shall not be considered a parking lot under the provisions of Section 7.3 of this Article. 
7.1.4.  Location of Parking for Multiple-Family Residential. The off-street parking facilities for multi-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the dwellings they are intended to serve, and shall consist of a parking lot as set forth in Section 7.3. 
7.1.5.  Location of Parking for Other Land Uses. The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or within five hundred (500) feet of the permitted uses requiring such off-street parking, such distance to be measured along lines of public access to the property between the nearest point of the parking facility to the building to be served. At least 30 percent of the front setback area shall remain as open space unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except for landscaping, plant materials, or vehicle access drives. 
7.1.6.  Seating Capacity of Seats. As used in this Article for parking requirements, seats shall mean that each twenty-four (24) inches of seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat, except that where specifications and plans filed with the Code Enforcement Officer specify a certain seating capacity for a particular building, such specified seating capacity shall be used as the basis for required parking space. 
7.1.7.  Similar Uses and Requirements. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, and is similar, the requirements of off-street parking facilities for the similar use shall apply. 
7.1.8.  Floor Area. For the purpose of this Article, the floor area used to determine the required number of parking spaces shall be as defined in Article 2.00, Definitions. 
7.1.9.  Collective Provisions. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses, provided such facilities collectively shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with Section 7.2 of this Article. 
7.1.10.  Parking Duration. Except when land is used as storage space in connection with the business of a repair, service garage, hotel or motel, a twenty-four (24) hour time limit for parking in non-residential off-street parking areas shall prevail, it being the purpose and intention of the foregoing that the requirement of maintaining vehicle storage or parking space is to provide for the public safety in keeping parked cars off the streets, but such requirement is not designed to or intended to provide, and it shall be unlawful to permit, the storage or prolonged parking on any such parking area in any such district wrecked or junked cars, or for creating a junk yard or a nuisance in such areas. 
7.1.11.  Restriction on Parking on Private Property. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to park any motor vehicle on any private property, or use said private property for vehicle storage, or use any portion of any private property as parking space, without the express or implied consent, authorization, or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of such property. 
7.1.12.  Commercial Use of Parking Space. No commercial repair work or any servicing or selling of any kind shall be conducted on any parking area. 
7.1.13.  Parking Space Requirements for Handicappers. In those cases where barrier-free design parking areas are required under Act 1, Public Acts of 1966, as amended (MCL 125.1351 et seq.), such parking areas shall be provided in accordance with the following table and identified by signs as being reserved for physically handicapped persons. Signs shall be located approximately six (6) feet above grade. Each reserved parking area shall be not less than twelve (12) feet wide. Where a curb exists between the parking lot surface and the sidewalk surface, an inclined approach or a curb cut with a gradient of not more than one foot in twelve (12) feet and a width of not less than four (4) feet shall be provided for wheelchair access. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be located as close as possible to walkways and entrances. Signs shall be provided when necessary, indicating the direction of travel to an accessible entrance. The parking area shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and have a maximum slope of five (5) percent. 
Total Spaces in Lot Required Number of Accessible Spaces up to 25 One (1) 26 to 50 Two (2) 51 to 75 Three (3) 76 to 100 Four (4) 101 to 150 Five (5) 151 to 200 Six (6) above 200 Six (6)  
7.1.14.  Off-Street Parking in C-2 Commercial Districts. For permitted uses and special uses allowed within C-2 District, off-street parking requirements shall not apply if all of the following conditions are met: 
A.  The use is within 300 feet of a municipal parking lot. 
B.  The use will not create unusual parking demands and will not disrupt the parking arrangements of residential neighborhoods, or existing commercial areas. 
C.  The use is within the C-2 District and bounded by Third Street, Vine Street, Clinton and Riverside Streets. 
D.  That where practical, any available land on the owner premise shall accommodate the required number of parking spaces for that business as specified by the Off-Street Parking Requirement Table (7.2.). 
Section 7.2. - Table of off-street parking requirements. 
    The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings as specified above shall be determined in accordance with the following table, and the space so required shall be stated in the application for a building permit and shall be irrevocably reserved for such use and/or shall comply with the initial part of this Section. 
Use Required No. of Parking Spaces Per Each Unit of Measure as Follows Section 7.2.1. Residential a. Single- or Two-Family Dwelling 2 per each dwelling unit b. Multiple-Family Dwelling 2 per each dwelling, plus 1 per each ten (10) dwelling units c. Senior Citizen Housing 1 per each dwelling unit, plus 1 per each ten (10) dwelling units d. Fraternities, Sororities, Rooming Houses 1 per each three (3) occupants e. Dormitories 1 per each four (4) occupants Section 7.2.2. Institutional a. Churches 1 per each three (3) seats based on maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly therein b. Private Clubs & Lodges 1 per each three (3) individual members allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local county, state, fire, health, or building codes c. Hospitals 1 per each four (4) beds, plus 1 per staff doctor, plus 1 per each four (4) employees d. Convalescent Homes, Home for the Aged, Nursing Homes, Children's Homes 1 per each four (4) beds, plus 1 per each staff doctor, plus 1 per each four (4) employees e. High Schools 1 per each teacher, plus 1 per each ten (10) students, plus 1 per each employee or administrator, plus requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall therein f. Elementary & Junior High Schools, Trade Schools 1 per each teacher, plus 1 per each employee or administrator, plus requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall therein g. Child Care Center, Day Nurseries, or Nursery Schools 1 per each 400 sq. ft. of UFA, plus 1 per each employee h. Stadiums & Sports Arena 1 per each four (4) seats or eight (8) feet of bench i. Assisted Living and Rehabilitation  1 to 6 beds 2 plus .5 spaces per each bed  7 to 10 beds 2 plus .75 spaces per each bed  11 to 20 beds 2 plus 1 space per each bed Section 7.2.3. Commercial a. Retail Stores, except as otherwise specified herein 1 per each 200 sq. ft. of GFA, plus 1 per each three (3) employees b. Furniture, Appliances & Household Equipment, Repair Shops, Hardware Stores 1 per each 800 sq. ft. of UFA, plus 1 per each two (2) employees and other similar uses c. Auto Salesrooms, Wholesale Stores, Machinery Sales, & other similar uses 1 per each 1000 sq. ft. of UFA, plus 1 per each employee d. Medical Clinic & Dental Clinic 3 per each staff or visiting doctor, plus 1 per each employee e. Business & Professional Offices 1 per each 300 sq. ft. of GFA f. Motels, Hotels, Tourist Homes 1 per each guest bedroom, plus 1 per each employee, plus amount required for accessory uses g. Banks (other than drive-in), Post Offices 1 per each 200 sq. ft. of UFA, plus 1 per each one (1) employee h. Drive-in Banks 4 Stacking spaces per each teller window i. Barber & Beauty Shops 3 per each operator/chair 1.5 per each tanning bed 1 per each nail technician/other staff j. Bowling Alleys 6 Per bowling lane, plus amount required for accessory uses k. Drive-in Restaurants 1 per each 50 sq. ft. of GFA, plus 1 per each two (2) employees l. Fast Food Drive-in Restaurants 1 per each 125 sq. ft. of GFA, plus 1 per each two (2) employees, with a minimum total of 25 parking spaces m. Establishments (other than drive-in restaurants) in which is conducted the sale and consumption on the premises of food, beverages or refreshments 1 per each three (3) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, state, or county fire, health, or building codes, plus 1 per each three (3) employees, or 1 per each 100 sq. ft. of UFA, (whichever is greater) n. Private Tennis, Swim or Golf Clubs, or other similar uses 1 per each two (2) member families or individuals, plus amount required for accessory uses o. Golf Course, open to the general public 5 per each holes, plus 1 per each employee, plus amount required for accessory uses p. Filling Stations, Automobile Service Stations 2 per each service stall, plus 1 per each employee, plus 1 per each service vehicle, plus 1 per each 200 sq. ft. GFA used by the public q. Motor Vehicle Wash Establishments (self-serve) 4 per each wash stall r. Motor Vehicle Wash Establishments (other than self-serve) 4 per each unit which represents the establishments maximum capacity as computed by dividing the linear dimensions of the mechanical wash/dry operation by 20 feet, plus 1 per each employee s. Service Garages, Auto Repair Shops, Collision or Bump Shops, and other similar uses 1 per each 800 sq. ft. UFA, plus 1 per each two (2) employees computed on the basis of the maximum number of employees on duty at any on time, plus 2 per each stall or service area t. Open Air Business (not otherwise provided for herein) 1 per each 800 sq. ft. of lot area used for said business u. Personal Service Establishments (not otherwise provided for herein) 1 per each 300 sq. ft. of UFA, plus 1 per each two (2) employees v. Theaters, Auditoriums, & Assembly Halls 2 per each five (5) seats based on the maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly therein, plus 1 per each two (2) employees w. Marinas 1 per each boat slip, plus 1 per each employee Section 7.2.4. Industrial a. Industrial or Manufacturing Establishments, Research Establishments 1 per each 11/2 employees computed on the basis of the greatest number of persons employed at any one time, day or night, or 1 per each 2000 sq. ft. of UFA (whichever is greater) b. Warehouses and Storage Buildings 1 per each two (2) employees computed on the basis of the greatest number of persons employed at any one time, day or night, or 1 per each 2000 sq. ft. of GFA (whichever is greater)  
(Ord. No. 2009-01,  1, 5-18-09) 
Section 7.3. - Off-street parking lot construction and operation. 
    The construction of any parking lot shall be in accordance with the requirements of the provisions of this Ordinance and such construction shall be completed and approved by the Code Enforcement Officer and the City Engineer before actual use of the property as a parking lot and before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued. Plans for the development of any parking lot must be submitted to the Building Inspector, prepared at a scale of not less than fifty (50) feet equals one (1) inch and indicating existing and proposed grades, drainage, pipe sizes, parking of all dimensions, type of curbing, drive and aisle dimensions, lighting, adjacent main buildings, sidewalls, landscaping, surfacing and base materials to be used and the layout of the proposed parking lot. The plans are to be prepared in a presentable form by person(s) competent in such work and shall reflect conformance with the following provisions. 
7.3.1.  All such parking lots required for uses other than single- or two-family residential shall be hard-surfaced with a pavement consisting of asphalt or concrete, shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate within or upon such area, and shall be completely constructed prior to a Certificate of Occupancy being issued. No surface water from such parking area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining private property. 
7.3.2.  All illumination for or on all such parking lots shall be deflected away from adjacent residential areas and shall be installed in such a manner as to allow the reduction of the amount of light in other than normal parking hours each day, and shall provide average and initial illumination of 0.80 vertical foot-candles and 0.62 horizontal foot-candles in the area used for parking. 
7.3.3.  The depth of the front yard setback line from the street as established for houses in any block in any given residential area shall be continued and made applicable to parking space in such residential area and it shall be unlawful to use the space between such setback line and the street line for the parking of motor vehicles. 
7.3.4.  When a non-residential parking lot or parking area is situated on a parcel which adjoins a residentially-zoned district, the side and/or rear yard setback, adjacent to this residential district, shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the proposed actual parking area. The first fifteen (15) feet of this required setback shall be developed as a greenbelt and shall extend to encompass the parking lot by extending beyond the actual parking area and its drives by at least thirty (30) feet or to the property line. The above greenbelt requirement may be replaced, upon Planning Commission approval,by an eight (8) foot wide strip of lawn containing a five (5) foot high solid-faced wall equivalent, located within three (3) feet of the respective property line and encompassing the parking lot as stipulated above. 
7.3.5.  Off-street parking lots adjacent to public rights-of-way and directly visible from residential, mixed-use and downtown redevelopment zoning districts shall be screened according to the following design standards: 
A.  Masonry piers spaced per the following schedule: 
Street Length Less than 100' 100'-150' 151'-200' Greater than 200' Pier Spacing 20' 30' 40' 50'  
B.  Ornamental metal, wood, vinyl or brick screen fence between the heights of 32 inches and 36 inches shall be installed between the piers. Such fence shall not obscure the off-street parking area. The Planning Commission may substitute an opaque landscape hedge as regulated in section C. for a fence. 
C.  An opaque landscape shrub hedge between the height of 32 inches and 36 inches is installed and maintained along public right-of-way side of the fence line. 
D.  A minimum five foot landscape strip is installed along the inside of the fence line. 
E.  Ornamental trees spaced 20 feet on center are installed in the landscape strip. 
F.  Planning Commission may modify these requirements provided the applicant demonstrates that required parking lot dimensions inhibit installation and proper maintenance. 
G.  A corner visibility triangle meeting the requirements of this ordinance shall be maintained at corners and access drives. Walls and landscaping not exceeding 30 inches in height can be installed within the corner visibility triangle. 
7.3.6.  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot, by means of limited and clearly defined drives, shall be provided for all vehicles. 
7.3.7.  Wheel chocks shall be provided, so located as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over the lot or setback lines. This requirement may be waived by the City building official or Planning Commission where a five (5') foot landscape strip is located adjacent to the parking space. 
7.3.8.  Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following minimum regulations and as listed in Table 7.3.8(a) and as illustrated in 7.3.8(b). 
1.  A minimum off-street parking space shall not be less than 18 feet in length as measured from a face of sidewalk, curb or wheel chock. 
2.  A pedestrian walk adjacent to off-street parking spaces shall not be less than six (6') feet in width and not reduced to less than four (4') feet of clear walking space with vehicle overhang. 
3.  A vehicle shall not overhang or cross public right-of-way or property. 
7.3.9.  Parking lots containing more than twenty (20) spaces shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 5.7 of this Ordinance. 
Table 7.3.8(a) 
PARKING 
PATTERN MINIMUM DRIVEWAY OR AISLE WIDTH PARKING SPACE LENGTH (a) PARKING SPACE WIDTH (b) TOTAL WIDTH OF TWO TIERS OF SPACES & AISLES 0 (parallel) 10 feet 25 feet 8 feet feet 30 10 feet 20 feet 9 feet feet 45 12 feet 20 feet 9 feet feet 60 18 feet 20 feet 9 feet feet 90 24 feet 20 feet 9 feet feet  
a.  as measured perpendicular to longitudinal angle of parking 
b.  as measured parallel to longitudinal angle of parking 
Table 7.3.8(b) 
Parking Layouts* 

Parking Layouts 
*Maneuvering lanes will be required to be increased when such lane is required for fire or safety vehicle access to building. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02,  1, 4-19-10) 
Section 7.4. - Commercial vehicles and equipment parking. 
    A person shall not park or permit to be parked, any commercial vehicle, trailer, or construction or agricultural equipment on any residentially zoned property in the city, or on any public street, for any purpose or length of time other than for expeditious loading and delivery or pick-up and unloading of materials, goods, or merchandise, or for the purpose of carrying on a principal use permitted on the property on which the vehicle is parked, or as permitted below: 
A.  A commercially licensed vehicle, may be parked on residentially- zoned property if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The vehicle is used as the principal means of transportation for a resident in the conduct of their employment or profession or is the resident's sole means of motor vehicle transportation. 
2.  The vehicle is not a dump truck, stake truck, flatbed or tow truck semi-tractor or semi-tractor trailer with two or more rear axles, a mobile home, tractor, bulldozer, earth carrier, drag line vehicle, crane, excavator and any other equipment or machinery not customarily considered to be for the regular maintenance of a residential property. 
B.  The owner, tenant, or lessee of a farm may openly store the machinery and equipment used on his farm; and it is further provided that equipment necessary for construction, legally parked in the right of way or parked overnight on a lot, parcel, or tract of land, during the construction work thereon, shall be excepted from this restriction. 
Section 7.5. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    On the same premises with every building or part thereof, erected, and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, department store, wholesale, market, hotel, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with street or parking areas. 
7.5.1.  Such loading and unloading space, unless completely and adequately provided for within a building, shall be an area ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet, with fourteen (14) foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule. 
Gross Floor Area (sq. ft.) Loading & Unloading Spaces Required 0-2,000 None. 2,000-20,000 One (1) space. 20,000-100,000 One (1) space plus one (1) space for each 20,000 sq. ft. in excess of 20,000 sq. ft. 100,000-500,000 Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space for each 40,000 sq. ft. in excess of 100,000 sq. ft. Over 500,000 Fifteen (15) spaces plus one (1) space for each 80,000 sq. ft. in excess of 500,000 sq. ft.  
7.5.2.  Double Count. Off-street loading space areas shall not be construed as, or counted toward, the supplying of area required as off-street parking space area. 
Section 7.6. - Parking lot entrance drives. 
    All parking areas other than those for single-family and duplex units shall provide adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes so that backing directly onto a street is unnecessary. In addition, adequate radii or flare approaches shall be provided to permit ingress and egress of vehicles onto or from the site in a manner that does not endanger through traffic on the accessing street. Maximum driveway entrance width for single-family and duplex units shall be twenty (20) feet, as measured at the back of sidewalk or property line; maximum driveway opening at the street line or curb shall be twenty-four (24) feet on a flared opening. Only one (1) driveway opening per single and two-family residential site frontage will be permitted unless utilized for circle driveways. Maximum driveway entrance width for all other building or use type shall be thirty-five (35) feet for a two-way driveway. 
Section 7.7. - Recreational vehicles and/or equipment. 
    The following shall regulate the control of recreational vehicles within the City of St Clair. 
7.7.1.  Intent. It is the intent of this ordinance to provide for the reasonable use and storage of recreational vehicles, on residential property, which would normally be utilized by the owners of such residential property. It is the further intent of this ordinance to provide for the protection of the general public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of St Clair. It is also the intent of this ordinance to effectively prohibit the storage of recreational vehicles in the front yard and to preserve and protect the value of residentially utilized property in the City of St Clair from over crowding and congestion. 
7.7.2.  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  Recreational vehicle and/or equipment: Any motor home, manufactured motorized home, motorbus, travel trailer, camp trailer, camper, truck camper bodies, folding tent trailer, all designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use, or periodical and occasional recreational and vacation use equipment such as a utility trailer, boat, boat trailer, float or raft, personal watercraft, snowmobiles, including transportation equipment and off-road vehicles, or other similar vehicles. 
B.  Landscape screening: Landscaping which provides screening, at installation, of at least 50% of the view for the full height of the landscaping. 
C.  Trailer: Every vehicle without motive power, designed for carrying property or persons and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
D.  Truck: means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
E.  Tractor: means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
7.7.3.  Parking of Recreational Vehicles. The parking or storage of Recreational Vehicles and/or equipment on public streets, or on occupied or vacant property is prohibited with the following exceptions: 
A.  The storage of Recreational Vehicles on waterfront lots shall be in compliance with all of the regulations listed in this ordinance and shall be further regulated by the following: 
1.  A minimum yard setback prohibiting storage along the river shall be established by rendering a straight line between the adjacent dwellings from the two corners that are nearest the river and closet to the existing residence. 
2.  Watercraft of any type, stored in structures located over waters which are regulated by the Army Corps of Engineers and Department of Environmental Quality or watercraft located on a hoist in/over/or adjacent to navigable waterways. 
B.  When parking in front of the structure, for loading or unloading during any two 24 hour periods in any seven day week from Sunday to Saturday. 
C.  Recreational Vehicles and/or equipment when stored within the confines of an enclosed garage or accessory structure when such structures are in compliance with all other requirements of the City codes and ordinances. 
D.  The storage of not more than one Recreational Vehicle or equipment and one boat or personal watercraft is permitted, on residential property in residentially zoned districts or lots otherwise used for residential purposes, subject to the following: 
1.  The equipment or vehicle must be owned or leased by and be licensed to or carry current registration by the occupant of the residence located on the property on which the equipment or vehicle is stored. The requirement of carrying current registration shall be deemed satisfied for equipment issued a six month registration pursuant to the current laws regulating six month registrations, where such six month registration is current or was current within the previous six months. 
2.  The vehicle, trailer or equipment may be stored in the rear or side yard provided it complies with the following requirements: 
a.  The vehicle does not exceed 34 feet in length per the official designation of the length by the manufacturer as registered with the State or 14 feet in height. 
1.  The length restriction will be waived for one specific vehicle that was regularly parked on the property, prior to the enactment of this ordinance, if a request for a waiver is filled out and submitted to the City within 90 days of the enactment of the ordinance. 
b.  It does not extend past the front of the nearest corner of the residence or attached garage on the side of the residence where the vehicle is stored and there is a minimum side yard setback provided to store the vehicle on for full length of the vehicle without the vehicle extending over the property line. 
c.  Where the side yard for the proposed storage abuts a street, the vehicle shall comply with the minimum side yard setback requirements and footnotes listed in the Schedule of District Regulations for the main structures for the district in which it is located. 
d.  It is provided with a hard surface storage pad consisting of gravel, asphalt or concrete and installed in such a manner as to prevent the growth of vegetation through the pad. 
e.  The grade of the pad must be installed in a manner that will not increase the amount of runoff onto adjacent properties, in compliance with all requirements of the zoning ordinance in regard to drains and drainage, after review and approval by the building inspector. 
3.  Not more than a total of 30% of the rear yard may be occupied by the total of all Recreational Vehicles or equipment and accessory structures. 
4.  In the case of a complex of multiple family dwellings of three or more units or mobile home parks, the City shall require a screened area, in addition to off-street parking spaces, to be provided on the site for the parking and storage of recreational vehicles and/or equipment. The area used for the parking of the vehicles shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and shall be submitted in the form of a drawing in sufficient detail demonstrating the following: 
a.  Landscape screening must be provided at a minimum height of 4 feet in such a manner so as to designate the area and number of units that will be allowed to be stored on site. 
b.  A non-porous surface area, which will prevent the growth of vegetation through the surface, must be provided for the parking of recreational vehicles. 
c.  The grade of the area provided for parking must be such that it will not increase the amount of runoff onto adjacent properties, and must be in compliance with all requirements of the zoning ordinance in regard to drains and drainage, after review and approval by the building inspector. 
5.  A Recreational Vehicle and/or equipment may be stored within any portion of a dedicated easement provided it is in compliance with all other requirements of the ordinance and it is maintained so that it can be readily moved in case of an emergency. 
E.  In addition to the one Recreational Vehicle or item of equipment allowed under section D above, the storage of one additional boat or personal watercraft is permitted only as follows: 
1.  When stored within the confines of an enclosed garage or accessory structure. 
2.  Temporary driveway parking, in a front, side or rear yard setback, of a boat or personal watercraft not exceeding twenty-six (26) feet in length, on a trailer, with the total height of the combination not exceeding seven (7) feet in height and eight (8) feet six (6) inches in width, is permitted between the dates of April 15 through October 15, provided the vehicle has current license and registration as required under State law. During the balance of the calendar year said additional boat may be stored on the property under the restrictions contained in section D above. Boats and recreation equipment shall not be parked closer than (10) feet to the curb of a street. 
F.  Any area expressly permitted and zoned for commercial sales and/or storage of the applicable Motor Home, Recreational Vehicle and/or equipment. 
7.7.4.  Recreational Vehicles or equipment collecting water or attracting insects, vermin and other pests. Any watercraft or recreational vehicle and/or equipment which serves as a collection point for pools or ponds of water, a breeding ground for mosquitoes or other insects, or a refuge for rats, rodents, vermin or other pests, while stored on residential property is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance. 
7.7.5.  Recreational Vehicle, trailer or boat used as dwelling. The use or occupancy of any recreational vehicle and/or equipment as a dwelling or for lodging is prohibited with the following exception: 
A.  One unit may be occupied provided it is posted with a valid zoning permit, which will be permitted for two periods, not exceeding two weeks each, in any one calendar year from January to December. 
B.  The vehicle may only be located as required or allowed by other sections of this ordinance. Temporary storage of the vehicle in the front yard or waterfront yard is not permitted without a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
7.7.6.  Connection of Recreational Vehicle to utilities. The connection of a recreational vehicle or equipment to utilities such as electric, sewer and water lines, is prohibited with the following exception: 
A.  A Recreational Vehicle or equipment may be temporarily connected to an electrical power outlet, when in compliance with the other requirements of this ordinance and where the connecting cord and internal wiring of the unit are in compliance with the provisions of all other applicable codes currently in effect. 
7.7.7.  Wrecked, damaged, inoperative, disassembled or disabled Recreational Vehicles and/or equipment. Any wrecked, damaged, inoperative, disassembled or disabled recreational equipment and/or vehicle, stored or parked in zoning districts other than those zoned for commercial sales, or on vacant lots for a period in excess of 15 days is prohibited, with the following exceptions: 
A.  When stored within the confines of an enclosed garage or accessory structure. 
B.  When stored in any area expressly permitted and zoned for commercial repair and/or storage of the applicable recreational vehicle and/or equipment. 
7.7.8.  Recreational vehicles and/or equipment used for storage. The use of any recreational vehicle and/or equipment for the storage of materials, goods or equipment other than those items considered to be a part of the unit or essential to its immediate use in any zoning district is prohibited. 
Section 7.8. - Off-street parking in public rights-of-way. 
7.8.1.  The City Council may grant license agreements to property owners for the establishment of off-street parking in public rights-of-way immediately adjacent to property owned by an applicant as provided in this section. 
7.8.2.  Application for the establishment of off-street parking in public rights-of-way shall be made to the Planning Commission which shall review same in terms of the standards stated within this section and shall establish that such off-street parking: 
(a)  Shall not cause any additional traffic safety problems in the area of the request. Volume and speed of traffic, effect on clear vision areas, pedestrian access routes to and from the proposed parking shall all be considered. The Chief of Police shall provide a written opinion addressing this or any other traffic safety concerns. 
(b)  Shall not cause any additional fire safety problems in the area of the request. Access for fire safety equipment shall be considered. The Fire Chief shall provide a written opinion addressing these or any other fire safety concerns. 
(c)  Shall help to alleviate an existing parking problem in the area of the request. 
7.8.3.  The application for off-street parking shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and City Planner who shall make written reports to the Planning Commission relative to the effect of such an improvement upon existing public utilities and future public usage of the right-of-way. 
7.8.4.  The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing and give notice of the proposed parking area to persons to whom real property within three hundred feet of the area in question is assessed, and to the occupants of single and two family dwellings within three hundred feet, the notice to be delivered personally or by mail. The Planning Commission shall make a written report of the hearing and their findings of fact, regarding the proposed parking area, to the City Council with a recommendation to approve or deny the request. Final determination shall be a discretionary decision of the City Council. The Council may condition approval of the request upon any additional terms or conditions as it may deem appropriate. 
7.8.5.  Should an application for off-street parking in a public right-of-way be approved by the City Council, the City Attorney shall prepare a written license agreement for execution by the property owners which agreement shall address: 
(a)  Compliance with specifications established by the City Engineer. 
(b)  Responsibility for maintenance. 
(c)  Responsibility for restoration of the area if necessary construction by the City disturbs the area. 
(d)  Reimbursement to the City for administrative and engineering costs. 
(e)  Whether or not the licensee will have exclusive use of the right-of-way, or whether it will be open to the public. 
Section 7.9. - Vehicle sales prohibited. 
    The sale or exhibition for sale of vehicles on lots, other than those zoned and approved for commercial sale of vehicles, is prohibited with the following exceptions: 
A.  No more than one motor vehicle, boat or other piece of recreational equipment may be sold or exhibited for sale at any given time by the occupant of a residence located on the property and in no case shall it be located in the right of way. 
B.  The vehicle or equipment is required to be owned or leased by the occupant of the residence located on the property. 
C.  The vehicle or equipment will be permitted to be displayed on any occupied residential land for three periods, not exceeding two weeks each, in any one calendar year from January to December. 
ARTICLE 8. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

Section 8.1. - Purpose. 
    The provisions of this article provide enabling authority and standards for the submission, review, and approval of applications for planned unit developments. It is the intent of this article to authorize the use of planned unit development regulations for the purposes of: encouraging the use of land in accordance with its character and adaptability; conserving natural resources and energy; encouraging innovation in land use planning; providing enhanced housing, employment, shopping, traffic circulation and recreational opportunities for the people of the City; and bringing about a greater compatibility of design and use. 
Section 8.2. - PUD regulations. 
8.2.1.  Planned unit development treatment may be applied in any zoning district. 
8.2.2.  Any land use authorized in this Ordinance may be included in a planned unit development, subject to adequate public health, safety, and welfare protection mechanisms being designed into the development for the purpose of effectively dividing varied land uses which have been joined in and/or are adjacent to the development. 
8.2.3.  The applicant for a planned unit development must demonstrate all of the following as a condition to being entitled to planned unit development treatment: 
A.  Grant of the planned unit development will result in one of the following: 
1.  A recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to the community, where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved without application of the planned unit development regulations; or 
2.  Long-term protection and/or preservation of natural resources and natural features of a significant quantity and/or quality in need of protection or preservation on a local, state, and/or national basis; or 
3.  A non-conforming use shall, to a material extent, be rendered more conforming, or less offensive, to the zoning district in which it is situated. 
B.  The proposed type and density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the need for or burden upon public services, facilities, and utilities in relation to the use or uses otherwise permitted by this Ordinance, and shall not place an unreasonable burden upon the subject and/or surrounding land and/or property owners and occupants and/or the natural environment. 
C.  The proposed development shall be consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the City. 
D.  The proposed development shall not result in an unreasonable negative economic impact upon surrounding properties. 
E.  The proposed development shall be under single ownership and/or control such that there is a single person having responsibility for completing the project in conformity with this Ordinance. 
Section 8.3. - Project design standards. 
8.3.1.  Residential uses shall be permitted with the following maximum density, based upon the zoning district in which the property is situated immediately prior to classification under this article. 
A.  Eight (8) dwelling units per gross acre in R-1. 
B.  Ten (10) dwelling units per gross acre in R-1A. 
C.  Twelve (12) dwelling units per gross acre in R-2. 
D.  Fourteen (14) dwelling units per gross acre in R-3. 
8.3.2.  Non-residential uses shall be permitted as part of a common development with residential units to the extent the applicant demonstrates by expert analysis, and the Planning Commission finds, in its discretion, that the non-residential uses shall principally serve the persons residing in the residential units in the project, provided, the non-residential uses, including without limitation, parking and vehicular traffic ways, shall be separated and buffered from residential units in a manner consistent with good land and community planning principles. 
8.3.3.  For non-residential uses, minimum lot area requirements of the district in which a use is a permitted principal use shall apply, subject to the provisions of the immediately following paragraph. All ambiguities shall be resolved by the Planning Commission. 
8.3.4.  All regulations applicable to lot size, lot width, setback, parking and loading, general provisions, and to other requirements and facilities, shall be met in relation to each respective land use in the development based upon regulations of the zoning district in which the property is situated immediately prior to classification under this article. For all special uses, regulations applicable to the respective uses shall apply. The Planning Commission, in its discretion, shall resolve all ambiguities as to applicable regulations. Notwithstanding the immediately preceding provision of this paragraph, deviations with respect to such regulations may be granted as part of the overall approval of the planned unit development, provided there are features or elements deemed adequate by the Planning Commission designed into the project plan for the purpose of achieving the objectives of this article. 
8.3.5.  Additional density of up to 25 percent greater than specified in Section 8.3.1. for residential uses may be allowed in the discretion of the Planning Commission based upon a demonstration by the applicant of design excellence in the planned unit development resulting in a material benefit to all or a significant portion of ultimate residential uses of the project, including, without limitation, development of innovative design producing significant energy efficiency, pedestrian or vehicular safety, or long-term aesthetic beauty. 
8.3.6.  To the maximum extent feasible, the development shall be designed so as to preserve natural resources and natural features. In the interpretation of this provision, natural resources and natural features may be impaired or destroyed only if it is clearly in the public interest to do so. In determining whether action is in the public interest, the benefit which would reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposal shall be balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the activity, taking into consideration the local, state and national concern for the protection and preservation of the natural resources or features. To accomplish this balancing, the following criteria shall be applied: The availability of feasible and prudent alternative methods of accomplishing the development; the extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects of the proposed activity; the size, quality and rarity of the natural resources or natural features which would be impaired or destroyed. 
8.3.7.  There shall be a perimeter setback and berming, as found to be necessary by the Planning Commission, for the purpose of buffering the development in relation to surrounding properties. If the planned unit development project includes non-residential uses adjacent to a district authorizing residential uses, and/or if the project is larger than one acre in area, such perimeter setback shall be established with a dimension from the property line of up to one hundred (100) feet in the discretion of the Planning Commission, taking into consideration the use or uses in and adjacent to the development. The setback distance need not be uniform at all points on the perimeter of the development. 
8.3.8.  Thoroughfare, drainage, and utility design shall meet or exceed the standards otherwise applicable in connection with each of the respective types of uses served. 
8.3.9.  Where feasible, there shall be underground installation of utilities, including electricity and telephone. 
8.3.10.  In all cases where separation can be accomplished without significantly reducing the kind and density of uses, the pedestrian circulation system, and its related walkways and safety paths, shall be separated from vehicular thoroughfares and ways. 
8.3.11.  Signage, lighting, landscaping, building materials for the exterior of all structures, and other features of the project, shall be designed and completed with the objective of achieving an integrated and controlled development, consistent with the character of the community, surrounding development or developments, and natural features of the area. 
8.3.12.  In all cases where non-residential uses adjoin off-site residentially zoned property, noise reduction and visual screening mechanisms such as earthen and/or landscape berms and/or decorative walls, shall be employed. The Planning Commission, in its discretion, shall review and approve the design and location of such mechanisms in regard to maximizing, to a reasonable extent, the achievement of the screening objectives. 
Section 8.4. - Procedure for review and approval. 
8.4.1.  The grant of a planned unit development application shall require a rezoning by way of an amendment of this Ordinance. 
8.4.2.  Prior to the submission of an application for planned unit development approval, the applicant may submit to the Planning Commission a preliminary site plan of the proposed planned unit development, as well as the following information: Total number of acres in the project; a statement of the number of residential units, if any, the number and type of non-residential units, and the number of acres to be occupied by each type of use; the known deviations from ordinance regulations to be sought; the number of acres to be preserved as open or recreational space; and, all known natural resources and natural features to be preserved. 
8.4.3.  The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary site plan, and shall be entitled to make reasonable inquiries of and receive answers from the applicant. Following review, the Planning Commission shall provide the applicant with written comments, which shall be part of the official minutes of the Planning Commission. 
8.4.4.  Within six (6) months following receipt of the Planning Commission comments on the preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, four (4) copies of a final plan conforming with Section 8.5. below. This plan shall constitute an application to amend this Ordinance, and shall be noticed for public hearing before the Planning Commission, and otherwise acted upon by the Planning Commission, and the City Commission, as and to the extent provided by law. With and in addition to the regular report submitted by the Planning Commission in connection with a rezoning application, the Planning Commission shall, to the extent it deems appropriate, submit detailed recommendations relative to the planned unit development project, including, without limitation, recommendations with respect to matters on which the City Commission must exercise discretion. 
Section 8.5. - Applications. 
    Final plans shall include the following: 
8.5.1.  All requirements of Article 9 of this Ordinance. 
8.5.2.  A plan showing the type, location, and density of all uses. 
8.5.3.  All open spaces, including preserves, recreational areas, and the like, and each purpose proposed for such areas. 
8.5.4.  A separately delineated specification of all deviations from this ordinance which would otherwise be applicable to the uses and development proposed in the absence of this planned unit development article. This specification should include ordinance provisions from which deviation are sought, and the reasons and mechanisms to be utilized for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare in lieu of the regulations from which deviations are sought. 
8.5.5.  A detailed landscaping plan. 
8.5.6.  A specific schedule of the intended development and construction details, including phasing or timing, and the general improvements to constitute a part of the development, including, without limitation, lighting, signage, the mechanisms designed to reduce noise, utilities, and visual screening features. 
8.5.7.  A specification of the exterior building materials with respect to the structures proposed in the project. 
8.5.8.  Signatures of all parties having an interest in the property. 
Section 8.6. - Conditions. 
8.6.1.  Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of a planned unit development, to the extent authorized by law, for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving natural resources and energy, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and the public health, safety, and welfare of individuals in the project and those immediately adjacent, and the community as a whole, shall be reasonable related to the purposes affected by the planned unit development, and shall be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, and be related to the objective of ensuring compliance with the standards of this Ordinance. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of the record of the approved planned unit development. 
Section 8.7. - Phasing and commencement of construction. 
8.7.1.  Phasing: Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the planning and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each phase shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open space, and shall contain the necessary components to ensure protection of natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the planned unit development and the residents of the surrounding area. In addition, in developments which include residential and non-residential uses, phasing shall contemplate that at least 35 percent of all proposed residential units are completed concurrent with the first phase of any non-residential construction; completion of at least 75 percent of all proposed residential construction prior to the second phase of non-residential construction; and completion of 100 percent of all residential construction prior to the third phase of non-residential construction. For purposes of carrying out this provision, the percentages shall be approximations as determined in the discretion of the Planning Commission. 
8.7.2.  Commencement and Completion of Construction: Construction shall be commenced within one (1) year following final approval of a planned unit development, or within one (1) year of any other necessary governmental approval for commencement of the project, whichever is later, provided all other necessary approvals have been actively pursued. Each phase of the project shall be commenced within one (1) year of the schedule established for same in the application submitted. If construction is not commenced within such time, any approval of a site plan on the project shall expire and be null and void, provided, an extension for a specified period may be granted by the Planning Commission upon good cause shown if such request is made to the Commission prior to the expiration of the initial period. Moreover, in the event a site plan has expired, the City shall be authorized to rezone the property in any reasonable manner, and, if the property remains classified as PUD, a new application shall be required, and shall be reviewed in light of then existing and applicable law and ordinance provisions. 
Section 8.8. - Effect of approval. 
    If and when approved, the planned unit development amendment, with all conditions imposed, if any, shall constitute the land use authorization for the property, and all improvement and use shall be in conformity with such amendment. 
Section 8.9. - Fees. 
    The amount of such fees shall be established by ordinance of the Planning Commission. 
ARTICLE 8B. - DOWNTOWN REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Section 8.20. - Purpose. 
    The Downtown Redevelopment District is a zoning district intended to implement the recommendations of the Downtown Vision Plan. The Downtown Vision Plan is a master redevelopment plan that has been officially adopted into the City of St. Clair Master Land Use Plan. The Plan was created through significant public input and support from business and property owners, residents, city officials and staff. 
    The intent of this Ordinance is to facilitate the implementation of the Downtown Vision Plan through visually and functionally strengthening the public right-of-way space; creating an orderly and cohesive visual image; fostering a business friendly redevelopment climate; and encouraging public use and social harmony. Regulations established within this Ordinance set clear provisions and controls on building form and site design and the submission review process. Broader limits on land usage allow flexibility in determining the proper mix of residence and business types. 
    The Downtown Redevelopment District is established to achieve the following goals: 
A.  Provide for orderly and integrated planning to avoid fragmentary, short-term, or speculative investments. 
B.  Promote development consistent with the plans and programs of the Downtown Development Authority enhancement efforts. 
C.  Promote development consistent with design guidelines and principles set forth in the Downtown Vision Plan. 
D.  Promote coordination of public and private efforts in the planning, financing, and development of infrastructure improvements. 
E.  Reduce and prevent long-term vacancy. 
F.  Reduce and prevent blight, decay and abandonment. 
G.  Provide for safe interaction between vehicular and pedestrian movement systems. 
H.  Protect the residential integrity of adjacent single-family neighborhoods. 
I.  Promote the full economic potential of the Downtown. 
J.  Establish clear and predictable standards for development. 
    The Downtown Redevelopment District is divided into three Subdistricts of Riverside, Gaslight and Clinton Avenue. Specific building and site design requirements are set forth for each Subdistrict in addition to general regulations for the entire district. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.21. - Applicability. 
    The requirements of the Downtown Redevelopment District are applicable to change in building footprint, change in building height, major facade and exterior building renovations, and change or alteration in site design. This ordinance does not intend to impede routine repair and maintenance of existing buildings. 
    Exception: A change in tenant occupancy not requiring building or site construction as described above will require adherence to awning/overhang and signage requirements within thirty (30) days of tenancy. Within any thirty-six (36) month period, any building not occupied for twenty-four (24) months, consecutive or non-consecutive, within this time period shall meet the design standards of the Downtown Redevelopment District (Refer to Section 8.34 for variance procedures). 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.22. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where a requirement or definition of the Downtown Redevelopment District imposes a greater restriction than is required by local ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits, the provisions of this section shall control, unless otherwise specified. Exception: Requirements of the City of St. Clair Building Code and St. Clair County, State of Michigan and federal agencies shall supersede the standards of the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.23. - Enabling authority. 
    The provisions of this article provide the enabling authority and standards for the submission, review and approval of applications for building and land use within the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.24. - How to use the Downtown Redevelopment District Ordinance. 
Step 1. Is your property in the Downtown Redevelopment District? 
1.  Use the Zoning Map to determine if your property is within the Downtown Redevelopment District. If yes; 
2.  Locate the subdistrict the property is located in. Refer to the zoning map on page 6. 
Step 2. Is your building use or land use permitted? 
1.  Review Section 8.27 Building Use Table to determine if your use(s) are permitted as right, permitted as a special land use; or prohibited. If permitted as right or as a special land use, proceed to Step 3. 
2.  If prohibited, resubmit application with a permitted or special land use or consult Section 8.34 Review Criteria for the variance procedure. 
Step 3. Prepare submission using: 
1.  Section 8.28 Subdistrict Building Standards. 
2.  Section 8.29 Common Building Design Standards. 
3.  Section 8.30 General Provisions. 
4.  Section 8.31 Special Approval Use Provisions. 
5.  Section 8.32 Signs. 
Step 4. Consult the definition sections located in Article 2, Section 6.2 and Section 8.34 to understand terminology. 
Step 5. Follow the submission requirements and understand: 
1.  Section 8.32 Administration for procedures, roles and responsibilities of the reviewing bodies. 
2.  Section 8.33 Review Criteria. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.25. - Regulatory components. 
    This ordinance sets forth redevelopment standards for individual subdistricts, common building design features applicable throughout the district, site design standards, standards for special approval uses and signs. 
    Subdistrict Building Standards of Section 8.28 regulates build-to lines, building heights, and facade transparency. 
    Common Building Design Standards of Section 8.29 regulates ground floor height, facade design features and roof systems. 
    General Provisions of Section 8.30 regulates site features, off-street parking, circulation and special approval uses. 
    Special Approval Use Provisions of Section 8.31 establishes design criteria for specific building uses that promote compatibility in the downtown district. 
    Sign standards of Section 8.31 regulate the size, location and design of signage. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.26. - District and subdistrict boundaries. 
    The Downtown Redevelopment District is bounded by Vine Street on the north; St. Clair River on the east; Pine River and Pine Street on the south; Sixth Street to Witherell Street to the rear/side property line of properties abutting Third Street on the west. The Downtown District additionally includes the St. Clair Inn Planned Unit Development site on Riverside Drive north of Vine Street. 
    The Downtown Redevelopment District is divided into three subdistricts. 
8.26.1.  Riverside Subdistrict includes the area bounded by Vine Street, St. Clair River, Witherell Street/public access easement and the Gaslight District. This area also includes the St. Clair Inn Planned Unit Development area north of Vine Street. For the property between Jay and Vine Streets, the subdistrict extends 310 feet west of the west right-of-way line for Riverside Drive (M-29). 
The design intent is to redevelop the downtown as a place with a defined street edge and pedestrian friendly sidewalk. Urban design scale transitions from the tallest permitted buildings along Riverside Avenue (M-29) to residential scale buildings west of Third Street. Public rights-of-way are designed as a network of linear parks rather than solely conveying vehicular traffic. 
8.26.2.  Gaslight Subdistrict includes the properties fronting or abutting Third Street between Vine Street and Witherell Street. The subdistrict segment fronting the east side of Third Street between Vine and Jay Streets has a depth of 120 feet. 
8.26.3.  Clinton Avenue Subdistrict includes properties adjacent to Clinton Avenue between Riverside Drive and Sixth Street plus: commercial property between Riverside Drive and the St. Clair River; south frontage of Witherell Street from Third to Sixth Streets; and, the north frontage of Pine Street from the Pine River to Sixth Street. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.27. - Schedule of building use. 
    The schedule of building use identifies specific uses by category, applicability and subdistrict. The following legend applies. Uses not listed are considered prohibited. 
P denotes a Permitted Use S denotes a Special Approval Use (Refer to Section 8.31 Special Approval Use Provisions and Section 8.34 Review Criteria) - denotes a Prohibited Use  
Building Riverside Drive Gaslight East Gaslight West Clinton Avenue Non-Residential Uses Banks, credit unions, insurance etc. P P P P Bed & breakfast - - P P Business or trade schools P - P - Dance or music studios P P P - Drive-through - - - S Ferry and river transportation terminals P - - - Health and fitness clubs P - - - Hotels P P P P Laundry and dry cleaning (personal service) - P P P Market with a maximum gross floor area of 10,000 square feet P - - - Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial/Office Building P P P P Outdoor sales or display S S S S Outdoor and sidewalk cafe/deck S S S S Personal service such watch repair, beauty and barber shops, etc. P P P P Planned shopping center S - - - Planned Unit Development (St. Clair Inn Historic District P - - - Plant nurseries S - - - Poolrooms S - - S Private clubs and lodges S - - - Professional and medical office P P P P Restaurants, taverns and nightclubs (except drive-in) P P - P Retail business-local P P P P Theaters (except drive-in) S S - - Theaters (integrated into a restaurant) P P P P Veterinary offices S - S - Vehicle refueling center Public and Semi-Public Uses Concessions catering to public facilities P - - P Parks S S S P Parking lot - public P - - P Parking structure S S - S Post office and similar government service P P P P Municipal buildings and facilities S - - - Utility installations essential to serve the Downtown District S S S S Existing Building Micro brewer, small wine maker, and small distiller P - - P Building Requiring Modifications Micro brewer, small wine maker, and small distiller S - - S Residential Uses Multiple-family residential - P P - Single-family residential - - S - Home occupation - - - P Accessory Buildings - - - P  
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 2011-05,  1, 5-16-11; Ord. No. 2012-01,  1, 3-5-12; Ord. No. 2016-04,  1, 4-4-16; Ord. No. 2016-08,  1, 5-2-16) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2012-01, adopted March 5, 2012, referred to veterinary office as an "allowed land use" in the Gaslight District West. The city has advised the intent was to allow this use as a "special approval use." 
Section 8.28. - Subdistrict building design standards. 
    The Downtown Redevelopment District is composed of three subdistricts. Each subdistrict has individual character and redevelopment purpose. 
8.28.1.  Riverside Redevelopment Purpose: The concept is to alter the physical complexion from a low-rise compilation of individual buildings to a vibrant higher-density district of mixed business, office and residential uses that promotes pedestrian and bicycle use. The objective is to create the economic and social hub for the City and surrounding region. 
8.28.2.  Gaslight Redevelopment Purpose: This subdistrict uses its building placement and volume to provide a moderate transition from the more intense Riverside Drive Subdistrict to the established residential neighborhoods to the west. East and west sides of Third Street are regulated differently. 
8.28.3.  Clinton Avenue Redevelopment Purpose: The design regulations of this Section intend to strengthen the identity of this corridor as a restaurant and entertainment destination. Regulations mitigate physical intrusion into adjacent residential neighborhoods as the district expands toward Witherell and Pine Streets. 
8.28.4.  Schedule of Subdistrict Regulations. 
Standards Riverside Drive Gaslight East Gaslight West Clinton Avenue Front Min.: 0 feet 
Max.: 10 feet Min.: 0 feet 
Max.: 10 feet Min.: 0 feet 
Max.: 15 feet Min.: 0 feet 
Max.: 15 feet Side 0 feet 0 feet Min.: 0 feet 
Max.: 10 feet Min.: 0 feet 
Max.: 5 feet Rear No requirement. No requirement. No requirement. 
Min. Setback: 25 feet No requirement. 
Min. Setback: 25 feet Height Min.: 2 stories 
Max.: 4 stories Min.: 2 stories 
Max.: 3 stories Min.: 2 stories 
Max.: 2 1/2 stories Min.: 2 stories 
Max.: 2 1/2 stories Facade 
Transparency Ground Level: 50 to 70 percent 
  
Upper Levels: 25 to 70 percent Ground Level: 50 to 70 percent 
  
Upper Levels: 25 to 70 percent Ground Level: 25 to 70 percent 
  
Upper Levels: 15 to 70 percent Ground Level: 50 to 70 percent 
  
Upper Levels: 25 to 70 percent  
Notes For 8.24.4. Schedule of Subdistrict Regulations. 
A.  A roof in the Gaslight West subdistrict must have a minimum 4:12 pitch. 
B.  The third and fourth stories must be setback from the ground level facade line along a right-of-way. 
C.  A minimum internal ground floor height of ten (10) feet is required in the Riverside Drive and Clinton Avenue subdistricts. 
D. For corner lots, the Planning Commission has the authority to determine the percentage of transparency of the facade fronting the less prominent of the two (2) public streets. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.29. - Common building design standards. 
    The purpose of the District Design Standards is to support the creation of a visually coherent and organized destination. Many of these standards are placed to build in human scale and proportionality supporting the pedestrian environment encouraged in the Downtown Vision Plan. The standards set design parameters but are moderately general in scope to promote creativity. The use of decoration as a means to disguise a facade or building design not meeting the intent of this Ordinance is prohibited. Standards are grouped by building component: ground floor height, exterior wall, wall projection, roof, site and prohibited features. 
8.29.1.  Ground Floor. The ground floor of any building shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  A finished floor for a non-residential or mixed-use building shall be flush with the exterior grade on any public sidewalk to meet barrier-free requirements. 
B.  Residential buildings shall have a maximum finished floor height of four (4) feet above grade provided that barrier-free access is provided at another location. 
8.29.2.  Exterior Wall. 
A.  Building facades shall be divided into modules of no greater than thirty-five (35) feet in width. A module shall be delineated through the use of vertical expression lines or off-setting the exterior wall. 
B.  Facade shall have a clearly defined base separated from upper floors with a sign band, cornice, awning or similar three-dimensional horizontal expression line. 
C.  A cornice shall delineate and visually cap building parapets and wall off-sets. 
D.  Expression lines or cornices shall not be covered or obscured from view by awnings, overhangs or tacked-on roof extensions. 
E.  Ground floor entries for public access shall be provided at intervals no greater than thirty-five (35) feet. 
F.  Recessed entries are required for the primary entry door to businesses or mixed-use buildings. 
G.  Exterior walls shall be finished with any of the following materials: 
1.  Brick (full dimension). 
2.  Cementitious siding. 
3.  Wood (insect and weather-resistant). 
4.  Wrought iron (decorative elements). 
5.  Porcelain coated metal panels on the ground level. 
6.  Concrete masonry units-Decorative (shall not exceed ten (10) percent of any facade surface fronting a public street or pedestrian walk or path.) 
7.  Exterior finished insulating system may be used as trim on an upper level facade and shall not exceed 25 percent of the wall surface. 
8.  Planning commission has the authority to modify the requirements of Section 8.29.2 provided that exterior materials have greater durability than permitted materials and the intent of the Downtown Redevelopment Code is met. 
8.29.3.  Window, Door and Opening. 
A.  The use of reflective or opaque glass shall be prohibited. 
B.  Tinted windows may be used as a practical solution to screen the east or west facing windows. Window tinting shall be limited to a level acceptable to the Planning Commission. An accurate sample shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for evaluation prior to a decision. 
C.  Windows, doors and openings shall be defined by awnings, overhangs, change in masonry pattern or material, reveals, architectural trim or similar design solution. 
D.  Windows shall have a vertical alignment. Windows in a square or horizontal opening are permitted for ground floor retail storefronts provided frames, mullions or dividers are used to create a vertical appearance. 
E.  Circular and semi-circular windows limited in number and confined to accent use are permitted based on Planning Commission approval. 
F.  Window frame materials shall be constructed of any of the following materials: 
1.  Wood; 
2.  Aluminum; 
3.  Copper; 
4.  Steel; 
5.  Vinyl clad wood; 
6.  Fiberglass; 
7.  Materials similar in durability, construction and finish as permitted by the Planning Commission. 
8.29.4.  Awning and Canopy: Awnings and canopies are subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Depth shall not exceed five (5) feet unless permitted by the Planning Commission. 
B.  A minimum of eight (8) feet shall be maintained between the finished grade and the lowest level of an awning or overhang including the valance. 
C.  Shall not exceed the width of the individual window or door opening that is covered. 
D.  Awnings shall maintain a height to depth ratio not exceeding a height of one and 1.5 times the depth. 
E.  Awnings shall not be lit from the inside or underside. 
F.  Planning Commission has the authority to modify the requirements of Section 8.29.4 provided the intent of the Downtown Redevelopment Code is met. 
8.29.5.  Front Porch/Stoop: Front porches or stoops are required for residential structures. 
A.  Enclosed porches prohibited. 
B.  Covered and uncovered stoops are permitted. 
C.  A minimum depth of six (6) feet shall be observed. 
D.  Porches and stoops are permitted to extend forward of the build-to line but not into the right-of-way. The Planning Commission shall have discretion on the distance. 
E.  Planning Commission has the authority to modify the requirements of Section 8.29.5 provided the intent of the Downtown Redevelopment Code is met. 
8.29.6.  Balcony: A balcony is permitted subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Minimum depth of three (3) feet shall be observed. 
B.  Maximum depth of six (6) feet shall be observed. 
C.  Balconies may be covered but shall remain open. 
D.  A minimum of twelve (12) feet shall be maintained between the grade of the facade and the lowest part of a balcony. 
E.  Encroachment of balconies over public property must first obtain City Council approval. 
F.  Planning Commission has the authority to modify the requirements of Section 8.29.6 provided the intent of the Downtown Redevelopment Code is met and City Council approval for encroachment is granted. 
8.29.7.  Arcade: An arcade is permitted on Planning Commission approval and City Council approval for encroachment onto public property. 
8.29.8.  Bay Window/Chimney: A bay window or chimney is subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Maximum projection of three (3) feet shall be provided. 
B.  The sum total of the widths of projecting windows and chimneys shall not exceed one third ( 1/3 ) of the total length of the building wall. 
C.  Transparent glass windows shall be provided on all sides of a bay window. 
D.  A minimum of twelve (12) feet shall be maintained between the grade of the facade and the lowest part of an upper story bay window. 
E.  A ground floor chimney shall be set on a foundation meeting the City Building Code. 
F.  Planning Commission has the authority to modify the requirements of Section 8.29.8 provided the intent of the Downtown Redevelopment Code is met. 
8.29.9.  Roof, Gutter and Downspout. 
A.  A false or decorative roof applied to a building facade is prohibited. 
B.  A flat roof shall be capped with a parapet between two (2) feet and four (4) feet in height as measured from the finished roof grade. 
C.  Downspouts shall match gutters in material and finish. 
D.  Roof, gutter and downspout color shall match or complement the main building facade color. 
E.  Roof Finish Materials: A roof shall be finished with one of the following materials: 
1.  Metal; 
2.  Asphalt, slate or cedar shake shingles; 
3.  Tile. 
G.  Gutter Finish Materials: Gutters shall be finished with one of the following materials: 
1.  Copper; 
2.  Galvanized Steel; 
3.  Aluminum. 
H.  Planning Commission has the authority to modify the requirements of Section 8.29.9 provided the intent of the Downtown Redevelopment Code is met. 
8.29.10.  Prohibited Building Design Components. 
A.  Historically inaccurate windows. 
B.  Undersized shutters. 
C.  Plastic shutters. 
D.  Reflective glass. 
E.  Awnings lit from the underside or inside. 
F.  Security covering on windows. 
G.  Overhead doors on public streets. 
H.  Screen doors in deteriorated or damaged condition. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.30. - General provisions. 
    General provisions of Section 8.30 uniformly apply throughout the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
8.30.1.  Building Front and Rear: The front or side of a building shall face the public street. Rear facing buildings, loading docks, overhead doors and service entries are prohibited on public streets, parks and paths. 
8.30.2.  Exceptions From Build-To Lines. 
A.  Exceptions from build-to lines may be granted by the Planning Commission for civic buildings. 
B.  Exceptions from build-to lines are permitted to accommodate the dimensional requirements for a clear vision zone at street intersections. The Planning Commission shall treat the clearance dimension as absolute and not a minimum. 
8.30.3.  Intersection Visibility. 
A.  Intersection visibility requirements of Section 5.10 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be followed. 
B.  Upper stories are exempt from this requirement provided that no ground support is in the intersection visibility zone. 
8.30.4.  Off-Street Parking-Surface Lots. 
A.  Off-street parking is not permitted in a front yard. 
B.  The number of parking spaces shall be calculated using the following requirements: 
Building Use Off Street Parking Ratio Non-Residential 3.5 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of ground floor area Mixed Use Non- 
Residential 3.5 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of ground floor area Residential 1.25 spaces per unit with 2 rooms or less 
1.5 spaces per unit with 3 rooms or greater Multiple-Family Residential 1.25 spaces per unit with 2 rooms or less 
1.5 spaces per unit with 3 rooms or greater 
1 space per 5 units for visitor parking Single and Two-Family 
Residential 2 spaces per unit  
A.  Parking ratios are exact and shall not be construed as minimum or maximum requirements. 
B.  A parking space shall not be located within three feet of a right-of-way line or pedestrian walk/path. 
C.  Minimum parking space dimensions as required within the Section 7.3 shall be adhered to. 
D.  Shared parking solutions are encouraged. In determining such approval, parking need not be contiguous with the building or use served. 
E.  Planning Commission has the authority to credit the number of required off-street parking spaces in lieu of a shared parking arrangement. 
8.30.5.  Driveway Location. 
A.  New drives shall not be located directly adjacent to an existing driveway. 
B.  New drives shall be aligned directly across the street or off-set by a minimum of 125 feet from an existing drive. 
C.  New drives shall be located a minimum sixty (60) feet from an intersection. 
D.  Areas not required for parking shall be landscaped. 
E.  A change in material, texture or use of high-visibility markings shall be provided where pedestrian circulation crosses vehicular routes. 
F.  Planning Commission has the authority to modify the requirements of Section 8.30.5 if the criteria set forth in Subsections A.-E. cannot be met because of existing conditions. 
8.30.6.  Exterior Equipment: Ground-mounted equipment, antenna and satellite dishes greater than eighteen (18) inches in diameter shall be located in rear or side yards and shall not face public streets and parks/squares. 
8.30.7.  Walls, Fences and Hedges: Walls, fences and hedges shall meet the following criteria: 
A.  Segments of public rights-of-way not occupied by buildings shall be delineated by a wall, fence or hedge. 
B.  Required screening elements shall be one hundred percent (100%) opaque. 
C.  Permitted maximum and minimum heights include: 
1.  Front Yard: 
a.  Maximum of forty-two (42) inches. 
b.  Minimum of thirty (30) inches. 
2.  Side and Rear Yard: 
a.  Maximum of six (6) feet. 
b.  Minimum height of forty-two (42) inches. 
D.  Walls and fences shall be constructed of one or more of the following finish materials: 
1.  Wood (insect and weather resistant); 
2.  Brick; 
3.  Decorative masonry units provided the wall finish matches the primary building finish; 
4.  Wrought iron; 
5.  Reinforced concrete; 
6.  Fiberglass. 
E.  Planning Commission has the authority to modify wall, fence and hedge requirements with the exception of Section 8.30.7.B. 
8.30.8.  Utility Placement: New utilities shall be placed underground. 
8.30.9.  Street Furniture: The design, type and locating of street furniture shall be approved by the Planning Commission. 
8.30.10.  Street Trees: Street trees are required as part of a development application and shall be planted with a spacing of 35 feet. Trees shall be of a species permitted by the City of St. Clair Code of Ordinances. The Planning Commission has the authority to modify spacing requirements to accommodate entries, curb cuts, fire hydrants and street amenities. 
8.30.11.  Yard Landscaping: All yards shall include a lawn or plaza except where pedestrian paths and off-street parking areas are located. 
8.30.12.  Landscape Material: Landscape standards shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Trees shall be a minimum two-inch caliper. 
B.  Trees shall be of a species permitted by the city. Planning Commission shall prohibit any permitted tree species if a disease is known at the time of approval. 
C.  Trees, shrub and plant material shall comply with Federal, State, County and local laws requiring inspection for plant disease and insect control; shall meet the American Standards for nursery Stock; shall be nursery grown; and shall be compatible with the climate category set forth by the United States Department of Agriculture for this region. The Planning Commission may require applicant to provide documentation certifying that the requirements of this Section are met. 
D.  Automatic underground sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained for all landscaped areas. 
E.  A mandatory performance bond in an amount set by Planning Commission may be required. 
8.30.13.  Prohibited Site Components. 
A.  Outdoor storage; 
B.  Chain-link, barbed or security wire or wire mesh. 
8.30.14.  Civic Sites: Civic buildings shall not be subject to build-to or building frontage requirements. Design shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission. Civic buildings include, but are not limited to, municipal buildings, churches, libraries, schools, recreation facilities and places of assembly. 
8.30.15.  Accessory Structure: Accessory structures shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  No accessory structure or use shall be permitted in the Riverside Drive Subdistrict. 
B.  An accessory structure shall not exceed one and one-half (1 1/2) stories and sixteen (16) feet in height. 
C.  The structure footprint does not exceed 500 square feet. 
D.  Exterior material shall match the primary building(s) in type and color. 
E.  Exterior doors opening to a vehicle or equipment garage, loading/storage area or workshop shall not face a public street. This requirement shall not apply to openings facing a public alley. 
F.  Structures are located in a rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.31. - Special approval use provisions. 
8.31.1.  Outdoor or Sidewalk Cafe: An outdoor or sidewalk cafe shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Minimum of six (6) feet of unobstructed clear path within the right-of-way shall be maintained for pedestrian circulation. 
B.  Umbrellas shall have a minimum clear height of seven (7) feet six (6) inches from grade to the tip of the rib. 
C.  Operators/owners of sidewalk cafes shall: 
1.  Obtain an encroachment permit for cafe's extending into a public right-of-way. 
2.  Provide waste receptacles. 
3.  Remove garbage and litter of the cafe; and all property within 100 feet within one hour of close of business. 
4.  Continually clean tables of plates, cutlery, glasses and food products. 
5.  Provide liability insurance naming the City of St. Clair as an additional insured as approved by City Council. 
6.  Agree to identify, hold harmless and to defend, at the sole expense of the operator/owner, any action brought against the City based upon the issuing of a building or encroachment permit for this use. The operator/owner shall indemnify and reimburse the City for any judgment for damages, court costs and attorneys' fees that the City may be required to pay as a result of such action. The City, at its sole discretion, may participate in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve operator/owner of the obligations of this condition. Commencement of construction or operations under this permit shall be deemed to be acceptance by operator/owner of all conditions of this permit. 
D.  The Planning Commission may set additional conditions to support the economic and social health of the District. 
8.31.2.  Outdoor Sales and Display: An outdoor sales and display area shall meet the following provisions: 
A.  The outdoor sales or display area shall be an extension of an abutting business. 
B.  The outdoor sales or display space shall locate directly adjacent to the indoor space of the business seeking application. 
C.  Maximum area shall not exceed the greater of 25 percent of the indoor ground floor area or 1,000 square feet. 
D.  The Planning Commission may waive these requirements upon demonstration by an applicant that the intent of the Downtown Redevelopment Code continues to be met. 
8.31.3.  Structured Parking: Off-street parking structures shall meet the following provisions: 
A.  Incorporate attached or detached liner buildings along the right-of-way. 
B.  Detached liner buildings shall meet the location, volume and height restrictions of like uses set forth in the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
C.  Parking structure and the lighting, stairwell, elevator equipment and similar equipment shall exceed the height of the liner buildings. 
D.  Structured parking without liner buildings as permitted by the Planning Commission shall have the following design features: 
1.  Landscaped greenbelt incorporating ground plants, perennial and annual flowers, shrubs and deciduous trees. 
2.  Fenestrations shall have a vertical appearance. The appearance of horizontal bands is prohibited. 
8.31.4.  Large Footprint Buildings: Buildings with a footprint greater than 20,000 square feet shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  One-story buildings shall have a minimum height of twenty four (24) feet. The height can be accomplished through the use of multiple-story liner buildings, taller ceiling heights and parapets 
B.  Facades fronting public streets or internal walks and paths shall be divided into maximum modules of thirty five (35) feet. Such modules shall be delineated by a vertical expression line or off set of the exterior wall. 
C.  Shall reinforce the pedestrian-oriented character through adhering to design standards set forth within and continuing a linked system of sidewalks and pedestrian paths. 
D.  Loading docks, service areas and trash disposal areas and equipment shall not face streets, parks, squares or significant pedestrian spaces. 
8.31.5.  Theaters: Theaters shall adhere to the following requirements: 
A.  Circulation and parking shall not cause blockage of surrounding street system. 
B.  Provide a written description of the operational hours, types of movies and performances, valet service and outside customer waiting. 
8.31.6.  Utility Installations: Utility installations, including essential services, shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Demonstrate the need to locate a utility installation in the Downtown Redevelopment District. This demonstration shall include reasonable diligence in locating the subject installation outside of the District. 
B.  Opaquely screen buildings, equipment and security fencing from public and private view. 
C.  Prohibit outdoor storage. 
D.  Unattended vehicles shall not be located on-site with the exception for maintenance. 
8.31.7.  Hotels: Hotels shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Provide a full-service restaurant. 
B.  Locate the main guest entry on a primary street. 
C.  Integrate room ventilation into the building design 
8.31.8.  Planned Shopping Center: A planned shopping center shall meet the requirements of a large footprint building. 
8.31.9.  Veterinary Offices: Veterinary offices shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Administer to common household animals only. 
B.  Prohibit kenneling of animals. 
C.  Prohibit outside exercise and storage areas. 
D.  Not be considered a clinic or a hospital. 
8.31.10.  Poolrooms: A poolroom shall: 
A.  Provide a written description of the operational hours, other services provided such as the serving of alcohol or food, and indicate whether the use is part of a larger entertainment facility or other venue. 
B.  Not located within 500 feet of public, private or parochial school building or church building. 
8.31.11.  Vehicle Refueling Station: A vehicle refueling station shall: 
A.  Retail gasoline or diesel fuel. 
B.  Limited convenience store area to an accessory use not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the building area. 
C.  Minimize the number of access drives. 
D.  Locate access drives away from intersections. 
E.  Design pump canopy(ies) to complement and match the primary building design. 
F.  Prohibit repair, fluid changes, detailing and auto washing. 
G.  Planning Commission may permit the retailing of bio-fuels, electricity and similar fuel sources for vehicles based on demonstrated need by an applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.32. - Signs. 
    Standards for sign design and placement are set forth in the Schedule of Sign Regulations. 
8.32.1.  Part I Schedule of Sign Regulations: Maximum Area Permitted: A building may select one of the following signs unless permitted otherwise. 
RIVERSIDE AND CLINTON AVENUE SUBDISTRICTS Standard Wall Awning or Canopy Freestanding 
Projecting Max. Number of Signs One (1) per public thoroughfare. One (1) per awning or canopy. One (1) per development. Maximum Area One and one-half (1.5) sq. ft. per one (1) lineal foot of building or thirty-six (36) sq. ft. One and one-half (1.5) sq. ft. per one (1) lineal foot of building frontage or thirty-six (36) sq. ft. One and one-half (1.5) sq. ft. per one (1) lineal foot of building or thirty-two (32) sq. ft. per side. Maximum Bonus Area Twelve (12) sq. ft. for the use of exterior illumination or through the use of a dark background with a minimum sixty percent (60%) opaqueness. Twelve (12) sq. ft. for use of exterior illumination. Twelve (12) sq. ft. for the use of exterior illumination or through the use of a dark background with a minimum sixty percent (60%) opaqueness. Maximum Sign Height Two (2) feet. Two (2) feet for a canopy. No requirement. Height Above Grade Min: Eight (8) feet. 
  
Max: Fifteen (15) feet for a single-story building. 
  
Max: One (1) foot below the second-story window sill line for a multi-story building. Eight (8) feet. Min: No requirement for freestanding. 
 Min: Eight (8) feet for wall-mounted. 
  
Max: Twelve (12) feet. Additional Permitted Signs A wall sign is permitted on abutting public streets. The wall sign on each additional street(s) shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the allowable area for the primary street sign. Awning signs are permitted on abutting public streets. Awning signage on each additional street(s) shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the allowable area for the primary street sign. For properties greater than one hundred twenty (120) lineal feet of primary street frontage, a pole-mounted projecting sign not exceeding eighteen (18) sq. ft. is permitted on the primary frontage in addition to a wall, awning or canopy sign. Additional Criteria All lettering or graphics must project a minimum three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inches from the sign surface. 
  
Letter signs may be directly mounted to the canopy roof structure. Awning valance lettering shall not exceed eight (8) inches in height. 
  
Shall be prohibited on any awning except hose mounted on the ground level. 
  
Letter signs may be directly mounted to the canopy roof structure. Signs shall not project over a public right-of-way. 
  
All lettering or graphics must project a minimum three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inches from the sign surface.  
GASLIGHT SUBDISTRICTS Standard Wall Awning or Canopy Freestanding 
Projecting Max. Number of Signs One (1) per public thoroughfare. One (1) per awning or canopy. One (1) per development. Maximum Area One (1) sq. ft. per one (1) lineal foot of building or twenty-four (24) sq. ft. One (1) sq. ft. per one (1) lineal foot of building frontage or twenty-four (24) sq. ft. One (1) sq. ft. per one (1) lineal foot of building or twenty-four (24) sq. ft. per side. Maximum Bonus Area Eight (8) sq. ft. for the use of exterior illumination or through the use of a dark background with a minimum sixty percent (60%) opaqueness. Eight (8) sq. ft. for use of exterior illumination. Eight (8) sq. ft. for the use of exterior illumination or through the use of a dark background with a minimum sixty percent (60%) opaqueness. Maximum Sign Height Two (2) feet. Two (2) feet. No requirement. Height Above Grade Min: Eight (8) feet. 
  
Max: Fifteen (15) feet for a single-story building. 
  
Max: One (1) foot below the second-story window sill line for a multi-story building. Eight (8) feet. Min: No requirement for freestanding. 
  
Min: Eight (8) feet for wall-mounted. 
  
Max: Twelve (12) feet. Additional Permitted Signs A wall sign is permitted on abutting public streets. The wall sign on each additional street(s) shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the allowable area for the primary street sign. Awning signs are permitted on abutting public streets. Awning signage on each additional street(s) shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the allowable area for the primary street sign. For properties with greater than one hundred and twenty (120) lineal feet of primary street frontage, a pole-mounted projecting sign not exceeding twelve (12) sq. ft. is permitted on the primary frontage in addition to a wall, awning or canopy sign. Additional Criteria All lettering or graphics must project a minimum three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inches from the sign surface. 
  
Letter signs may be directly mounted to the canopy roof structure. Awning valance lettering shall not exceed eight (8) inches in height. 
  
Shall be prohibited on any awning except hose mounted on the ground level. 
  
Letter signs may be directly mounted to the canopy roof structure. Signs shall not project over a public right-of-way. 
  
All lettering or graphics must project a minimum three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inches from the sign surface.  
8.32.2.  Part II Schedule of Regulations: Signs Exempt from Maximum Permitted Area. 
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT Standard Wall Mounted, Projected or Hanging Window Additional Max. Number of Signs One (1) per street frontage. One (1) per window. 
Two (2) per street frontage. Signs identified below are permitted as exempt signs provided the criteria in Section 8.32.3 are met. 
Rear or side entry sign. 
Awning valance or window signage not exceeding four (4) sq. ft. 
Banner Sign: Public Property. 
Banner Sign: Private Property. 
Access directional sign. 
Business directories for multiple tenants. 
"Open" signs. 
Menu. 
Temporary Sidewalk And Valet Signs. 
Multiple-family residential development. 
Flags and bunting promoting a national holiday or community event. Maximum Area Six (6) sq. ft. per side. Eight (8) sq. ft. or fifteen percent (15%) of the ground floor window area, the lesser of. Maximum Bonus Area Not permitted. Four (4) sq. ft. for the use of light-colored or gold leaf letters applied through stenciling or etching. Maximum Sign Height Eighteen (18) inches. No requirement. Height Above Grade Min: Seven (7) feet. 
  
Max: Twelve (12) feet for a single-story building. 
  
Max: One (1) foot below the second-story window sill line for a multiple-story building. No requirement. Additional Permitted Signs Zero (0). Zero (0). Additional Criteria A projecting sign shall not extend greater than five (5) feet from the wall surface. 
  
A hanging sign shall not extend beyond the outer limits of the supporting structure. 
  
A projecting or hanging sign shall be confined to the ground level. 
  
Interior illumination is prohibited. Signage permitted on ground-level windows only. 
  
Window display shall remain visible from exterior. 
Fuel Price Signs. 
Electronic Message Signs. 
Riverfront Signs.  
8.32.3.  Additional Signage Criteria. 
A.  Rear or side entry sign: Max six (6) sq. ft. 
B.  Awning valance or window signage not exceeding four (4) sq. ft. is permitted in addition to the main signage for non-residential or mixed-use development. Lettering shall not exceed eight (8) inches in height. 
C.  A fuel price sign is permitted provided that: 
a.  Price is displayed as a single color on a dark background. 
b.  Message shall only reflect the fuel sales price. 
c.  Requirements of Sections 6.4.3(B) and 6.4.5 of the Zoning Ordinance are met. 
D.  An electronic message sign is permitted in the Clinton Avenue sub-district provided that: 
a.  Such sign is wall mounted. 
b.  Maximum area is sixteen (16) square feet. 
c.  Requirements of Section 6.4.5 Electronic Message Signs are met. 
E.  Signage facing the St. Clair River or Pine River is permitted provided that: 
a.  A property shall abut the St. Clair River or Pine River. 
b.  The total sign area for a property abutting the St. Clair River shall not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the permitted sign area. 
c.  The total sign area for a property abutting the Pine River shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the permitted sign area. 
d.  Additional dimensional requirements for permitted signs shall be met. 
e.  Signage shall be positioned between a building and the riverfront. 
F.  Banner Sign: Public Property - Temporary banner signs are permitted within a public right-of-way or on public property. City Council has the authority to grant such permission and to establish criteria for location, size, time limits, content and other criteria deemed appropriate to protect public health, safety and welfare. If a governmental agency other than the City owns the property, written permission from that agency shall be required prior to City Council approval. 
G.  Banner Sign: Private Property - Temporary banner signs are permitted on private property provided the following criteria are met. 
1.  A sign shall be displayed for a maximum two (2) weeks in any six-month period. Signs displayed less than three (3) days shall be considered as a three-day display period. 
2.  A sign shall be removed within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event. 
3.  Advertising of a community event is exempted from time constraints. 
4.  A business, non-profit agency or leasing entity shall be permitted one sign. 
5.  A sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet for one side or a total of twenty (20) square feet for all sides. 
5.[6.]  Illumination is prohibited. 
6.[7.]  A sign shall be registered with the City of St. Clair Building Department. 
H.  Access directional signs not exceeding four (4) sq. ft. in area and limited to two (2) feet in height. 
I.  Business directories for multiple tenants not exceeding six (6) sq. ft. and wall mounted. Interior illumination is prohibited. 
J.  "Open" signs not exceeding four (4) sq. ft. in area. One (1) per business. The use of neon is permitted. 
K.  A menu not exceeding six (6) sq. ft. is permitted to be displayed adjacent to a restaurant main entrance. 
L.  Sidewalk and Valet Signs are permitted provided the following criteria are met: 
1.  One (1) sign is permitted per business. 
2.  The sign must be removed during hours that business is not open. 
3.  A sign located in the public right-of-way shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and six (6) square feet in area for any one side. 
4.  A sign on private property shall not exceed five (5) feet in height and eight (8) square feet in area for any one side. 
5.  Illumination is prohibited. 
6.  A sign shall not obstruct doorways, entries, sidewalks pedestrian paths and other non-motorized path systems. 
7.  A minimum of four (4) feet of continuous clear space shall be maintained between the street curb area and a sidewalk or valet sign. 
M.  A multiple-family residential development is permitted to have one (1) identification monument sign. The sign shall be located at the main entry and shall not exceed eighteen (18) sq. ft. in area per side. A bonus of six (6) sq. ft. is permitted for letter signs illuminated from the exterior. 
N.  Flags and bunting promoting a national holiday or community event are permitted. 
8.32.4.  Planning Commission Interpretation: The Planning Commission may interpret the intent of Section 8.32, Signs, in accordance with the following: 
A.  The zoning administrator or building department may send a sign application to the Planning Commission for interpretation as to size, style, illumination and design. 
B.  The Planning Commission may modify the requirements of this Section 8.32 based on functional hardship. 
C.  Marquee, time and temperature signs may be approved by the Planning Commission. 
D.  Planning Commission may require written description, visual graphics, plans, elevations and other applicable support for an interpretation or modification. 
8.32.5.  Multi-Tenant Buildings: A master sign plan is required for developments accommodating multiple tenants. The plan shall meet the requirements of this Section. The master sign plan shall be applicable to current and future users of the building. The City shall enforce the master sign plan when processing a certificate of occupancy or site plan application. The Planning Commission can approve a new master sign plan upon application. 
8.32.6.  Additional Regulations: The following Sections are applicable to the Downtown District sign schedules: 
 6.1 General provisions. 
 6.2 Definitions. 
 6.3 Permits and general requirements. 
 6.5 Exempted signs, except for banner and window signs. 
 6.6 Prohibited signs. 
 6.7 Nonconforming signs. 
 Definitions of the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
8.32.7.  Prohibited Signs: Any sign not specifically permitted by this Ordinance shall be considered prohibited for the purposes of this Section. The following signs are also prohibited: 
 Electronic message board. 
 Electronic message sign, except as permitted in the Clinton Avenue sub-district. 
 Neon, except for "open" or "closed" signs with a maximum area of four (4) sq ft. 
 LED illumination. 
 Trailer or vehicle mounted sign. 
 Imitation traffic. 
 Roof, except letter signs as permitted in the sign schedule. 
 Lasers, searchlights and other high-intensity illumination. 
 Advertising of a product or service on a flag or bunting. 
 Pennants, streamers and similar types of advertising or temporary decoration. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 2011-05,  1, 5-16-11) 
Section 8.33. - Administration. 
8.33.1.  Submission Requirements: Submitted plans shall meet the requirements of Section 9.1.3 of the City of St. Clair Zoning Ordinance. The following additional items shall be submitted: 
A.  Legal description. 
B.  Site survey showing existing buildings, natural features and trees on site and buildings, driveways and rights-of-way within 100 feet. 
C.  Building elevations illustrating all facades of principal and accessory structures. 
8.33.2.  Review Process: An application for site plan approval is subject to review and approval by the administration or by the Planning Commission. Criteria for enacting the review procedure is provided in Sections 8.33.3 through 8.33.5. 
8.33.3.  Administrative Review: Site plan applications limited in extent and scope are administratively reviewed and decided upon by the City of St. Clair Building Official or designee. A site plan is required to meet the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. Administrative review is applicable for: 
A.  Additions not exceeding the lesser of twenty percent of existing building ground floor area or 2,000 sq. ft. 
B.  Normal maintenance such as window and door replacement and repair to exterior building materials, roof and gutters and non-structural bearing walls. Repairs shall not exceed fifty percent of the replacement value of the building in any consecutive 12-month period. 
C.  Change in occupancy provided the proposed use is similar in terms of traffic generation, waste removal and does not increase noxious detriments to the social, economic and physical well-being of surrounding development. 
D.  Permanent and temporary sign requests. 
8.33.4.  Design Review Committee: For site plans requiring Planning Commission review, a design or designee committee comprised of the Planning Commission Chair, City Superintendent and building department representative shall review building elevations and site design and advise the applicant prior to review by the full Planning Commission. This committee is advisory and will issue a findings report to the Planning Commission. The committee may designate alternate members and may use the services of applicable consultants in preparing a report. The report shall describe how the proposed project conforms to the standards of the Zoning Ordinance. 
8.33.5.  Planning Commission: Site plan applications exceeding administrative review responsibility shall be reviewed and decided upon by the Planning Commission. Planning Commission responsibility includes: 
A.  Review recommendations of design review committee. 
B.  Review the site plan application and all submitted materials. 
C.  Approve, postpone, table or deny application. 
D.  Acts on appeals of administrative and design subcommittee decisions in regard to regulations for the design and use of buildings and land. 
E.  Incorporate statement of conclusions within a motion. Such statement shall describe how the proposed project conforms to the: 
1.  Downtown Redevelopment District regulations. 
2.  Applicable provisions of the City of St. Clair Zoning Ordinance. 
3.  City of St. Clair Master Plan. 
4.  All other codes and ordinances regulating the use of land. 
E.[F.]  Planning Commission has the authority to modify or waive the requirements of the Downtown Redevelopment Code where authorized. In no instance shall such authority permit development that conflicts with the Downtown Vision 2020 plan and the intent of the Downtown Redevelopment Code. 
8.33.6.  City Council: The City Council shall act as the Zoning Board of Appeals for site plan applications within the Downtown Redevelopment District. The City Council shall: 
A.  Act on appeal from a decision of the Planning Commission or administration; 
B.  Act on appeal for building and land use; 
C.  Grant variances from the strict interpretation of the Downtown Redevelopment District. In doing so, City Council can impose reasonable conditions upon a decision to approve. Imposed conditions shall do all of the following: 
D.  Protect the health, safety and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those that will use the land, use or activity under consideration; residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity; and the community as a whole; 
E.  Protect natural resources; 
F.  Relate to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed land use or activity; 
G.  Meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations; 
H.  Relate to the standards established for the building or land use or activity under consideration and ensure compliance with those standards. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.34. - Review criteria. 
    Review criteria are established to make certain that all applications are treated equally during the application review process. City Administration, Design Review Committee and Planning Commission and City Council shall adhere to the following review criteria during its evaluation process. 
8.34.1.  Design Review. 
A.  Approval of the site plan application upon conformance to all provisions of the City of St. Clair Downtown Redevelopment District, applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and applicable provisions of codes and ordinances affecting land use and development in the City of St. Clair. 
B.  Approval is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the City. 
C.  Design considerations including building placement, mass and height; circulation and parking; walls and fences; and similar elements provide a desirable physical and social environment meeting the intent of this Section. 
D.  Design considerations including exterior materials and color; windows; lighting and signage, awnings and overhangs; trim and similar features provide a desirable physical and social environment meeting the intent of this Section. 
E.  Design considerations including the location, type, size color, texture and coverage of plant materials to soften the hard edges for the time of planting and after a five (5) year growth period and similar elements have been considered. A provision for irrigation and maintenance shall accompany landscape plans. 
F.  Hours of operation will not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
8.34.2.  Special Approval Use Review: This Ordinance recognizes that certain building and land uses can coexist in the Downtown Redevelopment District but only if special design standards are followed to alleviate public health, welfare and safety concerns of a social, physical and economic nature. The design provisions located in the Downtown Redevelopment District and the Zoning Ordinance are valid unless a stricter standard is required by Section 8.30 General Provisions. 
A.  The Planning Commission shall review the proposed special approval use in terms of the standards stated within this Ordinance and shall establish that such use and the proposed location: 
1.  Is consistent with the intent and objectives of the City of St. Clair Master Plan. 
2.  Is consistent with the intent of the City of St. Clair Zoning Ordinance. 
3.  Is consistent with the intent of the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
4.  Conforms to the placement, massing and height standards of the Zoning Ordinance. 
5.  Conforms to the architectural and site design standards of the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
6.  Use conforms to all other codes and ordinances regulating the use of land. 
7.  Acceptable access for vehicles and pedestrians, levels of traffic generation and public service capacity for the development and surrounding uses-existing and future-are proposed. 
8.  No adverse impacts to the surrounding businesses, residences and public facilities will be experienced or are anticipated. 
9.  No adverse environmental impacts will be experienced or are anticipated. 
10.  Will not create excessive additional public costs and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the City. 
B.  The Planning Commission has authority to require a traffic study, market study, additional architectural, site and sign drawings and similar documents to make certain that the special use does not negatively impact the area. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall adhere to the process requirements of Section 3.5. 
8.34.3.  Variance Review: City Council shall adhere to the following review criteria when evaluating a variance request. 
A.  Shall not be contrary to the public interest and to the spirit and intent of the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
B.  Shall not permit the establishment of any use which is not permitted by right within the district. 
C.  Shall not cause any adverse effect to property within the vicinity. 
D.  Shall affect only property subject to exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions that do not generally apply to other property or uses in the vicinity, and have not resulted from any act of the applicant. 
E.  Shall only be granted in order to avoid practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship which would result from enforcement of the strict letter of this Ordinance. 
F.  Shall not be issued if the circumstance is general or recurrent in nature and the amendment to the ordinance is the practical method of alleviating the occurrence. 
8.34.4.  Variance Restrictions: A variance shall be restricted by the following conditions: 
A.  Grant no more than the minimum variance necessary to relieve the practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship from the terms of this Ordinance shall be granted. 
B.  An application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the City Council shall not be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the last denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of changed conditions found upon inspection by the City Council to be valid. 
C.  Each variance granted shall become null and void unless the provisions of the variance have been utilized by the applicant within six (6) months after the granting of the variance. 
D.  Prior to granting a variance, all other existing infractions related to this Ordinance or other City Codes related to the variance request shall be resolved. 
8.34.5.  Amendment to the Downtown Regulating Code: Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the following criteria when amending the Downtown Redevelopment District. 
A.  Proposed amendment is consistent with the City of St. Clair Master Plan and Downtown Vision Plan. 
B.  Proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the health, safety, welfare and public interest of the City of St. Clair. 
C.  Proposed amendment is internally consistent and does not conflict with the purposes, regulations, and required findings of the City of St. Clair Zoning Ordinance or other codes and regulations affecting development in the City. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09) 
Section 8.35. - Definitions. 
    Defined terms listed below are specific to Downtown Redevelopment District and not set forth within Article 2 of the Zoning Ordinance. Refer to Article 2 Definitions and Article 6 Signs for definitions not specified in Section 8.36 
8.35.1.  Definitions of Building and Site Elements: 
    Alley: A publicly or privately owned secondary way which affords access to the side or rear of abutting property. 
    Appurtenances: Architectural features consisting of: spires, belfries, cupolas or dormers; silos; parapet walls, and cornices without windows; chimneys, ventilators, skylights, and antennas. 
    Architectural Trim: The finished woodwork or similar used to decorate, border or protect the edges of openings or surfaces. 
    Awning: A rooflike cover of canvas or other material extending in front of a doorway or window or over a deck or balcony used to provide protection from the sun or rain. 
    Balcony: An elevated platform projecting from the wall of a building supported by either a cantilever or brackets and enclosed by a railing or parapet. 
    Bay Window: A series of windows projecting outward from the main wall of a building and forming a bay or alcove in a room within. 
    Build-To Line: A line parallel to the property line along which a building shall be built. 
    Building Frontage: The vertical side of a building which faces the primary space or street. Corner lots are considered to have two building frontages. 
    Building Placement: The location of a building foundation on a property. 
    Building Volume: The space displaced by the exterior walls and roof of a building; a product of building width, depth, and height. Building volume is regulated in order to shape public spaces that are human-scaled, well-ordered, and which maximize the amenity of shared public spaces. 
    Building Width: The distance from one side of a building frontage to the other. In conditions where buildings are attached, building width is the distinction between buildings which shall be expressed via a change in architectural expression. 
    City of St. Clair Master Plan: The City of St. Clair's official land use vision and policy statement. 
    Colonnade or Arcade: A covered open-air walkway at standard sidewalk level attached to or integral with the building frontage; overhead structure is supported architecturally by columns or arches along the sidewalk. 
    Cornice: A continuous molded projection that crowns a wall or other construction or horizontally divides it for compositional purposes. 
    Deck: An elevated platform that meets one of the following criteria: 
- Finished roof area 
- Building extension that is independently supported or partially supported from the building. 
- A deck is not considered a porch or stoop as defined by this Ordinance. 
    Downtown Vision Plan: The City of St. Clair Downtown Development Authority's official building use and urban design vision and policy statement. This plan is adopted into the City of St. Clair Master Plan. 
    Eave Line: The overhanging lower edge of a roof. Required dimensions are taken to the lowest elevation of the overhang, or in the event of an irregular horizontal line, an acceptable dimension is at the discretion of the Planning Commission. 
    Expression Line: Horizontal or vertical delineation of a facade or exterior wall through the use of recessed or projected reveals of a minimum two (2) inches in width and depth or an off-set in the exterior wall. 
    Exterior Wall: A wall forming part of the envelope of a building, having one (1) face exposed to the weather. 
    Facade: The front of a building or any of its sides facing a public right-of-way or space. 
    Fenestration: The design, proportioning and disposition of windows and other exterior openings of a building. 
    Finished Floor: The wearing surface of a floor, usually laid over a sub-floor. 
    Finished Grade: The elevation of drives, walks, lawns or other improved surface after completion of construction or grading operations. 
    Frame: A skeletal structure of members designed to give shape and support to a building or other construction. 
    Front Porch: A roofed area, attached at the ground floor level or first floor level, and to the front of a building, open except for railings, and support columns. 
    Garden Wall: A freestanding wall along the property line dividing private areas from streets, alleys, and or adjacent lots. 
    Ground Floor Height: Height of the floor space nearest the ground level between the finished floor and finished ceiling. 
    Height: The vertical distance from the lowest point on the tallest side of the structure to the top of the parapet, cornice or eave. 
    Liner Building: A building built in front of a parking garage, cinema, supermarket etc., to conceal large expanses of blank wall area and to face the street space with a facade that has doors and windows opening onto the sidewalk. Parking garages and their liners may be built at different times. 
    Micro Brewer, Small Wine Maker and Small Distiller: Any business whose primary purpose is the creation of alcoholic beverages, where such business has been granted a license issued by the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission for such operation. 
    Module: The subdividing of a long wall into a composite of identifiable sections causing a vertical rhythm. The dimensions of such are used as a standard for determining the proportion of overall construction. 
    Molding: A long, narrow and ornamental surface with a uniform cross-section and profile shaped to produce modulations of light, shade and shadow. 
    Mullion: A vertical member within the lights of a window. 
    Muntin: A rabbeted member for holding the edges of windowpanes within a sash. 
    Opaque: Visually impenetrable surface capable of completely obscuring objects from view. Variants are expressed in percentages of opacity that will permit less than total light and visual penetration. 
    Overhang: A projection of a wall framing the upper level of a fenestration. Overhangs are constructed of a metal framework and not covered. 
    Parapet: A low protective wall that rises above the roof. 
    Porch: An exterior appendage to a building forming a covered approach or vestibule to a doorway. 
    Primary Space or Street: The space or street that a building fronts. At squares and street intersections the space or street highest in the hierarchy is the primary street. 
    Redevelopment: The process of restoring property to a better condition. 
    Reflective Glass: Glass having a thin translucent metallic or other coating bonded to the exterior or interior surface to reflect a portion of the light and radiant heat that strikes it. 
    Roof: The external upper covering of a building, including the frame supporting the roofing 
    Roof types: 
Flat - A roof having no slope or one with only a slight pitch so as to drain rain water. 
Shed - A roof having a single slope. 
Pitch - A roof having two or more slopes including a gable, hip, curb (mansard or gambrel), butterfly (inverted slope), pavilion, rainbow, barrel and sawtooth. 
    Shutter: A hinged cover or screen for a window. 
    Sill height: Height measured from finished grade to the horizontal member beneath a window opening. 
    Site: The geographic location of a construction project defined by legal boundaries. 
    Skylight: A glazed opening in a roof or ceiling for admitting daylight. 
    Stacking Lane: A road used to queue vehicles accessing a drive-through facility. 
    Stoop: A small platform and/or entrance stairway at a house door commonly covered by a secondary roof or awning. 
    Storefront: Building frontage for the ground floor usually associated with retail uses. 
    Subdistrict: One of three geographically smaller areas within the Downtown Redevelopment District exhibiting unique architectural and site design attributes. 
    Structured Parking: Layers of parking stacked vertically. 
    Tinted Glass: Glass having a chemical admixture to absorb a portion of the radiant heat and visible light that strikes it. 
    Transparent: Surface capable of transmitting light so that bodies and objects situated beyond or behind can be seen. 
    Umbrella Rib: Structural frame of an umbrella canopy. 
    Valance: A vertical ornamental covering hung over the edge of an awning. 
    Window box: A box designed to hold soil for growing plants at or on a windowsill. 
    Window Sill: The horizontal ledge at the base of a window opening. 
8.35.2.  Definitions of Building Use Types. 
    Convenience Market: A business whose primary activity is the retail sale of food, beverages, and small personal items, predominantly for off-premises consumption and typically found in establishments with long or late hours of operation and in relatively small buildings. Convenience market/store does not include establishments whose operation is primarily characterized by (a) the sale of alcohol, such as a liquor store; (b) on-site preparation of food, such as a delicatessen or restaurant; (c) stores which sell fresh fruits, vegetables, and/or meats, such as a food store; or (d) a gas station with the retail sales area for food and drink products of one hundred (100) square feet or less. 
    Drive-Through Facility: An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service or packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive service or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles. This definition includes the drive-through lanes, ordering point and pick-up window or any combination thereof. 
    Fast Food Restaurant: A business where the primary serving of food is for take-out in disposable or non-returnable containers, provided that the business may provide a table and seating area for patrons to consume food and beverage on premises. 
    Full-Service Restaurant: A place which is regularly and in a bona fide manner used and kept open for the serving of at least lunch and dinner to guests for compensation and which has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith, containing conveniences for cooking an assortment of food which may be required for such meals. The sale or service of sandwiches (whether prepared in a kitchen or made elsewhere and heated up on the premises) or snack foods shall not constitute a full-service restaurant. 
    Gas Station: A retail business establishment limited to the sale of motor fuels and supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles. These may include sale of petroleum products; sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items; washing and lubrication and repair. Major automotive repairs, engine, transmission and differential overhaul, painting and body and fender work are excluded except for such uses that are otherwise permitted in the district. "Service Station" as used in this title does not include chain, automatic or coin-operated wash racks. A gas station use with greater than one hundred (100) square feet of retail sales, unrelated to automobile service, shall be considered to include a convenience market and must meet the regulations for a convenience market. 
    Indoor Sports and Recreation: Includes participant sports and health activities conducted in an enclosed building. 
    Live/work quarters: An area comprised of one (1) or more rooms that accommodates joint work activity and residential occupancy and includes (1) working space reserved for and regularly used by one (1) or more of the persons residing therein, and (2) cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities. All living space shall be contiguous with and made an integral part of the working space with direct access between living and working areas. 
    Neighborhood market/store: Includes delicatessens and other specialty food shops and also establishments which have a sizeable assortment of fresh fruits and vegetables and fresh-cut meat. 
    Nightclub: Any bar, cocktail lounge or restaurant, other than a cabaret, wherein live entertainment is provided. Live entertainment means any use of any premises, whether a principal or subsidiary use, which involves the presentation of music or voice by live entertainers to a specific audience or for the incidental enjoyment of patrons more than three (3) or more times during a calendar year. 
    Sidewalk Cafe: An area used for sit down eating and drinking situated in the permitted space between the build-to line and outside curb line. 
    Theater, Performance Space: An enclosed building used for public assembly and/or entertainment, including sports events, theatrical performances, concerts and recitals. Theater shall include auditorium. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05,  1, 10-5-09; Ord. No. 2016-04,  1, 4-4-16) 
ARTICLE 9. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Section 9.1. - Site plan review required in specific districts. 
    Site plan review and approval of all development proposals within specific zoning districts is required by the following provisions. The intent of this section is to provide for consultation and cooperation between the developer and the Planning Commission so that both parties might realize maximum utilization of land and minimum adverse effect upon the surrounding land uses. Through the application of the following provisions, the attainment of the Master Plan will be assured and the City will develop in an orderly fashion. 
9.1.1.  Site Plan Review Required: A site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval for the following: 
A.  Any uses within the following districts: 
R-3 - Multi-Family 
PUD - Planned Unit Development 
MD - Mixed Use (special uses only) 
OS - Office Service 
C-1 - Local Commercial 
C-2 - General Commercial 
M-1 - Light Industrial 
M-2 - Heavy Industrial 
B.  All special uses in single-family districts such as, but not limited to, churches, schools and public facilities. 
C.  All site condominium or condominium projects. 
D.  Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provisions of this Ordinance. 
E.  Any change and/or conversion of use as permitted and regulated by this Ordinance within the same zoning district. 
F.  Any addition to an existing principal or accessory building within districts listed in 9.1.1.(A) and subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Wherein the proposed addition constitutes an increase of 1,000 square feet or ten (10) percent or more as compared to the existing building or use, whichever is less. 
2.  Wherein the proposed addition or expansion would require a variance from the provisions of this Ordinance no matter what size the addition or expansion. 
3.  Wherein the proposed addition/albration contributes a change in parking requirements. 
9.1.2.  Site Plan Review Criteria: The site plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission upon finding that the following conditions are met: 
A.  The proposed use will not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood. 
B.  There is a proper relationship between thoroughfares and proposed service drives, driveways, and parking areas. 
C.  The location of buildings, outside storage receptacles, parking areas, screen walls, and utility areas is such that the adverse effects of such uses will be minimized for the occupants of that use and the occupants of surrounding areas. 
D.  It provides for proper development of roads, easements, and public utilities and protects the general health, safety, welfare, and character of the City. 
E.  It meets City requirements and standards for grading and surface drainage and for the design and construction of storm sewers, storm water holding facilities, water mains, sanitary sewers, and driveway approaches. 
F.  All buildings or groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit emergency vehicle access by some practical means to all sides. 
G.  Natural resources are preserved by developing in a manner which will not detrimentally affect or destroy natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, steep slopes, and woodlands. 
H.  Sites which include storage of hazardous materials or waste, fuels, salt, or chemicals will be designed to prevent spills and discharges of polluting materials to the surface of the ground, groundwater, or nearby water bodies. 
I.  The location of buildings, parking, drives, landscaping, and other improvements on the site is appropriate for the lot size and configuration. 
J.  Landscaping, including trees, shrubs, and other vegetative material, is provided to maintain and improve the aesthetic quality of the site and the area. 
K.  The proposed use is in compliance with all City ordinances and any other applicable laws. 
9.1.3.  Information Required on Site Plan: Plans submitted for site plan approval shall contain all of the following data prior to approval of such plans by the Planning Commission. Final construction plans must be submitted to the Building Department and such construction plans must be reviewed and approved prior to obtaining a Building Permit. 
Site plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire development. Sheet size shall be at least 24" x 36" with plan view drawn to a reasonable scale. Included on the site plan will be all dimensions and the following: 
A.  General Information. 
1.  Proprietor's name, address, and telephone number. 
2.  Date (month, day, year), including revisions. 
3.  Title block. 
4.  Scale. 
5.  Northpoint. 
6.  Location map drawn at a scale of 1" = 2,000' with northpoint indicated. 
7.  Architect, engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, or planner's seal. 
8.  Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas, etc., on the parcel, and within one hundred (100) feet of the site. 
9.  Proposed lot lines, property lines and all structures, parking areas, etc., within the site, and within one hundred (100) feet of the site. 
10.  Centerline and existing and proposed right-of-way lines. 
11.  Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels. 
12.  Gross acreage figure. 
13.  Proximity to major thoroughfare and/or section corners. 
B.  Physical Features. 
1.  Proposed locations of access drives, street intersections, driveway locations, sidewalks, signs, curbing, and acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes. 
2.  Location of existing and proposed service facilities above and below ground, including: 
a.  Storage, loading, and disposal areas for chemicals, hazardous substances, salt, and fuels. 
b.  Water main, hydrants, pump houses, standpipes, and building services and sizes. 
c.  Sanitary sewers and pumping stations. 
d.  Stormwater control facilities and structures including storm sewers, swales, retention and detention basins, drainageways, and other facilities, including calculations for sizes. 
e.  Location of all easements. 
3.  All buildings with dimensioned floor plans, setback and yard dimensions, and typical elevation views of proposed structures. 
4.  Dimensioned parking spaces and calculations, drives, and method of surfacing. 
5.  Exterior lighting locations and illumination patterns. 
6.  Location and description of all existing and proposed landscaping, berms, fencing, and walls. 
7.  Sidewalks and bike paths. 
8.  Trash receptacle pad location and method of screening. 
9.  Transformer pad location and method of screening. 
10.  Dedicated road or service drive locations. 
11.  Entrance details including sign locations and size. 
12.  Designation of fire lanes. 
13.  Any other pertinent physical features. 
C.  Natural Features. 
1.  Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of two (2) feet indicated. Topography on the site and beyond the site for a distance of one hundred (100) feet in all directions shall be indicated. 
2.  A grading plan showing finished contours at a maximum interval of two (2) feet, correlated with existing contours so as to clearly indicate required cutting, filling, and grading. 
3.  Location of existing drainage courses, lakes, ponds, wetlands, rivers and streams, including their water surface elevation, flood plain elevation, and ordinary high water mark. 
4.  Location of other natural resource features, including woodlands. 
D.  Additional Requirements for Multiple-Family, and PUD Developments. 
1.  Density calculations by type of unit by bedroom count. 
2.  Designation of units by type of unit in each building. 
3.  Carport locations and details where proposed. 
4.  Specific amount of recreation space and locations. 
5.  Type of recreation facilities to be provided in recreation space. 
6.  If proposed, details of community building and fencing of swimming pool. 
E.  Additional Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Developments. 
1.  Loading/unloading areas. 
2.  Gross and useable floor area. 
3.  Number of employees in peak usage. 
9.1.4.  Application Procedure: An application for Site Plan Review shall be process in the following manner: 
A.  All site plans shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission and must contain the following to be accepted: 
1.  A signed and complete application. 
2.  Ten (10) copies of the site plan. 
3.  All items as required by 9.1.3. shown on the site plan. 
4.  Required fees. 
B.  Upon acceptance of the site plan, the Code Enforcement Officer shall: 
1.  Forward a copy of the site plan and application to the City Planner or Engineer for review. 
2.  Place review of the site plan on the next Planning Commission agenda. 
3.  Forward a copy of the site plan and application to each Commission member. 
9.1.5.  City Review. Upon receipt of a site plan containing all the required information listed in the ordinance, regulating site plan review, the Planning Commission shall review the plan at a subsequent meeting and approve, approve with conditions, deny, or table the site plan with stipulations as to any information that will be required to be provided from the applicant prior to a decision being made at a subsequent meeting, as follows: 
A.  Upon determination of the Planning Commission that a site plan is in compliance with the regulations and intent of the Zoning Ordinance and any other required regulations, the plans will be marked "Approved". Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance except with minor revisions, the Planning Commission may grant conditional approval and the plans will be marked "Approved with the following conditions" Revised plans must then be submitted to the City for administrative approval with all revisions clearly delineated on the copies. Four (4) copies of the plan with any conditions listed will be required to be distributed as follows: 
1.  One (1) copy forwarded to the City Clerk. 
2.  Two (2) copies forwarded to the Code Enforcement Officer. 
3.  One (1) copy forwarded to the applicant. 
B.  The Planning Commission may table the site plan if it determines that additional information is required. The applicant shall be advised as to what additional information is required before the matter will again be placed before the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
C.  If extensive revision to the site plan is necessary to meet the Ordinance and regulation requirements, the site plan shall be denied and the applicant required to submit a new application and site plan, unless otherwise directed by the Commission. In this case, "Denied" shall be written on the plan and reasons for denial indicated. 
D.  Upon request, the City may permit the movement of soil on the site, prior to site plan approval provided that a soil erosion permit is issued by the county if required and that a topographical plan is submitted with sufficient detail, including elevations and a time schedule to determine the extent and length of the disruption of the soil. Conditions may be placed on the movement of the soil by the Commission including, but not limited to, time restrictions and restoration of specified vegetation on the site. 
E.  In those instances where final approval authority is vested with the City Council, the Planning Commission shall submit a recommendation to the City Council citing the reasons for approval, approval with conditions or denial of the plan. 
9.1.6.  Effect of Approval. When an applicant receives final site approval, he must develop the site in complete conformity with the approved site plan and the following requirements: 
A.  The site plan approval shall be valid for an initial period of one (1) year, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Should site construction commence within the initial one (1) year period, approval for the project will be extended for a period of one (1) year. 
2.  Should a building permit be issued, site plan approval shall continue for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance of a building permit. 
3.  At the end of the extension period from the date of the site construction or issuance of a building permit or upon occupancy or prior to the issuance of a temporary or final Certificate of Occupancy, the applicant shall submit a letter of credit or cash bond in the amount of 110% of the amount of the cost for completion of the site improvements, as determined by the City Engineer based on the approved site plan. 
B.  If the site is not under construction at the expiration of the initial approval time, the site plan approval becomes null and void and the developer shall make a new application for approval. 
C.  A one year time extension to site plan approval may be granted by the Planning Commission at a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting upon request, subject to additional conditions and/or review. 
9.1.7.  As-Built Plans. Prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy, one set of as-built plans must be submitted to the City of St. Clair by a registered architect of engineer containing the following: 
A.  As-built storm system plans shall indicate the offset of storm sewers from the property lines and shall include, but not be limited to, length of sewer, invert elevation, rim elevation, percentage of grade, manhole location, sewer material and joints used. Locations shall be shown on the plans with an accuracy of one (1) foot. 
B.  As-built sanitary sewer system plans shall indicate the offset of sanitary sewers from property lines and shall include, but not be limited to, length of sewer, invert elevation, rim elevation, percentage of grade, manhole location, sewer material and joints used. Locations shall be shown on the plans with an accuracy of one (1) foot. 
C.  As-built water system plans shall indicate the offset of water mains from property lines and shall locate gate valves, hydrants and all water system appurtenances from the nearest property corner. In addition, all underground appurtenances, such as gate valve wells, meter pits, pressure reducing valve pits, etc., shall be located from the nearest hydrant that is connected to the same water main as the appurtenance. Locations shall be shown on the plans with an accuracy of one (1) foot. 
D.  All plans shall list the type, brand name and lengths of pipe, hydrants, gate valves, etc., used. 
ARTICLE 10. - ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE AND FLOOD PREVENTION DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 10.1. - Purpose. 
    No use, otherwise allowed, shall be permitted within any district which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy, and operation, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained within said area. 
Section 10.2. - Smoke. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit the emission of any smoke from any source whatsoever to a density greater than that permitted by Federal Clean Air Standards and those standards promulgated by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources according to Act 348 of 1965 as amended. 
Section 10.3. - Dust, dirt, and fly ash. 
    No person, firm, or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated, maintained, or cause to be maintained, any process for any purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without maintaining and operating, while using said process or furnace or combustion device, recognized and approved equipment, means, method, device or contrivance to reduce the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids or fumes emitted into the open air, which is operated in conjunction with said process, furnace, or combustion device so that the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed Federal Clean Air Standards and those standards promulgated by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
Section 10.4. - Glare and radioactive materials. 
10.4.1.  Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes, including electromagnetic radiation such as x-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line. 
10.4.2.  Glare from automobile headlights or commercial or industrial vehicle headlights shall not be directed into any adjacent property so as to become a nuisance. 
10.4.3.  In non-residential areas, exterior lighting shall be installed so that the source of light shall not be visible from any residential dwelling and shall be so arranged as far as practical to reflect light away from the residential use. In no case shall more than one candle-power of light cross a lot line five (5) feet above the ground into a residential district. 
Section 10.5. - Fire and explosive hazards. 
    The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum gases and explosives shall comply with the State Rules and Regulations as established by Public Act No. 207 of 1941, as amended. 
Section 10.6. - Noise. 
10.6.1.  The emission of measurable noises from the premises shall not exceed sixty-five (65) decibels as measured at the boundary or property lines, except that where normal street traffic noises exceed sixty-five (65) decibels during such periods, the measurable noise emanating from the premises may equal, but shall not exceed, such traffic noises. Within the M1 and M2 districts, sound levels not exceeding seventy-five (75) decibels may be permitted. 
10.6.2.  In addition, objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature, or sounds characterized by high frequencies, even if falling below the aforementioned decibel readings, shall be so controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. This shall particularly apply to loading and unloading areas in commercial or industrial districts adjacent to residential districts. 
Section 10.7. - Odors. 
    The emission of noxious odors, odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines, when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four or more volumes of clean air or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines, is prohibited. 
Section 10.8. - Waste and rubbish dumping. 
    No garbage, sewage, filth, refuse, waste, trash, debris, or rubbish, including cans, bottles, waste paper, cartons, boxes and crates, or other offensive or obnoxious matter shall be kept in open containers, or piled, placed, stored, or dumped on any land within the City in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance or create a hazard to health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City. 
Section 10.9. - Regulations of floodplain areas. 
10.9.1.  Finding of fact. The flood hazard areas of the city of St. Clair are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss or impairment of life, property, health and safety, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary expenditures of public funds for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect public health, safety and general welfare. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increased heights and velocities of floodwaters by the occupation of the flood-hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazards to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
10.9.2.  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of the Flood Prevention District to protect the natural, human and economic resources of the city; and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by application of special regulations for the use of land which is, or may be, subject to periodic inundation by floods and floodwaters at predictable intervals. Said regulations, while permitting reasonable economic use and considering the physical limitations of such land, will help to protect public health, public safety and general welfare, and will reduce the financial burdens imposed upon the community which may result from the improper use of such land. Said regulations are designed to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and welfare, and property due to water or erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, to be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control, filling, grading, dredging, obstructions and other developments which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
D.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters, or impede or obstruct the flow thereof, or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
10.9.3.  Definitions. The words used in this article which are not expressly defined in this section shall be given their usual customary meaning with consideration to the context in which they are used. The following terms are expressly defined herein and shall mean: 
    Area of shallow flooding shall mean a designated AO or VO Zone on the flood insurance rate map for the City of St. Clair with base flood depths from one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel or watercourse does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where floodwater velocity flow may be evident. 
    Base flood shall mean the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year and shall be based upon a flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the area and is reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur in a particular stream, channel or watercourse. 
    Development shall mean any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the erection of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Flood or flooding shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land which is, in its normal state, dry and unsubmerged, from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any surface. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map shall mean that map (or maps) prepared by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development which indicates the location of the floodway and the floodway fringe areas within the city, a copy of which is available for examination in the office of the city clerk of the City of St. Clair. 
    Flood insurance rate map shall mean that map (or maps) prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency which classifies the floodplain into various zones for purposes of determining flood insurance premium rates within the city, a copy of which is available for examination at the office of the city clerk of the City of St. Clair. 
    Flood insurance study shall mean that study (or studies) prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency which examines, evaluates and determines flood hazards, and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations for the City of St. Clair, and contains flood profile studies as well as a flood hazard boundary and floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplains associated with the base flood shall mean that area which is inundated by the base flood. This is the floodplain area which shall be regulated by the standards and criteria of this article and shall be determined with reference to the flood boundary and floodway and the flood insurance study. 
    Floodproofing shall mean any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improves real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway shall mean the channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which carry and discharge the floodwaters of the base flood, as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and as indicated in the flood boundary and floodway map. 
    New construction shall mean all structures, including the placement of mobile homes, for which construction is started or commenced on or after the effective date of this article. 
    Obstruction shall mean any dam, dike, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, pile abutment, projection, excavation, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, file, structure, or other matter, in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or flood-hazard area which may impede, retain or change the direction of the flow of water or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to damage life or property. 
    Substantial improvement shall mean any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either (a) before the improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" shall be considered to occur when the first alteration of any structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not include any project for improvement to comply with existing state or city health, sanitary or safety code requirements which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or to any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State of Michigan Register of Historic Places. 
    Watercourse shall mean any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, channel, creek, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and shall include any area adjacent tracts subject to inundation by reason of overflow of floodwater. 
10.9.4.  Lands to which Floodplains District applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of St. Clair. The flood district shall be considered to overlay existing zoning districts and shall constitute additional terms to those impaired by the underlying zoning district. The Flood Prevention District is hereby divided into two (2) areas, which areas shall be known as the "floodway" area as defined in section 10.9.3 of this article and the "floodway fringe" area, as defined in section 10.9.3 of this article. The location and boundaries of the floodway and floodway fringe areas shall coincide with the location and boundaries of floodways and floodway fringe areas as shown on the "Flood Insurance Study for the City of St. Clair", dated June 15, 1978, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and floodway maps, and any revisions thereto all of which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
10.9.5.  Development permit required. From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any development, including the placement of mobile homes, within the Flood Protection District, without having first procured a development permit as hereinafter provided, said permit being required for all development as defined in section 10.9.3, and irrespective of whether or not said development involves the actual construction for building or structure. 
10.9.6.  Compliance. No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered, nor shall any land be used, except in full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
10.9.7.  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easement, covenant or deed restriction. When this article and any other ordinance, conflict or overlap, the ordinance which imposes the most stringent standard shall be applicable. 
10.9.8.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
10.9.9.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of St. Clair or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
10.9.10.  Administration. 
A.  Designation of the city superintendent. The city superintendent is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
B.  Duties and responsibilities of the city superintendent. Duties of the city superintendent shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
2.  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
3.  Review all permits for proposed new development to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding, to assure that: 
a.  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within floodprone area; 
b.  All public utilities, and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and instructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
c.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce expenses to flood damage. 
4.  Notify adjacent communities and the Michigan Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
5.  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
6.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures. 
7.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed. 
8.  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the city superintendent shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
9.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the city superintendent shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
10.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 10.9.3 of this article, then the city superintendent shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 10.9.10 of this article. 
11.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city superintendent and shall be open for public inspection. 
10.9.11.  Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the city superintendent on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill storage of materials; drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
B.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure has been floodproofed; 
C.  Provide a certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in section 10.9.13(B) (herein). 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
10.9.12.  Variances procedures; standards for determination conditions. 
A.  The zoning board of appeals, as established by the City of St. Clair, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
B.  The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city superintendent in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the St. Clair County Circuit Court, as provided by statute. 
D.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
E.  In passing upon such applications, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
11.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges. 
12.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots, existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
F.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this article, the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
G.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
H.  Conditions for variances: 
1.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
4.  The city superintendent shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
5.  An applicant for a variance to permit development in any floodway shall secure a permit from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources under the authority of 1929 PA 245, as amended by 1968 PA 167, and evidence thereof shall be submitted to the city superintendent. 
10.9.13.  Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structures; 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
3.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
4.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
5.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
6.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
B.  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required: 
1.  Residential construction: New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above base flood elevation. 
2.  Nonresidential construction: New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressure, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the baseflood. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 16-10.9.10 (B) (8) herein. 
3.  Mobile Homes: 
a.  No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway area, except in an existing mobile home park or existing mobile home subdivision. 
b.  All mobile homes placed within the floodway and floodway fringe areas shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: 
i.  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the mobile home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations and mobile homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
ii.  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side; 
iii.  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds; and 
iv.  Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored. 
c.  For new mobile home parks and subdivisions, for expansions to existing mobile home parks and subdivisions, for existing mobile home parks and subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced, and for mobile homes not placed in a mobile home park or subdivision, it is required that: 
i.  Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be one foot above the base flood level; 
ii.  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; and 
iii.  In the instance of elevation on pilings: 
-  Lots are large enough to permit steps; 
-  Piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten (10) feet apart; and 
-  Reinforcement is provided for pilings more that six (6) feet above the ground level. 
4.  Floodways: Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 10.9.5 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments are prohibited unless certification by a professional registered engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If section 10.9.12 (B) (4) (a) of this article is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
c.  The placement of any mobile homes is prohibited except in an existing mobile home park or existing mobile subdivision. 
10.9.14.  Permitted uses by right in the floodway area of the Flood Prevention District. The following uses having a low flood damage potential and present either no, or minimal obstruction to flood flows, shall be permitted within the floodway district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials or equipment. No use shall in any manner, affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. Approval from the State of Michigan Department of Natural Resources is needed for construction activity (of the following,) taking place in the floodway and floodway fringe areas of the Flood Prevention District: 
A.  Recreation uses: Parks, playgrounds, playfields, bridle paths, nature trails, natural wildlife preserves, outdoor tennis courts, archery ranges, boat launching ramps, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, game farms, fish hatcheries and similar uses. 
B.  Golf courses and driving ranges: In accordance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the City of St. Clair. 
C.  Agricultural uses: General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming and wild crop farming. 
D.  Uses incidental to single-family dwellings: Lawns, gardens and play areas. 
E.  Parking areas: Provided said parking areas are unpaved and are incidental to those uses permitted in the subsections listed above. 
F.  Uses not permitted: Permitted uses in underlying zoning districts shall not be construed as being permitted uses in the floodway area of the Flood Prevention District unless those uses are indicated as being permitted in the subsections listed above. 
10.9.15.  Uses permitted by special use permit in the floodway area of the Flood Prevention District. Provided such uses shall not, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, be adverse to the purpose of this section or damaging to the public health, safety or welfare, or impose a financial burden upon the community or shall in any manner affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system, the following uses may be permitted by issuance of a special use permit in accordance with all other requirements of the zoning ordinance of the City of St. Clair and section 10.9.14 of this article: 
A.  Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipe lines; 
B.  Marinas, boat rentals, piers, wharves; 
C.  Extraction of sand, gravel and other minerals; 
D.  Structures for recreational uses such as shelter houses, outbuildings or wildlife sanctuaries; 
E.  Paved parking areas; and 
F.  Other uses similar in nature to uses described in section 10.9.14 which are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
10.9.16.  Requirements for special use permit for uses in the floodway area of the Flood Prevention District. In addition to all other requirements of the zoning ordinances of the City of St. Clair, the application for a special use permit in the floodway area of the Flood Prevention District shall submit the following: 
A.  A letter of approval from the State of Michigan Department of Natural Resources; 
B.  A location map including existing topographic data at two-foot interval contours at a scale of one inch representing one hundred (100) feet; 
C.  A map showing proposed grading and drainage plans including the location of all public drainage easements, the limits, extent, and elevation of the proposed fill, excavation and occupation; 
D.  A statement from the St. Clair County Drain Commissioner indicating that he has reviewed and approved the proposal; 
E.  A statement from the city engineer concerning feasibility of the proposal and his approval; and 
F.  Any other information requested by the Planning Commission. 
10.9.17.  Standards for special use permits within the floodway. The Planning Commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts of each proposed use in terms of the following standards as well as those in section 10.9.16: 
A.  Structures shall not be designed for human habitation and shall have a low flood damage potential; 
B.  Structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of the floodwaters and whenever possible, shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of floodflow; 
C.  No special use permit shall be issued for the development of new structures, substantial improvement or relocation of old structures, or development of any kind within the floodway when such development, construction, improvement or relocation would cause any increase in flood level associated with the base flood. 
10.9.18.  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). Located within the areas of the special flood hazard established in section 10.9.3 of this article are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards, associated with base flood depths of one to three (3) feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
A.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the crown of the nearest street to or above the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map for the City of St. Clair. 
B.  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated aboveground of the nearest street to or above the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map; or 
2.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
10.9.19.  Permitted uses by right in the floodway fringe area of the flood prevention district. The following uses having a low flood damage potential and present either no, or minimal obstruction to flood flows, shall be permitted within the floodway fringe district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided they do not require structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment. Approval from the State of Michigan Department of Natural Resources is needed for construction activity taking place in the floodway fringe. 
A.  Recreation uses: Parks, playgrounds, playfields, bridle paths, nature trails, natural wildlife preserves, outdoor tennis courts, archery ranges, boat launching ramps, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, game farms, fish hatcheries and similar uses. 
B.  Golf courses and driving ranges: In accordance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the City of St. Clair. 
C.  Agricultural uses: General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming and wild crop farming. 
D.  Uses incidental to single-family dwellings: Lawns, gardens and play areas. 
E.  Uses not permitted: Permitted uses in underlying zoning districts shall not be construed as being permitted uses in the floodway area of the Flood Prevention District unless those uses are indicated as being permitted in the subsections listed above. 
10.9.20.  Uses permitted by special use permit in the floodway fringe area of the Flood Prevention District. Provided such uses shall not, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, be adverse to the purpose of this section or damaging to the public health, safety or welfare, or impose a financial burden upon the community, the following uses may be permitted by issuance of a special use permit in accordance with the zoning ordinance of the City of St. Clair and any other requirements contained herein: 
A.  Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipe lines; 
B.  Marinas, boat rentals, piers, wharves; 
C.  Extraction of sand, gravel and other minerals; 
D.  Structures for recreational uses such as shelter houses, outbuildings or wildlife sanctuaries; 
E.  Those uses indicated as being permitted uses or as being permissible with a special use permit in those zoning districts which underlie the Flood Prevention District; 
F.  Dumping or backfilling with any material in any manner. In the case where floodway fringe areas have no groundwater recharge or impoundment potential, filling may occur through compensating excavation and shaping of the floodway fringe in such a way as to maintain or improve the flow or natural impoundment capacity of the floodway fringe. In no case shall the flow or impoundment capacity of the floodway fringe be reduced. 
G.  Other uses similar in nature to uses described in section 10.9.18 which are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
10.9.21.  Requirements for special use permits for uses in the floodway fringe area of the Flood Prevention District. In addition to all other requirements of the zoning ordinance of the City of St. Clair, the applicant for a special use permit in the Flood Prevention District shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  The applicant for a special use permit shall be required to submit that information listed as necessary in section 10.9.16 herein. 
10.9.22.  Standards for special use permits within the floodway fringe. The Planning Commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts of each proposed use in terms of the following standards as well as those in section 10.9.16 herein: 
A.  All new residential structures and residential structures requiring substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one foot above the level of the base flood floodplain. 
B.  All new nonresidential structures and nonresidential structures requiring substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one foot above the level of the intermediate regional floodplain or shall be floodproofed to one foot above the level of the intermediate regional floodplain. 
ARTICLE 11. - NON-CONFORMING LOTS, NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND, NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, AND NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES 

Section 11.1. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit legal non-conforming lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are removed. 
11.1.1.  It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this Ordinance uses which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendments. Such uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, or be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district, except as provided for herein. 
11.1.2.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the completion of construction and use of a non-conforming building for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, provided, that construction is commenced within ninety (90) days after the date of issuance of the permit, and that the entire building shall have been completed according to the plans filed with the application for permit within one (1) year after the date of issuance of the building permit. 
Section 11.2. - Non-conforming lots. 
11.2.1.  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lots shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance to yard requirements may be obtained through approval of the Board of Appeals. 
11.2.2.  If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage and single ownership are of record at the date of passage or amendment of this Ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this Ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this Ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or occupied which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this Ordinance. 
Section 11.3. - Non-conforming uses of land. 
    Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
11.3.1.  No such non-conforming uses shall be enlarged or increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. 
11.3.2.  No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. 
11.3.3.  If such non-conforming use of land ceases operation for a period of more than six (6) months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
Section 11.4. - Non-conforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
11.4.1.  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its non-conformity. 
11.4.2.  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of replacement value at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
11.4.3.  Non-conforming single-family residential and duplex structures are exempt from this section; however, application for a building permit shall be made within one year from the date of damage or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04,  1, 10-1-07) 
Section 11.5. - Non-conforming uses of structures and land. 
    If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
11.5.1.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
11.5.2.  Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
11.5.3.  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations pertaining to the uses permitted in the district in which such structure is located, and the non-conforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
11.5.4.  If such non-conforming use of land and/or structures ceases such use or is vacant for a period of more than six (6) months the use shall be considered abandoned and any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance pertaining to the uses permitted in the district in which such land is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this provision only so long as seasonal uses shall continue. 
11.5.6[5].  If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another non-conforming use of the same or a more restricted classification provided that the Board of Appeals, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing non-conforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. Where a non-conforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more restrictive classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted classification. 
11.5.7[6].  The following provisions shall apply to uses of record legally existing prior to October 29, 1991 in the MD-1, MD-2, C-1 and C-2 zoning districts. A legal existing use of record which may be considered non-conforming under the provisions of this ordinance dated October 29, 1991, shall remain legally conforming uses if: 
A.  The proprietors of the property register as a use of record with the City within six months of legal notification by the City, and 
B.  The business activity on the premise is continuous after the effective date of the amendments. 
Should a change of use occur, the building become vacant for more than six (6) months, or the building is razed, demolished or destroyed for any reason after the effective date, then all provisions of the MD-1, MD-2, C-1, or C-2 zoning district regulations shall apply to the new proposed use. 
Section 11.6. - Repairs and maintenance. 
    On any building devoted in whole or in part to any non-conforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing to an extent not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the replacement value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance shall not be increased. 
Section 11.7. - Change of tenancy or ownership. 
    There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing non-conforming uses of land, structures, and premises provided there is no change in the nature or character of such non-conforming uses except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Section 11.8. - Elimination by municipality. 
    In accordance with Act 272, Public Acts of the State of Michigan of 1947, as amended (MCL 125.583a), the City Commission may acquire properties on which non-conforming buildings or uses are located, by condemnation or other means and may remove such uses or structures. The resultant property may be leased or sold for a conforming use or may be used by the city for a public use. The net cost of such acquisition may be assessed against a benefit district or may be paid from other sources of revenue. 
ARTICLE 12. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Section 12.1. - Purpose of board. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Act 207 of Public Acts of 1921, as amended, the Zoning Board of Appeals is established to ensure that the objectives of this Ordinance may be more fully and equitably achieved, that a means be provided for competent interpretation of this Ordinance, that reasonable flexibility be provided in the application of this Ordinance, and that the public health, safety, and welfare is protected. 
Section 12.2. - Membership, terms of office. 
    The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the City Council. The members shall be selected from the registered electors of the City. An elected officer or any employee of the City shall not serve as a member of the Zoning Board. 
    Terms shall be for three (3) years or until a successor is appointed and qualified. A successor shall be appointed not more than one (1) month after the term of the preceding member has expired. All vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term. 
    Members of the Board of Appeals shall be removable by the Council for non-performance of duty or misconduct in office upon written charges and after public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest shall constitute misconduct of office. 
Section 12.3. - Organization and procedures. 
12.3.1.  Filing Fee. An appeal may be taken by a person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the City. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals must be filed within fifteen working (15) days from the date that the decision to be appealed is effective. An appeal is taken by filing with the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The officer or body from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. An appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth by the City Council. 
12.3.2.  Officers. The Board shall elect from its membership a chairman, vice chairman, and such officers as may be necessary. The Board is authorized to appoint an executive secretary. 
12.3.3.  Rules of Procedure. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure. These rules shall be available for public inspection at the office of the Board. The rules as adopted shall include the following: 
A.  Meetings shall be held regularly each month according to the rules, at a fixed place and open to the public, except that a meeting shall not be required if there is no business to come before the Board. 
B.  The presence of four (4) members shall constitute a quorum, and it shall take a concurring vote of four (4) members to reverse an order or decision of the building inspector, planning commission, or any other official to whom authority is granted by this chapter to decide on any matter upon which it is required to pass by this chapter, or to grant a variance from the provisions thereof. It shall take a concurring vote of four (4) members to grant variance from the uses of land permitted in the Ordinance. 
C.  A record of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept by the Board, relating evidence presented by the applicant and the resolution by the Board, the vote of each member on each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. These shall be a public record and immediately filed in the office of the Board. 
D.  The Board shall receive reasonable assistance from the City departments in carrying out the functions of the Board. 
12.3.4.  Hearings. The Board of Appeals shall fix a time for the hearing of an appeal as specified in Section 3.11 of this Zoning Ordinance. The Board of Appeals shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and shall make an order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the Board of Appeals may vary or modify any of the ordinance rules, regulations, or provisions relating to the construction, or structural changes in equipment, or alteration of buildings or structures, or the use of the land, buildings or structure, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 4-16-07) 
Section 12.4. - Effect of appeal. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Code Enforcement Officer certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed with him that, for reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, or on application, by the Circuit Court, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, when due cause can be shown. 
Section 12.5. - Duties and powers of the zoning board of appeals. 
    The Board of Appeals may affirm or reverse, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the office or body from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall also have the following specified duties and powers: 
12.5.1.  Review. Shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative official or body charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
12.5.2.  Interpretation. Shall have the power to: 
A.  Hear and decide upon appeals for the interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.  Determine the precise location of the boundary lines between zoning districts. 
C.  Classify a use which is not specifically mentioned along with a comparable permitted or prohibited use for the purpose of the use regulations in any zoning district. 
12.5.3.  Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to authorize upon appeal, specific variances from such dimensional requirements as lot area and width regulations, building height, and bulk regulations, yard width and depth regulations, and such requirements as off-street parking and loading space as specified in this Ordinance when all the basic standards listed below are satisfied; that any variance granted: 
A.  Will not be contrary to the public interest and will not be contrary to the spirit and intent of this Ordinance. 
B.  Shall not permit the establishment within a zoning district of any use which is not permitted by right within the district. 
C.  Will not cause any adverse effect to property in the vicinity or in the zoning district of the City. 
D.  Is not one where the specific conditions pertaining to the property are so general or recurrent in nature as to make the formulation of a general regulation for such conditions practicable. 
E.  Affects only property subject to exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions that do not generally apply to other property or uses in the vicinity, and have not resulted from any act of the applicant. 
F.  Must be granted in order to avoid practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship which would result from enforcement of the strict letter of this Ordinance. 
12.5.4.  Conditions. In addition to the foregoing conditions, the following rules shall be applied in the granting of variances. 
A.  The Board of Appeals may impose reasonable conditions upon an affirmative decision. The conditions may include conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused to the land used for activity, to protect natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall do all of the following: 
1.  Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those who will use the land, use, or activity under consideration; residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity; and the community as a whole. 
2.  Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
3.  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations; be related to the standards established for the land use or activity under consideration; and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and the land owner. The Board shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. 
B.  No more than the minimum variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall be granted which is necessary to relieve the practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. 
C.  An application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the last denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of changed conditions found upon inspection by the Board to be valid. 
D.  Each variance granted shall become null and void unless the provisions of the variance have been utilized by the applicant within six (6) months after the granting of the variance. 
E.  Prior to granting a variance, all other existing infractions related to this Ordinance or other City codes related to the variance request shall be resolved. 
Section 12.6. - Appeal to circuit court. 
12.6.1.  The decision of the Board of Appeals rendered pursuant to Article XII shall be final. However, a party aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the Circuit Court. Upon appeal, the Circuit Court shall review the record and decision of the Board of Appeals to insure that the decision: 
A.  Complies with the Constitution and Laws of the State. 
B.  Is based upon proper procedure. 
C.  Is supported by competent materials, and substantial evidence on the record. 
D.  Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by law to the Board of Appeals. 
12.6.2.  If the court finds the record of the Board of Appeals inadequate to make the review required by this section, or that there is additional evidence which is material and with good reason was not presented to the Board of Appeals on conditions which the court considers proper. The Board of Appeals may modify its findings and decision as a result of the new proceedings, or may affirm its original decision. The supplementary record and decision shall be filed with the Court. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 4-16-07) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1975 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1975 Code, as updated through December 17, 1990, which are included herein. Sections of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1975 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-6 2-296-2-301 1-46-1-64 46-1-46-19 1-65 46-27 1-66, 1-67 46-20, 46-21 1-69-1-72 46-23-46-26 1-80-1-83 2-36-2-39 1-111 2-51 1-114 2-52 1-120-1-123 2-311-2-314 2-1-2-5 6-36-6-40 2-5(g) 6-41 2-6 6-42 2-7 6-26 2-67-2-77 6-81-6-91 3-1 10-1 3-4, 3-5 10-2, 10-3 3-15-3-21 10-26-10-32 3-24 10-33 4-1 58-201 4-2, 4-3 58-213, 58-214 4-4, 4-5 58-209, 58-210 4-6, 4-7 58-202, 58-203 4-8 58-211 4-19, 4-20 58-204, 58-205 4-21-4-23 58-206 4-24, 4-25 58-207, 58-208 4-26 58-212 5-1, 5-2 14-1, 14-2 5-4 14-3 5-12-5-14 14-27-14-29 5-73 14-122 5-214-5-221 14-151-14-158 5-232-5-241 14-181-14-190 5-251-5-254 14-211-14-214 5-255-5-259 14-214-14-218 6-1-6-7 22-31-22-37 6-8, 6-9 22-36 6-10, 6-11 22-38, 22-39 6-12 22-1 6-13-6-15 22-3-22-5 6-16 22-7 6-17 22-6 6-18 22-8 6-19 22-2 6-21 22-9 6-30-6-34 2-86-2-90 6-35-6-37 2-91 6-38, 6-39 2-92, 2-93 6-46-6-50 2-106-2-110 6-51-6-53 2-111 6-54, 6-55 2-112, 2-113 6-62-6-66 2-126-2-130 6-67-6-69 2-131 6-70, 6-71 2-132, 2-133 6-78-6-82 2-146-2-150 6-83-6-85 2-151 6-86, 6-87 2-152, 2-153 6-94-6-98 2-166-2-170 6-99-6-101 2-171 6-102, 6-103 2-172, 2-173 6-110-6-114 2-186-2-190 6-115-6-117 2-191 6-118, 6-119 2-192, 2-193 6-126-6-130 2-206-2-210 6-131-6-133 2-211 6-134, 6-135 2-212, 2-213 6-141, 6-142 2-226, 2-227 6-143-6-148 2-227-2-232 6-156-6-161 2-246-2-251 7-1-7-3 26-26-26-28 8-1-8-3 30-1 8-4-8-11 30-2-30-9 8-19-8-23 30-31-30-35 8-24-8-26 30-36 8-27, 8-28 30-37, 30-38 8-63-8-66 30-81-30-84 9-1 42-1 9-2 42-3 9-2(a) 42-2 9-3-9-5 42-4-42-6 9-7-9-13 42-7-42-13 10-1, 10-2 70-1, 70-2 10-13-10-20 70-26-70-33 10-40, 10-41 70-56, 70-57 11-12 18-25 11-13, 11-14 18-28, 18-29 11-15 18-31 11-16 18-30 11-17-11-22 18-32-18-37 12-2, 12-3 58-26, 58-27 12-14-12-18 58-41-58-45 12-29-12-36 58-171-58-178 12-47-12-54 58-91-58-98 12-60 58-121 12-61, 12-62 58-123, 58-124 12-63 58-126 12-64 58-125 12-65 58-127 12-67 58-122 12-68, 12-69 58-128, 58-129 13-6.1 38-3 13-11 38-4 13-22, 13-23 38-31, 38-32 13-24 38-37 13-25-13-27 38-33-38-35 13-29 38-38 13-30 38-36 13-31 38-39 13-41-13-43 38-61-38-63 13-44-13-47 38-65-38-68 13-48 38-64 13-60-13-63 38-91-38-94 13-70-13-74 38-116-38-120 15-1 34-1 15-12-15-21 34-26-34-35 15-30-15-33 34-56-34-59 16-1-16-3 50-1-50-3 16-5-16-8 50-4-50-7 16-20-16-26 50-31-50-37 16-37-16-42 50-61-50-66 16-53-16-59 50-86-50-92 16-70-16-77 50-116-50-123 16-78 50-126 16-79 50-128 16-80 50-127 16-81 50-124 16-82, 16-83 50-129, 50-130 16-84 50-133 16-85 50-131 16-86 50-125 16-87 50-132 16-88, 16-89 50-134, 50-135 17-1 54-1 17-13-17-16 54-26-54-29 17-27-17-29 54-41-54-43 17-30, 17-31 54-43, 54-44 17-42-17-50 54-56-54-64 17-115-17-121 26-76-26-82 18-1-18-4 2-281-2-284 18-101 18-102 19-1 18-61 19-3-19-6 18-63-18-66 19-21 18-82 19-23, 19-24 18-83, 18-84 20-11-20-15 66-26-66-30 20-26-20-32 66-41-66-47 20-33 66-49 20-34 66-51 20-35 66-50 20-36 66-48 20-37 66-52 20-48 66-68 20-49 66-67 20-50 66-66 20-51, 20-52 66-69, 66-70 20-63-20-67 66-91-66-95 20-68 66-97 20-69 66-96 20-70 66-98 21-1 62-26 21-2.1-21-2.6 62-28-62-33 21-3-21-7 62-41-62-45 21-21-21-31 62-61-62-71 21-33 62-72 21-34 62-74 21-35 62-73 21-36, 21-37 62-75, 62-76  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1975 Code, as updated through December 17, 1990, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1975 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede December 17, 1990, but which were never included in the 1975 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since December 17, 1990, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 46  8- 9-79 2 58-10 1991-01  1-21-91 1 54-58 1991-02  2- 4-91 1 54-63 1991-03  8-19-91 1 2-227 2, 3 2-229, 2-230 1991-05 12- 2-91 1 38-1 1992-01  2-17-92 1-5 58-66-58-70 1992-02  4-20-92 1 62-29 1992-03  5- 4-92 1 14-26 2 14-29 1992-04  5- 4-92 1 62-70 1992-09 12-21-92 1(5-55) 14-101 1(5-68) 14-121 1993-01  2- 1-93 1(13-80) 38-2 1993-03 10- 4-93 1(22-1)-1(22-3) 21-1-21-3 1(22-4) 21-4, 21-5 1(22-6)-1(22-17) 21-6-21-17 4 21-18 1993-05 12- 6-93 1(5-14.5) 14-52 1(5-16)-1(5-25) 14-53-14-62 1(5-26) 14-76-14-84 1(5-27) 14-85, 14-86 1(5-28)-1(5-30) 14-87-14-89 1993-06 12-20-93 1(5-15) 14-51 1994-03  7- 5-94 1-7       Added Adopt. ord., p. ix 1994-04  9- 6-94 1-6       Added 26-101-26-106 1995-01  6-19-95 1 14-26 2 14-29 1995-04  8-21-95 1       Added 6-101-6-109 1995-05 11- 6-95 1       Added 18-181-18-183 1996-01  3- 4-96 1       Added 14-4       Added 14-5 1996-04  5- 6-96 1 18-153 1996-05  7- 1-96 1 14-151(a), (d) 1996-06  7- 1-96 1 14-186 1996-07  7- 1-96 1       Added 18-201-18-206       Added 18-221-18-228       Added 18-241-18-245 1996-13 10- 7-96 1 38-4 1996-17 12- 2-96 1       Added 54-63(6) 1997-02  2- 3-97 1, 2       Added 14-241, 14-242 1997-05  2-17-97 1       Added 6-131-6-144 1997-06  2-17-97 1 62-27 62-42 1997-07  7- 7-97 1 14-5 2 62-75 1997-09  8-18-97 1       Added 21-31-21-56 1997-10 11- 3-97 1 14-51 1997-11 11- 3-97 1       Added 38-149(b)(13) 1997-12 11- 3-97 1       Rpld 58-41-58-45 1997-15 12-15-97 1 38-91 2       Rpld 38-92 3 38-93 1998-01  6- 1-98 1, 2       Added 30-61-30-63 1998-02  6-15-98 1       Added 62-42(d) 1998-03  7- 6-98 1 38-36(b) 1998-04  7- 6-98 1 14-26       Rpld 14-29 1998-06 10-19-98 1       Rpld 50-61-50-66       Added 50-61-50-71 1999-02  4- 5-99 1 38-33 1999-03  6-21-99 1       Added 26-29 1999-04  8- 2-99 1 38-277 1999-07  9-15-99 1       Added 36-1-36-6 1999-08  9- 7-99 1 1-2 1-12 1999-09  9- 7-99 1 6-91(b) 6-109(b) 10-28       Added 14-29 14-88 14-101(e) 14-122 14-242 18-37 26-28(d) 30-5 30-84 38-1(c) 38-4(c), (d) 42-13 50-7 50-37 50-92 58-98 58-210 66-52 66-98 70-33 70-58 1999-11  9- 7-99 1       Rpld 70-26-70-33       Added 70-26-70-33 1999-12 10-18-99 1 62-29(8) 62-38(b) 1999-13 11-15-99 1 58-11 2000-01  1- 3-00 1 App. A 2000-02  3-20-00 1       Added 58-1 2000-03  3-20-00 1 70-30(d) 2000-05  6-19-00 1 App. A 2000-06  8- 7-00 1 App. A 2000-07 10- 7-00 1 App. A 2000-08 10- 2-00 1 App. A 2000-12 12-18-00 1       Added 38-5 2001-02  5-21-01 1 18-152 18-177-18-182       Rpld 18-183 2001-03  6- 4-01 1       Added 66-71-66-74 2001-01  7-16-01 1       Rpld 14-51-14-62, 14-76-14-89       Added 14-51, 14-52 2001-06 10-15-01 1       Added 66-76-66-87 11-  -01       Added App. B 2001-08 12- 3-01 1       Added 62-34(i) 62-37(b) 2002-02  9-26-02 1 62-26, 62-37 62-29(1), (2) 62-61, 62-62 62-69 2002-03 10-21-02 1 50-68 2003-01  3- 3-03 1       Rpld 30-31-30-38 2003-02  3-17-03 1-8       Added 24-26-24-33 2003-04  5-19-03 1 62-62 62-65(e) 2004-01 1-20-04 1 46-28 2004-02 12-20-04 1 22-9 2005-02 3-21-05 1 App. B,  6.2; 
6.3.1.A.8, B; 6.3.3.F; 
6.4.4.A; 6.5; 
6.5.2.A       Added App. B,  6.5.1.G-I; 6.5.6.D 2005-03 9-6-05 1       Rpld 54-59(d) 2005-04 11-7-05 1       Added App. B,  5.33 2006-01 3-6-06 1 App. B,  5.33.3(c) 2006-02 3-6-06 1-3 App. B, art. 4, 
sched. 2007-01 4-16-07 1 2-227(e) 2007-02 4-16-07 1       Added App. B,  3.11 App. B,  3.5.2, 
3.5.4, 3.6.1, 
12.3.4, 12.6.1 2007-04 10-1-07 1       Added App. B,  11.4.3 2008-01  3- 3-08 1       Added 2-126-2-133 2008-03 10- 6-08 1 2-296(a) 2008-04 12-15-08 1       Added 58-41-58-50 3       Rpld 58-26 2009-01  5-18-09 1       Added App. B,  5.2.1. F.       Added App. B,  7.2.2.i. App. B,  7.2.3.i. 2009-02  5-18-09 1       Added 18-301-18-308 2009-03  5-18-09 1 18-63 18-66 18-81, 18-82 18-122 2009-04  6-15-09 1 18-177 2009-05 10- 5-09 1       Added App. B,  8.20-8.35 2010-01  4- 5-10 1       Rpld 30-81-30-84       Added 30-81-30-93 2010-02  4-19-10 1       Added App. B,  4.5.11(10.-19.), (5.-8.), 4.5.12(10.-19.), (5.-8.)5.6.4, 5.34, 6.4.5, 6.4.6, 6.5.7, 6.6.1D., 7.3.5 App. B,  5.6.2, 5.20.1, 6.2, 6.3.3B., D., 6.4.3B., 6.4.4A., 6.5.2A., 6.6.1C., 7.3.6, 7.3.7       Rnbd App. B,  7.3.5-7.3.8       as App. B,  7.3.6-7.3.9       Rpld App. B,  6.5.1H. 2010-03  4-19-10 1       Added 26-125-26-127 2010-04  5-17-10 1       Added 1-12(g) 2011-01  2-21-11 1       Rpld 2-206-2-213 2011-02  2-21-11 1       Added App. B,  5.35 2011-04  5-16-11 1       Rpld 38-91(g) 2011-05  5-16-11 1 App. B,  8.27, 8.32.2, 8.32.4, 8.32.7       Added App. B,  8.32.3.C., D., E.       Rnbd App. B,  8.32.3.C-K.       as App. B,  8.32.3.F-N. 2011-06  8- 1-11 1       Added App. B,  6.5.3.B., App. B,  6.5.8, 6.5.9 2011-07  8-15-11 1       Added 34-60-34-68 2011-08  8-15-11 1 14-241, 14-242 2011-09  9- 6-11 1       Added 58-28, 58-29 2011-10 10- 3-11 1 18-37 2011-11 10- 3-11 1       Added App. B,  6.4.7 2011-12 10- 3-11 1, 10 App. A 2011-13 11-21-11 1       Added 18-29(a)(3), 18-29(c)(3), 18-32(a)(3) 18-31 2011-14 12- 5-11 1       Added 38-60 2012-01  3- 5-12 1 App. B,  8.27 2012-03  4-16-12 1       Added 14-271-14-283 2012-04  6-18-12 3-7       Added 30-10 9 30-63 2012-05  6-18-12 3 58-1 2012-06  7- 2-12 1 2-226-2-232 2012-07  7- 2-12 1 62-29(3)a., b. 2013-03  9- 3-13 1       Added 18-181(a)(3) 2013-04 10- 7-13 1       Added 70-3 2013-05 11-18-13 1 38-147 2013-06 12- 2-13 1 38-141 2013-07 12- 2-13 1       Added 62-91-62-103 2014-03  5-19-14 1       Added 14-301-14-322 2015-01  6- 1-15 1 50-1 2015-03  8- 3-15 1       Added App. B,  3.3.5 2015-04  8- 3-15 1 6-134 2016-01  2- 1-16 1       Added 14-350 2016-02  2- 1-16 1       Added 14-355 2016-03  2-15-16 1 10-28 2016-04  4- 4-16 1 App. B,  8.27 App. B,  8.35.1 2016-05  5- 2-16 1 App. B,  5.20.1 2016-06  5- 2-16 1       Added App. B,  5.36 2016-07  5- 2-16 1 App. B,  5.7 2016-08  5- 2-16 1 App. B,  8.27 2016-09  5- 2-16 1 App. B,  2.1 2016-10  9- 6-16 1       Added 10-4 2016-11  8-15-16 1       Added 70-4 2017-02  4- 3-17 1       Added 14-305(c) 2017-03  5-15-17 1 62-92(a) 2017-04 11- 6-17 1 Ch. 50, art. II(tit.) Ch. 50, art. III(tit.)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 15.231 et seq. Char.  11.02 Ch. 2 15.261 et seq. 1-13 Ch. 2 15.261-15.275 2-229 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2 24.201 et seq. 58-11(5.15f) 58-11(5.82) 25.527 62-68 28.601 et seq. 34-1 29.1 et seq. Ch. 30 30-63 35.441 et seq. 18-181 81.1 18-81 81.1 et seq. 2-281 81.1c Char.  1.01 102.14 10-1, 10-2 117.1 et seq. Char.  1.01 117.3 30-61 117.3(a) Char.  5.01 Char.  7.07 117.3(c) Char.  9.03 117.3(d) Char.  2.03 117.3(e) Char.  2.01 117.3(f) Char.  7.03 117.3(h) Char.  6.02 117.3(k) Char.  5.08 30-63 58-1 117.3(l) Char.  2.06 117.3(m) Char.  11.02 117.4a Ch. 46 117.4a(1) Char.  8.02 117.4b Ch. 46 117.4d Char.  7.17 Ch. 46 117.4i 1-12 117.4j(3) Char.  1.03 117.5 Ch. 46 117.5b 1-1 117.61 et seq. Char.  1.02 124.151 et seq. Ch. 66 125.31 et seq. 2-226 2-228 125.583a App. B,  11.8 125.651 et seq. 2-246 2-248 125.1102 58-66 125.1351 et seq. App. B,  7.1.13 125.1415a 2-284 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 14 14-26 14-101 14-121 125.1501-125.1531 14-311 14-312 125.3801 et seq. 2-226 2-228 125.3815 2-227 128.1 et seq. Ch. 22 129.12 Char.  6.09 131.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 141.101 et seq. 62-29 62-33 62-71 141.421 et seq. Char. Art. 6 168.1 et seq. Char.  9.03 168.492 Char.  9.01 168.654 et seq. Char.  9.02 205.93 58.11(5.62e) 211.1 et seq. Char.  7.04 Char.  7.06 211.2 Char.  7.05 211.30a Char.  7.09 211.43b Char.  6.09 211.47 Char.  7.13 211.55 et seq. Char.  7.14 211.741 et seq. Ch. 46 211.746 46-22 211.761 et seq. Ch. 46 247.51 Ch. 66 247.61 et seq. Ch. 66 66-93 247.71 66-94 257.1 et seq. Ch. 58 257.1-257.923 58-1 257.204a 58-11(5.15b) 257.212 58-11(5.62a) 257.266a, b 58-11(5.62c) 257.252a et seq. 58-11(2.5a) 257.252b 58-11(2.5b) 257.252c 58-11(2.5c) 257.252d 58-11(2.5d) 257.252e 58-11(2.5e) 257.252f 58-11(2.5f) 257.252g 58-11(2.5g) 257.319 38-91 257.322, 257.323 58-11(5.15f) 257.605, 257.606 Ch. 58 257.610 Ch. 58 257.625 et seq. 58-11(5.15g) 257.625(1) 58-11(5.15b) 257.625(1)(C) 58-1 257.625(3) 58-11(5.15b) 257.625b 58-11(5.15b) 257.625f 58-11(5.15g) 257.710d 58-11(5.82) 257.710e 58-11(5.97) 257.904(1)(a) 58-11(5.62b) 257.904(1)(b) 58-11(5.62b) 257.941 et seq. 58-171 257.951 58-9 257.951 et seq. 58-9 257.1501 et seq. 58-122 281.1001 et seq. Ch. 70 281.1008 70-2 287.261 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 287.290 Ch. 10 287.301 et seq. 10-32 324.20101 et seq.       34-62 325.1001 62-42 325.1001-325.1023 62-27 325.1023 62-42 333.6107 38-91 333.7101 et seq.       38-60 333.12571 et seq.       62-63 333.12701 et seq.       14-62 338.881 et seq. 14-85, 14-86 338.901 et seq. 14-62 338.901-338.917 62-42 338.971 et seq. 14-62 338.2301 et seq. 14-52 436.2 38-117 436.22 38-91 436.33 38-91 436.33A(1) 38-91 436.33b 38-117 436.1703 58-11(5.62d) 552.601-552.650 58-11(5.62d) 560.101 et seq. Ch. 54 54-27 54-43 560.263 54-1 600.8312 58-11(2.5e) 712A.1-712A.32 38-91 722.1-722.6 38-91 750.49 et seq. Ch. 10 750.200 et seq. Ch. 30 750.240 et seq. Ch. 30 750.243a et seq. 30-63 750.463 et seq. Ch. 6 752.811 Ch. 6 760.1-776.22 58-11(5.15) 765.9c 14-5  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
MSA Section  
this Code 2.212 et seq. 1-2 3.560(101) et seq.       58-11(5.15f) 58-11(5.82) 3.572 Char.  6.09 4.55(9) et seq. Ch. 30 4.450(1) et seq. 34-1 4.559(1) et seq. 30-63 4.1700(71) et seq.       Ch. 2 4.1800(11) et seq.       1-13 Ch. 2 4.1801(1) et seq. Char.  11.02 Ch. 2 5.1591 et seq. 2-281 5.1591(3) Char.  1.01 5.1740 18-81 5.1819 10-1, 10-2 5.1889 62-26 5.2071 et seq. Char.  1.01 5.2073(a) Char.  5.01 Char.  7.07 5.2073(c) Char.  9.03 5.2073(d) Char.  2.03 5.2073(e) Char.  2.01 5.2073(f) Char.  7.03 5.2073(h) Char.  6.02 5.2073(k) Char.  5.08 30-63 5.2073(l) Char.  2.06 5.2073(m) Char.  11.02 5.2074 Ch. 46 5.2074(1) Char.  8.02 5.2075 Ch. 46 5.2077 Char.  7.17 Ch. 46 5.2082 1-12 30-63  
MSA Section  
this Code 5.2083(3) Char.  1.03 5.2084 Ch. 46 5.2084(2) 1-1 5.2085 et seq. Char.  1.02 5.2731 et seq. 62-26 62-29 62-33 62-71 5.2891 62-68 5.2949(1) et seq. Ch. 14 14-26 14-101 14-121 5.2949(32) et seq.       14-52 5.2991 et seq. 2-226 2-228 5.3011 et seq. 2-246 2-248 5.3165 Ch. 22 5.3188(1) et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 5.3228(21) et seq.       Char. Art. 6 5.3534(1) et seq. Ch. 46 5.3534(6) 46-22 5.3536(1) et seq. Ch. 46 5.24949(1) et seq.       14-51 6.1001 et seq. Char.  9.03 6.1492 Char.  9.01 6.1654 et seq. Char.  9.02 7.1 et seq. Char.  7.06 7.2 Char.  7.05 7.7 et seq. Char.  7.04 7.30(1) Char.  7.09 7.86 Char.  6.09 7.91 Char.  7.13  
Editor's note- The Michigan Statues Annotated are obsolete and will no longer be updated. References to MSA will be removed from the Code text as pages are supplemented. 
MSA Section  
this Code 7.99 et seq. Char.  7.14 9.631(1) 66-93 9.631(1) et seq. Ch. 66 9.631(11) 66-94 9.1801 et seq. Ch. 58 9.1904(1) 58-11(5.15b) 9.1952(1) et seq. 58-11(2.5a) 9.1952(2) 58-11(2.5b) 9.1952(3) 58-11(2.5c) 9.1952(4) 58-11(2.5d) 9.1952(5) 58-11(2.5e) 9.1952(6) 58-11(2.5f) 9.1952(7) 58-11(2.5g) 9.2022, 9.2023 58-11(5.15f) 9.2305, 9.2306 Ch. 58 9.2310 Ch. 58 9.2325 58-11(5.15b) 9.2325 et seq. 58-11(5.15g) 9.2325(1) 58-11(5.15b) 9.2325(2) 58-11(5.15b) 9.2410(4) 58-11(5.82) 9.2410(5) 58-11(5.97) 9.2641 et seq. 58-171 9.2651 58-9 9.2651 et seq. 58-9 9.3200(1) et seq. 58-122 12.15(12751) et seq.       62-63 12.270(1) et seq. Ch. 66 12.511 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 12.541 Ch. 10 12.545(21) et seq.       10-32 14.15(12701) 14-62 14.451 et seq. 14-62 16.114(15a) 2-284 18.86(1) et seq. 14-62 18.204(1) et seq. 14-85, 14-86 18.972 38-117 18.1004(2) 38-117 18.1287(1) et seq.       Ch. 70 18.1287(8) 70-2 19.855(2) 58-66 26.430 et seq. 54-43 26.430(101) et seq.       Ch. 54 54-27 26.430(263) 54-1 27A.8312 58-11(2.5e) tit. 28 Ch. 38 28.181 Ch. 66 28.244 et seq. Ch. 10 28.397 et seq. Ch. 30 28.437 et seq. Ch. 30 28.440(1) et seq. 30-63 28.643(101) Ch. 6 28.718 et seq. Ch. 6  
Section 12.1. - Purpose of board. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Act 207 of Public Acts of 1921, as amended, the Zoning Board of Appeals is established to ensure that the objectives of this Ordinance may be more fully and equitably achieved, that a means be provided for competent interpretation of this Ordinance, that reasonable flexibility be provided in the application of this Ordinance, and that the public health, safety, and welfare is protected. 
Section 12.2. - Membership, terms of office. 
    The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the City Council. The members shall be selected from the registered electors of the City. An elected officer or any employee of the City shall not serve as a member of the Zoning Board. 
    Terms shall be for three (3) years or until a successor is appointed and qualified. A successor shall be appointed not more than one (1) month after the term of the preceding member has expired. All vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term. 
    Members of the Board of Appeals shall be removable by the Council for non-performance of duty or misconduct in office upon written charges and after public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest shall constitute misconduct of office. 
Section 12.3. - Organization and procedures. 
12.3.1.  Filing Fee. An appeal may be taken by a person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the City. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals must be filed within fifteen working (15) days from the date that the decision to be appealed is effective. An appeal is taken by filing with the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The officer or body from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. An appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth by the City Council. 
12.3.2.  Officers. The Board shall elect from its membership a chairman, vice chairman, and such officers as may be necessary. The Board is authorized to appoint an executive secretary. 
12.3.3.  Rules of Procedure. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure. These rules shall be available for public inspection at the office of the Board. The rules as adopted shall include the following: 
A.  Meetings shall be held regularly each month according to the rules, at a fixed place and open to the public, except that a meeting shall not be required if there is no business to come before the Board. 
B.  The presence of four (4) members shall constitute a quorum, and it shall take a concurring vote of four (4) members to reverse an order or decision of the building inspector, planning commission, or any other official to whom authority is granted by this chapter to decide on any matter upon which it is required to pass by this chapter, or to grant a variance from the provisions thereof. It shall take a concurring vote of four (4) members to grant variance from the uses of land permitted in the Ordinance. 
C.  A record of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept by the Board, relating evidence presented by the applicant and the resolution by the Board, the vote of each member on each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. These shall be a public record and immediately filed in the office of the Board. 
D.  The Board shall receive reasonable assistance from the City departments in carrying out the functions of the Board. 
12.3.4.  Hearings. The Board of Appeals shall fix a time for the hearing of an appeal as specified in Section 3.11 of this Zoning Ordinance. The Board of Appeals shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and shall make an order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the Board of Appeals may vary or modify any of the ordinance rules, regulations, or provisions relating to the construction, or structural changes in equipment, or alteration of buildings or structures, or the use of the land, buildings or structure, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 4-16-07) 
Section 12.4. - Effect of appeal. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Code Enforcement Officer certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed with him that, for reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, or on application, by the Circuit Court, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, when due cause can be shown. 
Section 12.5. - Duties and powers of the zoning board of appeals. 
    The Board of Appeals may affirm or reverse, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the office or body from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall also have the following specified duties and powers: 
12.5.1.  Review. Shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative official or body charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
12.5.2.  Interpretation. Shall have the power to: 
A.  Hear and decide upon appeals for the interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.  Determine the precise location of the boundary lines between zoning districts. 
C.  Classify a use which is not specifically mentioned along with a comparable permitted or prohibited use for the purpose of the use regulations in any zoning district. 
12.5.3.  Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to authorize upon appeal, specific variances from such dimensional requirements as lot area and width regulations, building height, and bulk regulations, yard width and depth regulations, and such requirements as off-street parking and loading space as specified in this Ordinance when all the basic standards listed below are satisfied; that any variance granted: 
A.  Will not be contrary to the public interest and will not be contrary to the spirit and intent of this Ordinance. 
B.  Shall not permit the establishment within a zoning district of any use which is not permitted by right within the district. 
C.  Will not cause any adverse effect to property in the vicinity or in the zoning district of the City. 
D.  Is not one where the specific conditions pertaining to the property are so general or recurrent in nature as to make the formulation of a general regulation for such conditions practicable. 
E.  Affects only property subject to exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions that do not generally apply to other property or uses in the vicinity, and have not resulted from any act of the applicant. 
F.  Must be granted in order to avoid practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship which would result from enforcement of the strict letter of this Ordinance. 
12.5.4.  Conditions. In addition to the foregoing conditions, the following rules shall be applied in the granting of variances. 
A.  The Board of Appeals may impose reasonable conditions upon an affirmative decision. The conditions may include conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused to the land used for activity, to protect natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall do all of the following: 
1.  Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those who will use the land, use, or activity under consideration; residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity; and the community as a whole. 
2.  Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
3.  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations; be related to the standards established for the land use or activity under consideration; and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and the land owner. The Board shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. 
B.  No more than the minimum variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall be granted which is necessary to relieve the practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. 
C.  An application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the last denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of changed conditions found upon inspection by the Board to be valid. 
D.  Each variance granted shall become null and void unless the provisions of the variance have been utilized by the applicant within six (6) months after the granting of the variance. 
E.  Prior to granting a variance, all other existing infractions related to this Ordinance or other City codes related to the variance request shall be resolved. 
Section 12.6. - Appeal to circuit court. 
12.6.1.  The decision of the Board of Appeals rendered pursuant to Article XII shall be final. However, a party aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the Circuit Court. Upon appeal, the Circuit Court shall review the record and decision of the Board of Appeals to insure that the decision: 
A.  Complies with the Constitution and Laws of the State. 
B.  Is based upon proper procedure. 
C.  Is supported by competent materials, and substantial evidence on the record. 
D.  Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by law to the Board of Appeals. 
12.6.2.  If the court finds the record of the Board of Appeals inadequate to make the review required by this section, or that there is additional evidence which is material and with good reason was not presented to the Board of Appeals on conditions which the court considers proper. The Board of Appeals may modify its findings and decision as a result of the new proceedings, or may affirm its original decision. The supplementary record and decision shall be filed with the Court. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 4-16-07) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1975 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1975 Code, as updated through December 17, 1990, which are included herein. Sections of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1975 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-6 2-296-2-301 1-46-1-64 46-1-46-19 1-65 46-27 1-66, 1-67 46-20, 46-21 1-69-1-72 46-23-46-26 1-80-1-83 2-36-2-39 1-111 2-51 1-114 2-52 1-120-1-123 2-311-2-314 2-1-2-5 6-36-6-40 2-5(g) 6-41 2-6 6-42 2-7 6-26 2-67-2-77 6-81-6-91 3-1 10-1 3-4, 3-5 10-2, 10-3 3-15-3-21 10-26-10-32 3-24 10-33 4-1 58-201 4-2, 4-3 58-213, 58-214 4-4, 4-5 58-209, 58-210 4-6, 4-7 58-202, 58-203 4-8 58-211 4-19, 4-20 58-204, 58-205 4-21-4-23 58-206 4-24, 4-25 58-207, 58-208 4-26 58-212 5-1, 5-2 14-1, 14-2 5-4 14-3 5-12-5-14 14-27-14-29 5-73 14-122 5-214-5-221 14-151-14-158 5-232-5-241 14-181-14-190 5-251-5-254 14-211-14-214 5-255-5-259 14-214-14-218 6-1-6-7 22-31-22-37 6-8, 6-9 22-36 6-10, 6-11 22-38, 22-39 6-12 22-1 6-13-6-15 22-3-22-5 6-16 22-7 6-17 22-6 6-18 22-8 6-19 22-2 6-21 22-9 6-30-6-34 2-86-2-90 6-35-6-37 2-91 6-38, 6-39 2-92, 2-93 6-46-6-50 2-106-2-110 6-51-6-53 2-111 6-54, 6-55 2-112, 2-113 6-62-6-66 2-126-2-130 6-67-6-69 2-131 6-70, 6-71 2-132, 2-133 6-78-6-82 2-146-2-150 6-83-6-85 2-151 6-86, 6-87 2-152, 2-153 6-94-6-98 2-166-2-170 6-99-6-101 2-171 6-102, 6-103 2-172, 2-173 6-110-6-114 2-186-2-190 6-115-6-117 2-191 6-118, 6-119 2-192, 2-193 6-126-6-130 2-206-2-210 6-131-6-133 2-211 6-134, 6-135 2-212, 2-213 6-141, 6-142 2-226, 2-227 6-143-6-148 2-227-2-232 6-156-6-161 2-246-2-251 7-1-7-3 26-26-26-28 8-1-8-3 30-1 8-4-8-11 30-2-30-9 8-19-8-23 30-31-30-35 8-24-8-26 30-36 8-27, 8-28 30-37, 30-38 8-63-8-66 30-81-30-84 9-1 42-1 9-2 42-3 9-2(a) 42-2 9-3-9-5 42-4-42-6 9-7-9-13 42-7-42-13 10-1, 10-2 70-1, 70-2 10-13-10-20 70-26-70-33 10-40, 10-41 70-56, 70-57 11-12 18-25 11-13, 11-14 18-28, 18-29 11-15 18-31 11-16 18-30 11-17-11-22 18-32-18-37 12-2, 12-3 58-26, 58-27 12-14-12-18 58-41-58-45 12-29-12-36 58-171-58-178 12-47-12-54 58-91-58-98 12-60 58-121 12-61, 12-62 58-123, 58-124 12-63 58-126 12-64 58-125 12-65 58-127 12-67 58-122 12-68, 12-69 58-128, 58-129 13-6.1 38-3 13-11 38-4 13-22, 13-23 38-31, 38-32 13-24 38-37 13-25-13-27 38-33-38-35 13-29 38-38 13-30 38-36 13-31 38-39 13-41-13-43 38-61-38-63 13-44-13-47 38-65-38-68 13-48 38-64 13-60-13-63 38-91-38-94 13-70-13-74 38-116-38-120 15-1 34-1 15-12-15-21 34-26-34-35 15-30-15-33 34-56-34-59 16-1-16-3 50-1-50-3 16-5-16-8 50-4-50-7 16-20-16-26 50-31-50-37 16-37-16-42 50-61-50-66 16-53-16-59 50-86-50-92 16-70-16-77 50-116-50-123 16-78 50-126 16-79 50-128 16-80 50-127 16-81 50-124 16-82, 16-83 50-129, 50-130 16-84 50-133 16-85 50-131 16-86 50-125 16-87 50-132 16-88, 16-89 50-134, 50-135 17-1 54-1 17-13-17-16 54-26-54-29 17-27-17-29 54-41-54-43 17-30, 17-31 54-43, 54-44 17-42-17-50 54-56-54-64 17-115-17-121 26-76-26-82 18-1-18-4 2-281-2-284 18-101 18-102 19-1 18-61 19-3-19-6 18-63-18-66 19-21 18-82 19-23, 19-24 18-83, 18-84 20-11-20-15 66-26-66-30 20-26-20-32 66-41-66-47 20-33 66-49 20-34 66-51 20-35 66-50 20-36 66-48 20-37 66-52 20-48 66-68 20-49 66-67 20-50 66-66 20-51, 20-52 66-69, 66-70 20-63-20-67 66-91-66-95 20-68 66-97 20-69 66-96 20-70 66-98 21-1 62-26 21-2.1-21-2.6 62-28-62-33 21-3-21-7 62-41-62-45 21-21-21-31 62-61-62-71 21-33 62-72 21-34 62-74 21-35 62-73 21-36, 21-37 62-75, 62-76  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1975 Code, as updated through December 17, 1990, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1975 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede December 17, 1990, but which were never included in the 1975 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since December 17, 1990, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 46  8- 9-79 2 58-10 1991-01  1-21-91 1 54-58 1991-02  2- 4-91 1 54-63 1991-03  8-19-91 1 2-227 2, 3 2-229, 2-230 1991-05 12- 2-91 1 38-1 1992-01  2-17-92 1-5 58-66-58-70 1992-02  4-20-92 1 62-29 1992-03  5- 4-92 1 14-26 2 14-29 1992-04  5- 4-92 1 62-70 1992-09 12-21-92 1(5-55) 14-101 1(5-68) 14-121 1993-01  2- 1-93 1(13-80) 38-2 1993-03 10- 4-93 1(22-1)-1(22-3) 21-1-21-3 1(22-4) 21-4, 21-5 1(22-6)-1(22-17) 21-6-21-17 4 21-18 1993-05 12- 6-93 1(5-14.5) 14-52 1(5-16)-1(5-25) 14-53-14-62 1(5-26) 14-76-14-84 1(5-27) 14-85, 14-86 1(5-28)-1(5-30) 14-87-14-89 1993-06 12-20-93 1(5-15) 14-51 1994-03  7- 5-94 1-7       Added Adopt. ord., p. ix 1994-04  9- 6-94 1-6       Added 26-101-26-106 1995-01  6-19-95 1 14-26 2 14-29 1995-04  8-21-95 1       Added 6-101-6-109 1995-05 11- 6-95 1       Added 18-181-18-183 1996-01  3- 4-96 1       Added 14-4       Added 14-5 1996-04  5- 6-96 1 18-153 1996-05  7- 1-96 1 14-151(a), (d) 1996-06  7- 1-96 1 14-186 1996-07  7- 1-96 1       Added 18-201-18-206       Added 18-221-18-228       Added 18-241-18-245 1996-13 10- 7-96 1 38-4 1996-17 12- 2-96 1       Added 54-63(6) 1997-02  2- 3-97 1, 2       Added 14-241, 14-242 1997-05  2-17-97 1       Added 6-131-6-144 1997-06  2-17-97 1 62-27 62-42 1997-07  7- 7-97 1 14-5 2 62-75 1997-09  8-18-97 1       Added 21-31-21-56 1997-10 11- 3-97 1 14-51 1997-11 11- 3-97 1       Added 38-149(b)(13) 1997-12 11- 3-97 1       Rpld 58-41-58-45 1997-15 12-15-97 1 38-91 2       Rpld 38-92 3 38-93 1998-01  6- 1-98 1, 2       Added 30-61-30-63 1998-02  6-15-98 1       Added 62-42(d) 1998-03  7- 6-98 1 38-36(b) 1998-04  7- 6-98 1 14-26       Rpld 14-29 1998-06 10-19-98 1       Rpld 50-61-50-66       Added 50-61-50-71 1999-02  4- 5-99 1 38-33 1999-03  6-21-99 1       Added 26-29 1999-04  8- 2-99 1 38-277 1999-07  9-15-99 1       Added 36-1-36-6 1999-08  9- 7-99 1 1-2 1-12 1999-09  9- 7-99 1 6-91(b) 6-109(b) 10-28       Added 14-29 14-88 14-101(e) 14-122 14-242 18-37 26-28(d) 30-5 30-84 38-1(c) 38-4(c), (d) 42-13 50-7 50-37 50-92 58-98 58-210 66-52 66-98 70-33 70-58 1999-11  9- 7-99 1       Rpld 70-26-70-33       Added 70-26-70-33 1999-12 10-18-99 1 62-29(8) 62-38(b) 1999-13 11-15-99 1 58-11 2000-01  1- 3-00 1 App. A 2000-02  3-20-00 1       Added 58-1 2000-03  3-20-00 1 70-30(d) 2000-05  6-19-00 1 App. A 2000-06  8- 7-00 1 App. A 2000-07 10- 7-00 1 App. A 2000-08 10- 2-00 1 App. A 2000-12 12-18-00 1       Added 38-5 2001-02  5-21-01 1 18-152 18-177-18-182       Rpld 18-183 2001-03  6- 4-01 1       Added 66-71-66-74 2001-01  7-16-01 1       Rpld 14-51-14-62, 14-76-14-89       Added 14-51, 14-52 2001-06 10-15-01 1       Added 66-76-66-87 11-  -01       Added App. B 2001-08 12- 3-01 1       Added 62-34(i) 62-37(b) 2002-02  9-26-02 1 62-26, 62-37 62-29(1), (2) 62-61, 62-62 62-69 2002-03 10-21-02 1 50-68 2003-01  3- 3-03 1       Rpld 30-31-30-38 2003-02  3-17-03 1-8       Added 24-26-24-33 2003-04  5-19-03 1 62-62 62-65(e) 2004-01 1-20-04 1 46-28 2004-02 12-20-04 1 22-9 2005-02 3-21-05 1 App. B,  6.2; 
6.3.1.A.8, B; 6.3.3.F; 
6.4.4.A; 6.5; 
6.5.2.A       Added App. B,  6.5.1.G-I; 6.5.6.D 2005-03 9-6-05 1       Rpld 54-59(d) 2005-04 11-7-05 1       Added App. B,  5.33 2006-01 3-6-06 1 App. B,  5.33.3(c) 2006-02 3-6-06 1-3 App. B, art. 4, 
sched. 2007-01 4-16-07 1 2-227(e) 2007-02 4-16-07 1       Added App. B,  3.11 App. B,  3.5.2, 
3.5.4, 3.6.1, 
12.3.4, 12.6.1 2007-04 10-1-07 1       Added App. B,  11.4.3 2008-01  3- 3-08 1       Added 2-126-2-133 2008-03 10- 6-08 1 2-296(a) 2008-04 12-15-08 1       Added 58-41-58-50 3       Rpld 58-26 2009-01  5-18-09 1       Added App. B,  5.2.1. F.       Added App. B,  7.2.2.i. App. B,  7.2.3.i. 2009-02  5-18-09 1       Added 18-301-18-308 2009-03  5-18-09 1 18-63 18-66 18-81, 18-82 18-122 2009-04  6-15-09 1 18-177 2009-05 10- 5-09 1       Added App. B,  8.20-8.35 2010-01  4- 5-10 1       Rpld 30-81-30-84       Added 30-81-30-93 2010-02  4-19-10 1       Added App. B,  4.5.11(10.-19.), (5.-8.), 4.5.12(10.-19.), (5.-8.)5.6.4, 5.34, 6.4.5, 6.4.6, 6.5.7, 6.6.1D., 7.3.5 App. B,  5.6.2, 5.20.1, 6.2, 6.3.3B., D., 6.4.3B., 6.4.4A., 6.5.2A., 6.6.1C., 7.3.6, 7.3.7       Rnbd App. B,  7.3.5-7.3.8       as App. B,  7.3.6-7.3.9       Rpld App. B,  6.5.1H. 2010-03  4-19-10 1       Added 26-125-26-127 2010-04  5-17-10 1       Added 1-12(g) 2011-01  2-21-11 1       Rpld 2-206-2-213 2011-02  2-21-11 1       Added App. B,  5.35 2011-04  5-16-11 1       Rpld 38-91(g) 2011-05  5-16-11 1 App. B,  8.27, 8.32.2, 8.32.4, 8.32.7       Added App. B,  8.32.3.C., D., E.       Rnbd App. B,  8.32.3.C-K.       as App. B,  8.32.3.F-N. 2011-06  8- 1-11 1       Added App. B,  6.5.3.B., App. B,  6.5.8, 6.5.9 2011-07  8-15-11 1       Added 34-60-34-68 2011-08  8-15-11 1 14-241, 14-242 2011-09  9- 6-11 1       Added 58-28, 58-29 2011-10 10- 3-11 1 18-37 2011-11 10- 3-11 1       Added App. B,  6.4.7 2011-12 10- 3-11 1, 10 App. A 2011-13 11-21-11 1       Added 18-29(a)(3), 18-29(c)(3), 18-32(a)(3) 18-31 2011-14 12- 5-11 1       Added 38-60 2012-01  3- 5-12 1 App. B,  8.27 2012-03  4-16-12 1       Added 14-271-14-283 2012-04  6-18-12 3-7       Added 30-10 9 30-63 2012-05  6-18-12 3 58-1 2012-06  7- 2-12 1 2-226-2-232 2012-07  7- 2-12 1 62-29(3)a., b. 2013-03  9- 3-13 1       Added 18-181(a)(3) 2013-04 10- 7-13 1       Added 70-3 2013-05 11-18-13 1 38-147 2013-06 12- 2-13 1 38-141 2013-07 12- 2-13 1       Added 62-91-62-103 2014-03  5-19-14 1       Added 14-301-14-322 2015-01  6- 1-15 1 50-1 2015-03  8- 3-15 1       Added App. B,  3.3.5 2015-04  8- 3-15 1 6-134 2016-01  2- 1-16 1       Added 14-350 2016-02  2- 1-16 1       Added 14-355 2016-03  2-15-16 1 10-28 2016-04  4- 4-16 1 App. B,  8.27 App. B,  8.35.1 2016-05  5- 2-16 1 App. B,  5.20.1 2016-06  5- 2-16 1       Added App. B,  5.36 2016-07  5- 2-16 1 App. B,  5.7 2016-08  5- 2-16 1 App. B,  8.27 2016-09  5- 2-16 1 App. B,  2.1 2016-10  9- 6-16 1       Added 10-4 2016-11  8-15-16 1       Added 70-4 2017-02  4- 3-17 1       Added 14-305(c) 2017-03  5-15-17 1 62-92(a) 2017-04 11- 6-17 1 Ch. 50, art. II(tit.) Ch. 50, art. III(tit.)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 15.231 et seq. Char.  11.02 Ch. 2 15.261 et seq. 1-13 Ch. 2 15.261-15.275 2-229 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2 24.201 et seq. 58-11(5.15f) 58-11(5.82) 25.527 62-68 28.601 et seq. 34-1 29.1 et seq. Ch. 30 30-63 35.441 et seq. 18-181 81.1 18-81 81.1 et seq. 2-281 81.1c Char.  1.01 102.14 10-1, 10-2 117.1 et seq. Char.  1.01 117.3 30-61 117.3(a) Char.  5.01 Char.  7.07 117.3(c) Char.  9.03 117.3(d) Char.  2.03 117.3(e) Char.  2.01 117.3(f) Char.  7.03 117.3(h) Char.  6.02 117.3(k) Char.  5.08 30-63 58-1 117.3(l) Char.  2.06 117.3(m) Char.  11.02 117.4a Ch. 46 117.4a(1) Char.  8.02 117.4b Ch. 46 117.4d Char.  7.17 Ch. 46 117.4i 1-12 117.4j(3) Char.  1.03 117.5 Ch. 46 117.5b 1-1 117.61 et seq. Char.  1.02 124.151 et seq. Ch. 66 125.31 et seq. 2-226 2-228 125.583a App. B,  11.8 125.651 et seq. 2-246 2-248 125.1102 58-66 125.1351 et seq. App. B,  7.1.13 125.1415a 2-284 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 14 14-26 14-101 14-121 125.1501-125.1531 14-311 14-312 125.3801 et seq. 2-226 2-228 125.3815 2-227 128.1 et seq. Ch. 22 129.12 Char.  6.09 131.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 141.101 et seq. 62-29 62-33 62-71 141.421 et seq. Char. Art. 6 168.1 et seq. Char.  9.03 168.492 Char.  9.01 168.654 et seq. Char.  9.02 205.93 58.11(5.62e) 211.1 et seq. Char.  7.04 Char.  7.06 211.2 Char.  7.05 211.30a Char.  7.09 211.43b Char.  6.09 211.47 Char.  7.13 211.55 et seq. Char.  7.14 211.741 et seq. Ch. 46 211.746 46-22 211.761 et seq. Ch. 46 247.51 Ch. 66 247.61 et seq. Ch. 66 66-93 247.71 66-94 257.1 et seq. Ch. 58 257.1-257.923 58-1 257.204a 58-11(5.15b) 257.212 58-11(5.62a) 257.266a, b 58-11(5.62c) 257.252a et seq. 58-11(2.5a) 257.252b 58-11(2.5b) 257.252c 58-11(2.5c) 257.252d 58-11(2.5d) 257.252e 58-11(2.5e) 257.252f 58-11(2.5f) 257.252g 58-11(2.5g) 257.319 38-91 257.322, 257.323 58-11(5.15f) 257.605, 257.606 Ch. 58 257.610 Ch. 58 257.625 et seq. 58-11(5.15g) 257.625(1) 58-11(5.15b) 257.625(1)(C) 58-1 257.625(3) 58-11(5.15b) 257.625b 58-11(5.15b) 257.625f 58-11(5.15g) 257.710d 58-11(5.82) 257.710e 58-11(5.97) 257.904(1)(a) 58-11(5.62b) 257.904(1)(b) 58-11(5.62b) 257.941 et seq. 58-171 257.951 58-9 257.951 et seq. 58-9 257.1501 et seq. 58-122 281.1001 et seq. Ch. 70 281.1008 70-2 287.261 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 287.290 Ch. 10 287.301 et seq. 10-32 324.20101 et seq.       34-62 325.1001 62-42 325.1001-325.1023 62-27 325.1023 62-42 333.6107 38-91 333.7101 et seq.       38-60 333.12571 et seq.       62-63 333.12701 et seq.       14-62 338.881 et seq. 14-85, 14-86 338.901 et seq. 14-62 338.901-338.917 62-42 338.971 et seq. 14-62 338.2301 et seq. 14-52 436.2 38-117 436.22 38-91 436.33 38-91 436.33A(1) 38-91 436.33b 38-117 436.1703 58-11(5.62d) 552.601-552.650 58-11(5.62d) 560.101 et seq. Ch. 54 54-27 54-43 560.263 54-1 600.8312 58-11(2.5e) 712A.1-712A.32 38-91 722.1-722.6 38-91 750.49 et seq. Ch. 10 750.200 et seq. Ch. 30 750.240 et seq. Ch. 30 750.243a et seq. 30-63 750.463 et seq. Ch. 6 752.811 Ch. 6 760.1-776.22 58-11(5.15) 765.9c 14-5  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
MSA Section  
this Code 2.212 et seq. 1-2 3.560(101) et seq.       58-11(5.15f) 58-11(5.82) 3.572 Char.  6.09 4.55(9) et seq. Ch. 30 4.450(1) et seq. 34-1 4.559(1) et seq. 30-63 4.1700(71) et seq.       Ch. 2 4.1800(11) et seq.       1-13 Ch. 2 4.1801(1) et seq. Char.  11.02 Ch. 2 5.1591 et seq. 2-281 5.1591(3) Char.  1.01 5.1740 18-81 5.1819 10-1, 10-2 5.1889 62-26 5.2071 et seq. Char.  1.01 5.2073(a) Char.  5.01 Char.  7.07 5.2073(c) Char.  9.03 5.2073(d) Char.  2.03 5.2073(e) Char.  2.01 5.2073(f) Char.  7.03 5.2073(h) Char.  6.02 5.2073(k) Char.  5.08 30-63 5.2073(l) Char.  2.06 5.2073(m) Char.  11.02 5.2074 Ch. 46 5.2074(1) Char.  8.02 5.2075 Ch. 46 5.2077 Char.  7.17 Ch. 46 5.2082 1-12 30-63  
MSA Section  
this Code 5.2083(3) Char.  1.03 5.2084 Ch. 46 5.2084(2) 1-1 5.2085 et seq. Char.  1.02 5.2731 et seq. 62-26 62-29 62-33 62-71 5.2891 62-68 5.2949(1) et seq. Ch. 14 14-26 14-101 14-121 5.2949(32) et seq.       14-52 5.2991 et seq. 2-226 2-228 5.3011 et seq. 2-246 2-248 5.3165 Ch. 22 5.3188(1) et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 5.3228(21) et seq.       Char. Art. 6 5.3534(1) et seq. Ch. 46 5.3534(6) 46-22 5.3536(1) et seq. Ch. 46 5.24949(1) et seq.       14-51 6.1001 et seq. Char.  9.03 6.1492 Char.  9.01 6.1654 et seq. Char.  9.02 7.1 et seq. Char.  7.06 7.2 Char.  7.05 7.7 et seq. Char.  7.04 7.30(1) Char.  7.09 7.86 Char.  6.09 7.91 Char.  7.13  
Editor's note- The Michigan Statues Annotated are obsolete and will no longer be updated. References to MSA will be removed from the Code text as pages are supplemented. 
MSA Section  
this Code 7.99 et seq. Char.  7.14 9.631(1) 66-93 9.631(1) et seq. Ch. 66 9.631(11) 66-94 9.1801 et seq. Ch. 58 9.1904(1) 58-11(5.15b) 9.1952(1) et seq. 58-11(2.5a) 9.1952(2) 58-11(2.5b) 9.1952(3) 58-11(2.5c) 9.1952(4) 58-11(2.5d) 9.1952(5) 58-11(2.5e) 9.1952(6) 58-11(2.5f) 9.1952(7) 58-11(2.5g) 9.2022, 9.2023 58-11(5.15f) 9.2305, 9.2306 Ch. 58 9.2310 Ch. 58 9.2325 58-11(5.15b) 9.2325 et seq. 58-11(5.15g) 9.2325(1) 58-11(5.15b) 9.2325(2) 58-11(5.15b) 9.2410(4) 58-11(5.82) 9.2410(5) 58-11(5.97) 9.2641 et seq. 58-171 9.2651 58-9 9.2651 et seq. 58-9 9.3200(1) et seq. 58-122 12.15(12751) et seq.       62-63 12.270(1) et seq. Ch. 66 12.511 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 12.541 Ch. 10 12.545(21) et seq.       10-32 14.15(12701) 14-62 14.451 et seq. 14-62 16.114(15a) 2-284 18.86(1) et seq. 14-62 18.204(1) et seq. 14-85, 14-86 18.972 38-117 18.1004(2) 38-117 18.1287(1) et seq.       Ch. 70 18.1287(8) 70-2 19.855(2) 58-66 26.430 et seq. 54-43 26.430(101) et seq.       Ch. 54 54-27 26.430(263) 54-1 27A.8312 58-11(2.5e) tit. 28 Ch. 38 28.181 Ch. 66 28.244 et seq. Ch. 10 28.397 et seq. Ch. 30 28.437 et seq. Ch. 30 28.440(1) et seq. 30-63 28.643(101) Ch. 6 28.718 et seq. Ch. 6  
