CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF TRENTON, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2004 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TRENTON, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Kyle F. Stack 
Mayor 
____________ 
Timber Baun-Crooks 
W. Dan Gillespie 
Robert J. Howey 
William LeFevre 
Nelson Perugi 
Steven Rzeppa 
Councilpersons 
____________ 
Wallace Long 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Debra R. Devitt 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Trenton, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1974 Code, as supplemented through October 15, 2001, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1974 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Official City Staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Trenton, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Trenton, Michigan. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Trenton, Michigan. 2004. 
CITY OF TRENTON 
ORDINANCE NO. 681 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF TRENTON, MICHIGAN; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED IN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED; PROVIDING FOR THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF SUCH CODE AND A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATIONS THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE AND PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY OF TRENTON, COUNTY OF WAYNE, ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
    Section 1. The Code of Ordinances, revised and republished by the Municipal Code Corporation dated 2002, as amended, a complete copy of which is on file with the Office of the City Clerk, and consisting of chapters 1 - 33, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as "Trenton City Code" which shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supercede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the Council on or before October 1, 2004, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
    Section 2. That all the provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the effective date of this Ordinance, and all ordinances of general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 1, 2004, and not included or recognized and continued in force by reference thereto are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
    Section 3. That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect any of the following: 
a)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such ordinance. 
b)  Any Ordinance or Resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the City. 
c)  Administrative ordinances or resolutions of the council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code. 
d)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinances of the City. 
e)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City. 
f)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
g)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
h)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the City. 
i)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefore. 
j)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat division in the City, or approving any site plan or Planned Unit Development. 
k)  Any ordinance extending or contracting the boundaries of the City. 
l)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any City officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith. 
m)  Any ordinance declaring certain property to be a public nuisance and authorizing procedures for the demolition of the same. 
n)  Any ordinance or resolution prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking zones; specific speed zones; parking meter zones; and specific stop or yield intersections. 
o)  The Zoning Code of the City. 
    Section 4. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is re-pealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 5. That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of the Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days, or both, as provided in Section 1-8 of such Code. 
    Section 6. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Trenton City Code" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section 7. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 5 of this ordinance and Section 1-8 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the afore-mentioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 8. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk preserved in loose leaf form, or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized by her, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the Council. This copy of the Code is available both in print and electronic form for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
    Section 9. That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Trenton to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 5 of this ordinance. 
    Section 10. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
    Section 11. This ordinance shall be given first reading on the 6th of December, 2004, final reading of the 20th of December, 2004, published on the 2nd of January, 2005 and become effective on January 3, 2005. 
    ADOPTED, APPROVED AND PASSED by the City Council of the City of Trenton, this 20th day of December, 2004. 
/s/       Gerald R. Brown, Mayor /s/       Kyle F. Stack, City Clerk  
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the Ordinance as passed by the City Council of the City of Trenton at a regular Council Meeting held in the City Council Room in said City on the 20th day of December, 2004. 
/s/       Kyle F. Stack, City Clerk  
    I further certify that the foregoing was published in News Herald, a newspaper circulated in the City of Trenton, on the 2nd day of January, 2005. 
/s/       Kyle F. Stack, City Clerk  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 705-2  3-21-2011 Include 14 743 11-15-2010 Include 14 744  1-10-2011 Include 14 745  2-22-2011 Include 14 746  3- 7-2011 Include 14 747  3- 7-2011 Include 14 748  3- 7-2011 Include 14 749  3- 7-2011 Include 14 750  3-21-2011 Include 14 751  3- 7-2011 Include 14 752  3-21-2011 Include 14 2011-22 
(Charter Resolution)  6-20-2011 Include 15 740  8-15-2011 Include 15 754  7- 5-2011 Include 15 755  9- 6-2011 Include 15 756 11- 7-2011 Include 15 757 12-19-2011 Include 16 758  1-23-2012 Include 16 759  1- 9-2012 Include 16 760  2- 6-2012 Include 16 761  2- 6-2012 Include 16 762  5- 7-2012 Include 16 763  5-21-2012 Include 16 764  6- 4-2012 Include 16 705-3 10- 1-2012 Include 17 765  6-18-2012 Include 17 705-4  1-22-2013 Include 18 705-5  1-22-2013 Include 18 705-6  2- 4-2013 Include 18 766  1- 7-2013 Include 18 767  1- 7-2013 Include 18 768  2-19-2013 Include 18 769  2-19-2013 Include 18 770  2-19-2013 Include 18 771  3-18-2013 Include 18 772  3-18-2013 Include 18 773  3-18-2013 Include 18 774  5- 6-2013 Include 18 775  5- 6-2013 Include 18 705-7  6-17-2013 Include 19 705-8 12-16-2013 Include 19 705-9 12-16-2013 Include 19 776  6-17-2013 Include 19 777 11-12-2013 Include 19 778 10-28-2013 Include 19 779 12- 2-2013 Include 19 780  2- 3-2014 Include 20 781  3-17-2014 Include 20 782  4- 7-2014 Include 20 2014-19 
(Charter Resolution)  6-16-2014 Include 21 2014-20 
(Charter Resolution)  8-11-2014 Include 21 2014-21 
(Charter Resolution)  6-16-2014 Include 21 705-10  4-20-2015 Include 22 783  5-21-2015 Include 22 784  5-21-2015 Include 22 785  5-21-2015 Include 22 705-11  8- 3-2015 Include 23 786 12-14-2015 Include 23 705-12  1- 4-2016 Include 24 787  4-18-2016 Include 24 705-13  5-16-2016 Include 24 705-14  7-11-2016 Include 24 705-15  9- 6-2016 Include 25 788 10-17-2016 Include 25 705-16 11-21-2016 Include 25 705-17  2- 6-2017 Include 25 705-18  8-21-2017 Include 26 705-19  8-21-2017 Include 26 705-20 10- 2-2017 Include 26 789  6-19-2017 Include 26 790  7-17-2017 Include 26 791 11- 6-2017 Include 26 705-21  1- 8-2018 Include 26 792  1- 8-2018 Include 26 705-22  9- 4-2018 Include 27 793  9-17-2018 Include 27 794 11-19-2018 Include 27 795  2- 4-2019 Include 28  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Preamble 
PREAMBLE 
    Under the sovereignty of Almighty God, in whom we faithfully trust, We, the people of the City of Trenton, County of Wayne and State of Michigan, in order to perfect the great objectives of good and free government, to establish distributive and commutative justice, to extend civil liberty to all men, to maintain peace and public safety, to insure economic and efficient administration of our city affairs, and in general to promote the welfare and happiness of our people, regardless of race, color, creed, or nationality, do hereby ordain and establish this Home Rule Charter for the city of Trenton, Michigan, by virtue of the authority of the Constitution and Public Act 279 of 1909 [MCL 117.1 et seq.], as amended, of the State of Michigan. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Trenton, Michigan, as adopted by voters on July 16, 1957, and effective on June 4, 1957. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule charters, MCL 117.1 et seq. 

CHAPTER I. - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Name and Boundaries. 
    The name of this organized city is "City of Trenton." It is a body corporate and embraces the following described territory in the County of Wayne, including that territory constituting the former Village of Trenton, together with such territory as may from time to time be attached thereto, and less such territory as may from time to time be detached therefrom, in accordance with law: 
All that territory situated in the Township of Monguagon, Wayne County, Michigan, comprising part of Sections 13, 14, 23, 24, 25 and 26, Town 4 South, Range 10 East, and of Sections 7, 8, 17, 18, 19 and 30, Town 4 South, Range 11 East, and of Private Claim 590, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the South 1/4 corner of Section 26, Town 4 South, Range 10 East, said point being the Southwest corner of Monguagon Township and being on the center line of Vreeland Road, and proceeding thence North along the North and South 1/4 line of Sections 26, 23 and 14, Town 4 South, Range 10 East being also the West line of Monguagon Township, 15805 feet to the North 1/4 corner of said Section 14; thence East along the North line of Sections 14 and 13, Town 4 South, Range 10 East, being also the center line of King Road, 7826 feet to the Northeast corner of said Section 13, being also the Southwest corner of Section 7, Town 4 South, Range 11 East; thence North along the West line of said Section 7, being in Fort Street, 5300 feet to the Northwest corner of said Section 7; thence East along the North line of Sections 7 and 8, Town 4 South, Range 11 East, being also the center line of Sibley Road and its extensions and being the South line of the Village of Riverview, 6745 feet to a point 400 feet East of the Westerly United States Harbor Line along the Trenton Channel of the Detroit River, said 400 feet being measured at right angles to said Harbor Line; thence Southerly along a line parallel to and 400 feet East of said United States Harbor Line, 21810 feet to the South line of Section 30, Town 4 South, Range 11 East; thence West along the South line of said Section 30 and Sections 25 and 26, Town 4 South, Range 10 East, being also the South line of Monguagon Township and being the center line of Vreeland Road and its extension, 9820 feet to the point of beginning, containing 7.44 square miles. 
Editor's note- The boundaries in charter § 1.1 are superseded by subsequent annexations. 
State Law reference- Organized cities a body corporate, MCL 117.1. 
CHAPTER II. - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Section 2.1. - Continuation of Powers of Former Charter. 
    All powers, privileges and immunities not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter possessed by the Village of Trenton by virtue of its incorporation as such and enumerated in Public Act No. 3 of 1895 (MCL 61.1 et seq.), including all amendments thereto in effect on the day preceding the effective date of this charter, are hereby expressly retained by the city and shall constitute a part of the powers of the city even though not expressly enumerated herein. 
Editor's note- Given the broad grant of powers to home rule cities, the provisions of charter § 2.1 (which provides that the city has the powers of a village) are obsolete and not needed. As the section limits the powers to those in effect prior to the city charter becoming effective (i.e., on April 29, 1957), the section is useless as it would be almost impossible to determine those powers. 
Section 2.2. - General Powers. 
    Unless otherwise provided or limited in this charter, the city and its officers shall possess and be vested with any and all powers, privileges and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters under the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including all powers, privileges and immunities which cities are, or may be, permitted to provide in their charters by Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq.), as amended, as fully and completely as though these powers, privileges and immunities were specifically enumerated in and provided for in this charter, and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges or immunities herein be held to be exclusive. 
    The city and its officers shall have power to exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, whether such powers be expressly enumerated herein or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the city, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, and through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances and resolutions relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the Constitution and general laws of this state, and provisions of this charter. 
State Law reference- General limitations on powers of city, MCL 117.5. 
Section 2.3. - Further Definition of Powers. 
    In addition to the powers possessed by the city under the Constitution and statutes, and those set forth throughout this charter, the city shall have power with respect to, and may, by ordinance and other lawful acts of its officers, provide for the following, subject to any specific limitations placed thereon by this charter: 
(a)  The acquisition by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction or in any manner permitted by statute, of private property of every type and nature for public use, which property may be located within or without the County of Wayne and which may be required for or incidental to the present or future exercise of the purposes, powers and duties of the city, either proprietary or otherwise; 
(b)  The maintenance, development, operation, leasing and disposal of city property subject to any restrictions placed thereon by statute or this charter; 
(c)  The refunding of money advanced or paid on special assessments for water main extensions; 
(d)  The installation and connection of conduits for the service of municipally owned and operated electric lighting plants; 
(e)  The purchase or condemnation of the franchises and of the property used in the operation of companies or individuals engaged in the cemetery, hospital, almshouse, electric light, gas, heat, water and power business; 
(f)  The use, regulation, improvement and control of the surface of its streets, alleys and public ways, and of the space above and beneath them; 
(g)  The use, by others than the owner, of property located in streets, alleys and public places, in the operation of a public utility, upon the payment of a reasonable compensation to the owners thereof; 
(h)  A plan of streets and alleys within and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond the municipal limits; 
(i)  The use, control and regulation of streams, waters and water courses within its boundaries, subject to any limitations imposed by statute; 
(j)  The securing by condemnation, by agreement or purchase, or by any other means, of an easement in property abutting or adjacent to any navigable body of water for the purpose of securing the privilege and right to construct, own and maintain along or adjacent to any navigable body of water an elevated structure of one or more levels for use as a vehicular or pedestrian passageway, or for any other municipal purpose, including a tunnel; 
(k)  The acquiring, establishment, operation, extension and maintenance of facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits, including the fixing and collection of charges for services and use thereof on a public utility basis, and for such purpose to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation or otherwise, the land necessary therefor; 
(l)  Regulating, restricting and limiting the number and location of oil and gasoline stations; 
(m)  The acquiring, constructing, establishment, operation, extension and maintenance of facilities for the docking of water craft, hydroplanes and seaplanes, within its corporate limits, including the fixing and collection of charges for use thereof, and for such purpose or purposes, to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, the land necessary therefor; 
(n)  For regulating shipping, dockage, storage, warehousing and all other commercial and/or other industrial water front uses, and the regulating, restricting and limiting the number and location of boat liveries; 
(o)  The establishing of districts or zones within which the use of land and structures, the height, the area, the size and location of buildings and required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings, and the density of population may be regulated by ordinance in accordance with statutory provisions governing zoning; 
(p)  The regulating of trades, occupations and amusements within the city, not inconsistent with state and federal laws, and for the prohibiting of such trades, occupations, and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals or welfare of its inhabitants; 
(q)  Licensing, regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of advertising signs or displays and billboards within the city; 
(r)  The preventing of injury or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city from anything which is dangerous, offensive, or unhealthful, and for preventing and abating nuisances and punishing those occasioning them or neglecting or refusing to abate, discontinue or remove the same; 
(s)  The prescribing of the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended or revoked; requiring payment of reasonable sums for licenses; and requiring the furnishing of a bond to the city for the faithful observance of the conditions under which licenses are granted, and otherwise conditioning such licenses as the Council may prescribe; 
(t)  The regulating of all airports located within its boundaries, and, for the purpose of promoting and preserving the public peace, safety and welfare, controlling and regulating the use of air above the city by aircraft of all types; 
(u)  The prohibiting or regulating of the use, occupancy, sanitation and parking of house trailers within the city, and the right of the city to so regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to, the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any manner whatsoever; 
(v)  The requiring of an owner of real property within the city to maintain sidewalks abutting upon such property, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements or if the owner is unknown, to construct and maintain such sidewalks and assess the cost thereof against the abutting property in accordance with Section 11.12; 
(w)  The requiring of an owner of real property within the city to abate public hazards and nuisances which are dangerous to the health or safety of inhabitants of the city within a reasonable time after the Council notifies him that such hazard or nuisance exists, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements, or if the owner is unknown, to abate such hazard or nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such property in accordance with Section 11.12; 
(x)  The compelling of owners of real property within the city to keep sidewalks abutting upon their property clear from snow, ice or other obstructions, and if the owner fails to comply with such requirements, to remove such snow, ice or other obstructions and assess the cost thereof against the abutting property in accordance with Section 11.9 [11.12]; 
(y)  The control over all trees, shrubs and plants in the public streets, highways, parks or other public places in the city, all dead and diseased trees on private property, and trees on private property overhanging the street, sidewalk or public places and the removal thereof, and assessing the cost thereof against the property in accordance with Section 11.9 [11.12]; 
(z)  Requiring the platting of all land or premises within the city hereafter subdivided, in accordance with the terms and conditions as may be provided by ordinance, subject to any limitations imposed by statute. 
Editor's note- Modern charters for home rule cities in Michigan do not contain enumerations of powers similar to those found in this section. Reliance is placed upon grants of power such as found in charter § 2.2 and the provisions of Mich. Const. (1963), art. VII, § 22 et seq. 
Section 2.4. - Inter-Governmental Contracts. 
    The city shall have power to join with any governmental unit or agency, or with any number or combination thereof by contract or otherwise as may be permitted by law to have performed (a) jointly, or (b) by one or more of them for or on behalf of the other or others, or (c) by any other person, firm or corporation, any power or duty which is permitted to be so performed by law or which is possessed by, or imposed upon, each such governmental unit or agency. Provided however, any such contract or contracts shall provide an escape clause in favor of the city. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 2.4 are not needed in light of MCL 124.501 et seq. 
CHAPTER III. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for elections, MCL 114.3(b), (c); elections generally, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Section 3.1. - Qualifications of Electors. 
    The residents of the city having the qualifications of electors in the State of Michigan shall be electors of the city. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 3.1 are superseded by MCL 168.491 et seq. in that such act provides for the qualifications of electors of the city. See MCL 168.492. 
Section 3.2. - Election Procedure. 
    The election of all city officers shall be on a non-partisan basis. The general election statutes shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to registration and city elections, except as such statutes relate to political parties or partisan procedure and except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
    The Clerk shall give public notice of the time and place of holding each city election and of the officers to be elected and the questions to be voted upon, in the same manner as is required by statute for the giving of public notice of general elections in the state. 
    The polls at all elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed by law for the opening and closing of polls at state elections, subject to the statutory right of the Council to adjust these hours to local time. 
Editor's note- The provisions of the last sentence of charter § 3.2 dealing with the adjustment of hours to local time are obsolete in light of MCL 168.721. 
Section 3.3. - Wards and Precincts. 
    The City of Trenton shall consist of one ward. The precincts into which the city is divided on the effective date of this charter shall remain the precincts of the city until changed pursuant to this charter. The Council shall from time to time establish convenient election precincts. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for wards, MCL 117.3(e); election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq. 
Section 3.4. - Regular City Elections. 
    A regular city election shall be held on the first Monday in April of 1959, and in each odd-numbered year thereafter, but if some other date in the months of March, April or May is fixed by law for the holding of the state biennial spring election, then the regular city election shall be held on the date so fixed. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 3.4 are superseded by Code §§ 30-4 and 30-5. See MCL 168.144l. 
Section 3.5. - Special Elections. 
    Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council at least forty days in advance of such election, or when required by this charter or by statute. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more special elections shall be called in any one year than permitted by statute. 
State Law reference- Special elections, MCL 168.631 et seq. 
Section 3.6. - Elective Officers and Terms of Office. 
    The elective officers of the City shall be a Mayor, six members of Council, a Clerk, a Treasurer, and Assessor, all of whom shall be nominated and elected from the City-at-large. 
    Beginning November 4, 2003, there shall be elected a Mayor for a term of office of four years. Beginning November 4, 2003, there shall be elected a Clerk for a term of office of four years. Beginning November 4, 2003, there shall be elected a Treasurer for a term of office of four years. 
    At each regular City election, there shall be elected an Assessor for a term of office of four years, three Councilmen for a term of four years and such additional number of Councilmen as may be required to fill vacancies, pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.6 of this Charter. All such terms of office shall commence at 8:00 P.M. on the Monday next following the regular City election at which they are elected. 
    Vacancies in the office of Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer and Assessor shall be filled in accordance with Section 5.6 of this Charter. 
(Amended 11-5-2002; amended 11-6-2007) 
Editor's note- References in charter § 3.6 to justices of the peace are obsolete. See MCL 600.9921, 600.9930. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for certain elected officers and their terms, MCL 117.3(a), (c); vacancies in city office to be filled as provided in charter, MCL 201.37. 
Section 3.7. - Primary Elections. 
    Non-partisan primary elections shall be held on the first Tuesday in March preceding a regular city election, and the third Tuesday preceding a special election, but if some other date is fixed by law for the holding of the primary for the state biennial spring election, then the regular city primary election shall be held on the date so fixed. 
    If, upon the expiration of the time for filing nomination petitions for any elective city office, valid petitions have been filed for no more than twice the number of candidates for the respective offices to be elected at the following regular city elections, then no primary shall be held with respect to such offices. If no primary is to be held for one or more offices, the Clerk shall publish notice of the fact and the reason therefor as part of, or at the time provided for, the publication of notices for such primary election. 
    Candidates, equal in number to twice the number of persons to be elected to each city office at the next subsequent regular city election, who receive the highest number of votes at any such primary election shall be declared the nominees for election to the respective offices for which they are candidates. The names of such candidates, together with the names of candidates who filed valid nomination petitions for any office for which no primary election was held, shall be certified by the Clerk to the Election Commission as nominees for the next subsequent regular city election. 
    Effective November 4, 2014, all candidates for City elected offices shall be nominated by petition and any reference in the City Charter to a Primary Election shall be without effect. 
(Res. No. 2014-20, 8-11-2014) 
Editor's note- The provisions of the first paragraph of charter § 3.7 are superseded by Code §§ 30-4 and 30-5. See MCL 168.144l. 
Section 3.8. - Nominations. 
    The method of nomination of all candidates for the city elections shall be by petition. Such petitions for each candidate shall be signed by not less than forty (40) nor more than sixty (60) registered electors of the city. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any one office than there are persons to be elected to said office at the following regular city election. Where the signature of any individual appears on more petitions than he is so permitted to sign, such signatures shall be counted only to the extent he is permitted to sign in the order of the respective dates and hour of filing the petitions containing such signatures. 
    Nomination petitions shall be filed with the Clerk between the fortieth day preceding such election and 5:00 p.m. on the thirtieth day preceding the regular city primary election or any special election for the filling of vacancies in office. 
    The Clerk shall, prior to every city election publish notice of the last day permitted for filing nomination petitions and of the number of persons to be nominated or elected to each office at least one week and not more than three weeks before such day. 
Editor's note- The provisions of the second paragraph of charter § 3.8 are superseded by Code § 30-5. See MCL 168.644e. 
State Law reference- Nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a. 
Section 3.9. - Form of Petition. 
    The form of petition shall be substantially as that designated by the Secretary of State for the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers. A supply of official petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the Clerk. 
State Law reference- Nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a. 
Section 3.10. - Approval of Petition. 
    The Clerk shall accept only nomination petitions which conform with the form provided and maintained by him and which, considered together, contain the required number of valid signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for the filing of a petition. When a petition is filed by persons other than the person whose name appears thereon as candidates, it may be accepted only when accompanied by the written consent of the candidate. The Clerk shall, forthwith after the filing of a petition, notify in writing any candidate whose petition is then known not to meet the requirements of this section, but the failure to so notify any candidate shall in no way prevent a final determination that the petition does not meet such requirements. 
    Within three days after the last date for filing petitions, the Clerk shall make his final determination as to the validity and sufficiency of each nomination petition and whether or not the candidate has the qualifications required for his respective elective city office by this charter, and shall write his determination thereof on the face of the petition. The Clerk shall immediately notify in writing the candidates whose name appears thereon of his determination. Such notice to any candidate whose petition is found invalid or insufficient shall be delivered by personal messenger, if possible. Any candidate whose petition is so found invalid or insufficient shall be allowed to file supplementary or replacement petitions before four o'clock in the afternoon on the fifth day after the last date for filing original petitions. 
    The names of the candidates for the respective elective city offices who file valid and sufficient nomination petitions shall be certified by the Clerk to the Election Commission to be placed upon the ballot for the next subsequent regular city election or the next special election for the filling of vacancies in office, as the case may be. 
State Law reference- Certification of nominating petition by city clerk, MCL 168.552; validity of petition or signature, MCL 168.552a. 
Section 3.11. - Public Inspection of Petitions. 
    All nomination petitions shall be open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk. 
Section 3.12. - Election Commission. 
    The Election Commission is hereby created consisting of the Clerk, Attorney and the three Councilmen whose tenure of office is not expiring at the next regular biennial election. The members shall serve without compensation. The Clerk shall be the chairman. The Commission shall appoint the Board of Election Inspectors for each precinct, and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by state law and this charter relating to the conduct of elections in the city. The compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the Council. In any case where election procedure is in doubt the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to follow. 
Section 3.13. - Form of Ballot. 
    The form, printing and numbering of ballots or the preparation of the voting machines used in any city election shall conform as nearly as may be to the provisions of statute, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear. In all city elections, the names of qualified candidates or nominees for each office shall be listed under a separate heading and shall be rotated systematically in the manner prescribed by statute for rotation of names. 
    If two or more candidates for the same office have the same or similar surnames, the Election Commission shall print the occupation and residence address under the respective names of each of such candidates on the ballots (or on labels or slips to be placed on voting machines when used), provided; that for any of such candidates who is an incumbent of such office, the occupation shall be designated as "Incumbent." Except as provided in this section there shall be no supplementary identification of candidates on the ballot. 
State Law reference- Preparation and distribution of ballots, MCL 168.559 et seq. 
Section 3.14. - Canvass of Votes. 
    The Clerk and the members of the Council shall be the board of canvassers to canvass the votes at city elections, except that if any of such persons are candidates for office or nomination at the election to be canvassed such persons shall not serve as a canvasser of such election. Those of the members of such board who are present shall constitute a quorum. The board of canvassers shall convene on the day next succeeding each city election at the usual time and place of meeting of the Council, and determine the results of the city election upon each question and proposition voted upon, and what persons are duly elected to the several offices respectively at said election, and shall notify in writing the successful candidates to their election. The number of candidates for each office equal to the number to be elected to such office who receive the highest number of votes shall be elected. The Clerk shall make under the corporate seal of the city duplicate certificates of the determinations of the board and shall file one certificate with the County Clerk and the other in his own office. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 3.14 insofar as it deals with the creation and composition of the board of canvassers are superseded by MCL 168.30a et seq. 
Section 3.15. - Tie Vote. 
    If, at any city election, there shall be no choice between candidates by reason of two or more persons having received an equal number of votes, then the City Council shall name a date for the appearance of such persons for the purpose of determining the election of such candidates by lot as provided by statute. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 3.15 insofar as it requires that the council determine the date for the determination of the winner by lot are superseded by the provisions of MCL 168.851 et seq., which provisions require that the canvassing board make such determination. See also the editor's note for charter § 3.14, supra. 
Section 3.16. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office or upon any proposition may be had in accordance with election statutes. Unless otherwise required by statute, (1) a recount petition shall be filed with the Clerk by four o'clock in the afternoon on the second full day after the board of canvassers has made its official report, (2) any counter-petition shall be filed by four o'clock in the afternoon on the next full day thereafter, and (3) no officer shall be qualified to take office until the final determination of any recount of the votes cast for such office. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 3.16 (first sentence excepted) are superseded by MCL 168.861 et seq. 
Section 3.17. - Recall. 
    Any elected official may be recalled from office by the electors of the city in the manner provided by statute. A vacancy created by such recall shall be filled in the manner prescribed by this charter and by statute. 
State Law reference- Recall, MCL 168.951 et seq. 
CHAPTER IV. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT[3] 
    The following shall constitute the organization of city government. 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for officers and their duties, qualifications and compensation, MCL 117.3(a), (d). 

Section 4.1. - Mayor and City Council. 
    There shall be a Mayor and six Councilmen who shall be nominated and elected by the electors of the city at large. The Council shall be composed of seven members consisting of a Mayor and six Councilmen. The Mayor shall be the executive head of the city. The Council shall constitute the legislative body of the city and shall have power and authority, except as in this charter or by statute otherwise provided, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the city, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. In all cases where the word "Council" is used in this charter, the name shall be synonymous with the word commission or any other term used in any state or federal law in referring to municipal legislative bodies. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for mayor and elected city council, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 4.2. - Qualifications of Councilmen. 
    Members of the Council shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 5.1 of this charter. The Council shall be the sole judge of the election and qualification of its own members, subject only to review by the court. 
Section 4.3. - Clerk, Treasurer and Assessor. 
    There shall be a Clerk, a Treasurer and an Assessor, all of whom shall be nominated and elected by the electors of the city at large. 
Section 4.4. - Qualifications of Clerk, Treasurer and Assessor. 
    The Clerk, Treasurer and Assessor shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 5.1 of this charter. 
Section 4.5. - Justices of the Peace. 
    There shall be two Justices of the Peace who shall be nominated and elected by the electors of the city at large. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 4.5 are obsolete, as the position of justice of the peace has been abolished. See MCL 600.9921, 600.9930. 
Section 4.6. - Qualifications of Justices of the Peace. 
    The Justices of the Peace shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 5.1 of this charter. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 4.6 are obsolete, as the position of justice of the peace has been abolished. See MCL 600.9921, 600.9930. 
Section 4.7. - Compensation of Elective Officers. 
    The elective Officers of the City shall be entitled to receive as full compensation for their services, the following: 
(a)  Mayor. The compensation of the Mayor shall be $75.00 per compensable meeting, not to exceed 150 compensable meetings per annum. In no event shall total compensation be less than $3,400 per annum. 
(b)  Members of council. The compensation for each member of Council, excepting the Mayor, shall be $50.00 per compensable meeting, not to exceed 100 compensable meetings per annum. In no event shall total compensation be less than $2,000 per annum. 
(c)  Compensable meetings. Compensable Meetings shall include Regular and Special Meetings of the City Council, Council study and budget sessions, public hearings required by statute or local ordinance, staff meetings, and such other official meetings or hearings which members of Council may be required to attend by resolution of the Council. Members of Council must be in actual attendance at such meetings to receive compensation. 
(d)  Clerk, Treasurer and Assessor. The compensation for the Clerk, Treasurer and Assessor under this charter, shall be fixed by ordinance. No ordinance changing the annual salaries of the Clerk, and/or Treasurer, and/or Assessor may be enacted or amended less than sixty days before the next primary election at which the Clerk, Treasurer and Assessor are to be nominated. 
    Such compensation shall be paid monthly and except as otherwise provided in this charter, shall constitute the only compensation which may be paid for the discharge of any official duty for or on behalf of the City during their respective tenure of office. 
    The Mayor, Council Members and other elective officers may upon order of the Council be paid such bona fide expenses incurred on behalf of the City, as are authorized, itemized and approved by the Council. 
(Amended 11-7-1995) 
Section 4.8. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
    The Mayor Pro Tem shall be the Councilman who receives the highest number of votes cast at the election when this charter is voted upon, who shall serve until the first Council meeting following the second biennial election. Thereafter, the Mayor Pro Tem shall be the Councilman who shall have served a tenure of two years, and has received the highest number of votes cast at the time of his election to office. In case of the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor during the period of such absence or disability. Provided however, that he shall not have the power to remove any appointive officer or department head during any period in which he shall act in the capacity of Mayor, until he has so acted for a period of thirty consecutive days during such period, and no appointments made by him shall be permanent until such appointee shall have served for a period of sixty days following his appointment; and in the event of the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the Council shall designate another of its members to serve as acting Mayor during such absence or disability. Provided however, that he shall have only the same restrictive powers of the Mayor Pro Tem as hereinabove recited. 
Section 4.9. - Administrative Services. 
    The administrative elective officers of the city shall be the Mayor, City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Assessor, each of whom shall be elected by election from the city at large, and the following administrative appointive officers shall be: A full time administrative assistant officer, a Controller, City Attorney, City Engineer, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Director of Public Works and Health Officer, and such additional administrative officers or departments as may be created by ordinance. The Council may by ordinance create additional administrative offices and departments, and may by ordinance combine any administrative offices and departments in any manner it deems necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the city, and shall prescribe the functions of each office and department and the duties, authorities and responsibilities of the officers of each department. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the Mayor shall within thirty days after his taking of office following his election for the office of Mayor, appoint all administrative officers and department heads of the city government, whether the office be established by this charter or as may be created by ordinance. Provided, however, that the City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, but such appointment shall not be effective until it is confirmed by four votes of the City Council, in which case the Mayor as a member of the Council shall be precluded from voting, and who shall serve at the discretion and pleasure of the Council for an indefinite term, and shall have his compensation fixed by the Council, and who may be removed from office by four votes of the City Council, in which case the Mayor as a member of the Council shall be precluded from voting. In case the Mayor fails to make any appointments within the herein provided thirty days within which such appointments may be made, the Council shall make such appointments, as the case may be. 
    The appointive administrative officers or department heads, with the exception of the City Attorney, shall be responsible to the Mayor, and shall serve at the discretion and pleasure of the Mayor for an indefinite term, and shall have their compensation fixed by the Council. The Council however, shall have the power by four votes of its members to remove from office any appointive administrative officer or department head, in which case the Mayor as a member of the Council shall be precluded from voting. Such removed officer or officers shall not be reappointed to the same office during the same term of the office of the said Mayor, in which case the Mayor as a member of the Council shall be precluded from voting. Provided further however, such removed officer may be appointed by the Mayor to another office, but such appointment shall not be effective until it is confirmed by four votes of the City Council, in which case the Mayor as a member of the Council shall be precluded from voting. In case the Council shall so remove any appointee of the Mayor, the term of office of such appointee shall terminate and the Mayor shall proceed to fill the vacancy so created in accordance with the provisions hereinabove set forth for the appointment of administrative officers and department heads. In case the Mayor fails to make any such reappointments within the provided period within which such reappointments may be made, the Council shall make such reappointment, as the case may be. 
Section 4.10. - The Mayor: Duties. 
    Under the provisions of this charter the Mayor shall in addition to any powers and duties otherwise provided by law, have powers and duties as follows: 
(a)  He shall be the executive head of the city; 
(b)  He shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the Council equal with that of the other members of the Council, except as otherwise provided in this charter, but shall have no veto power; 
(c)  He shall be the presiding officer of the Council; 
(d)  He shall be the conservator of the peace and in emergencies may exercise within the city the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress riot and disorder, and shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances and regulations of the Council and the authority of the city government; 
(e)  The Mayor shall execute or authenticate by his signature such instruments as this charter or any statutes of the state of Michigan or the laws of the United States shall require; 
(f)  He shall see that all the laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(g)  Except as in this charter otherwise provided, he shall have power of appointment and removal of all appointive administrative officers and department heads; 
(h)  He shall see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants, and any public utility franchise or any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
(i)  He shall be responsible for the preparation and administration of the annual budget, and keep the Council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(j)  He shall be responsible for the establishment and maintenance of a general accounting plan for the city government, which shall conform to any uniform system of accounting prescribed for cities by law; 
(k)  He shall recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; 
(l)  He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments of the city government; 
(m)  He shall approve the rules and regulations of the several departments of the city government; 
(n)  He shall exercise and perform all administrative functions of the city not imposed by law, this charter or any state ordinance or regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, upon some other officer of the city; 
(o)  He shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, this charter, or as may be required by him by ordinance or direction of the Council. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 4.10(d) are preempted to the extent that it grants emergency powers to the mayor by MCL 10.31 et seq. See Walsh v. City of River Rouge , 385 Mich. 623, 189 N.W.2d 318 (1971). 
Section 4.11. - Administrative Assistant Officer. 
    The administrative assistant officer who shall be chosen by the Mayor on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications shall be a full time administrative assistant officer of the Mayor. He shall be accountable and responsible to the Mayor for the performance of his duties. It shall be the duty of the administrative assistant officer to assist the Mayor as he shall be directed by him, in: 
(a)  Directing, supervising and coordinating the work of the Controller, City Engineer, Chief of Police, Fire Chief and Director of Public Works, and such additional administrative offices as the Council may from time to time establish, and providing for efficient administration of all departments of the city government; 
(b)  Preparing and administering the annual budget, and keeping the Council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(c)  Efficiently administrating all departments of the city government; 
(d)  Keeping informed with respect to the administration of the several administrative departments, and to that end the heads of all administrative departments shall furnish him such information and periodical or special reports as the Mayor may deem necessary; 
(e)  Performing such additional duties as he may be directed by the Mayor; 
(f)  And he shall also attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in all discussions, but without the right to vote. 
Section 4.12. - Acting Administrative Officer. 
    The Mayor may appoint an acting administrative officer during the period of a vacancy in the office, or during the absence of the administrative assistant officer from the city. Such acting administrative officer while he is in such office shall have all of the responsibilities, duties, functions and authority of the administrative assistant officer. 
Section 4.13. - Controller: Functions and Duties. 
    The Controller shall be the chief accounting officer of the City. He shall: 
(1)  Establish and maintain a general accounting plan for the city government, which shall conform to any uniform system of accounting prescribed by cities by law; 
(2)  Act as adviser and assist the Mayor and/or administrative assistant officer in the formulation of each annual budget proposal; 
(3)  Keep a separate account of each item of budget appropriation made by the Council to a city administrative unit, and to other governmental units and agencies, to the extent and in the manner required by law; 
(4)  Prescribe and supervise the keeping of detailed accounting records by administrative units; 
(5)  Keep accounts of all funds collected by each administrative unit; 
(6)  Submit to the Council, through the Mayor and/or administrative officer, by the tenth day of each month, a statement showing the balances at the close of the preceding month in all funds and budget items, the amounts of the City's known liabilities, and the funds and budget items to which the same are to be charged, and all other information necessary to show the City's financial condition; 
(7)  Prepare for the Mayor and/or the Council, within thirty days following the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report of the City's financial condition as of the end of the year; 
(8)  Approve all purchase orders as to the sufficiency of appropriations therefor and correctness of budget allocation, before such orders are placed by an administrative unit; 
(9)  Sign all checks or warrants for the disbursement of funds from the City's treasury; 
(10)  Audit the financial records of each administrative unit; 
(11)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter, the Mayor, or the ordinances and resolutions of the Council. 
Section 4.14. - City Attorney. 
(a)  The Attorney shall be attorney and counsel for the City, and shall be responsible solely to the Council. He shall act as legal advisor to the Mayor, and be attorney and counsel for the Council and all of its members relating to their official duties. He shall give written opinions to any officer or department head or commission of the city when requested in writing by the Mayor, the Council or commission so to do, and shall file a copy of the same with the City Clerk. 
(b)  He shall prosecute ordinance violations and shall represent the City in cases before courts and other tribunals. He shall file with the Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Council may direct. 
(c)  He shall prepare or review all ordinances, regulations, contracts, bonds, and such other instruments as may be required by this charter or by the Council, and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof. 
(d)  He shall attend all meetings of the Council. 
(e)  Upon recommendation of the attorney, or upon its own initiative the Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest, or to assist in counsel with the City Attorney therein. 
(f)  In matters involving litigation in the Circuit Court for the County of Wayne, in which the city is a litigant concerning local matters in which the city has an interest, the Council may retain special legal counsel who is a non-resident and whose established office is without the limits of the city to handle such matters, provided however, the City Attorney shall assist and co-operate with the special legal counsel. 
(g)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter, the Mayor and/or the Council. 
Section 4.15. - City Clerk. 
(a)  The Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall attend all meetings of the Council, and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings and sessions in the English language. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for keeping of council journal in English, MCL 117.3(m). 
(b)  He shall keep a public record of all proceedings of the Council and shall authenticate the same by his signature. 
(c)  He shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or adopted by the Council. 
(d)  He shall be custodian of all papers, documents, bonds, and records pertaining to the City, unless the custody thereof is otherwise provided by law or this charter. 
(e)  He shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix it to documents and attest the same. 
(f)  He shall give notice to the proper officials of the expiration or termination of each franchise and contract to which the City is a party, and to city officers, personally, of the expiration of the terms of their respective offices and of any official bonds required of them. 
(g)  Under authority of the Council, he shall sign or countersign all contracts, deeds, licenses, or other public documents, on behalf of the City, and shall keep a record thereof. 
(h)  He shall publish and post all notices, proceedings, and other matters required to be published or posted by law, this charter, or ordinance. 
(i)  He shall be the chief elections officer of the City. 
(j)  He shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by law, this charter, the Mayor and/or the ordinances and resolutions of the Council. 
Section 4.16. - City Treasurer. 
(a)  The Treasurer shall have custody of all moneys, funds, and securities of the City, keep accounts thereof, deposit the same in the manner and in the places designated by the Council, and report the same forthwith in detail to the Controller. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by ordinance, he shall collect all moneys of the City, including charges for water and sewer services. He shall receive from other officer[s] and employees all moneys belonging to and receivable by the City that may be collected by them, and shall give receipt therefor. 
(c)  For the collection of taxes he shall have and shall exercise all of the powers and immunities which are granted and reserved to him by this charter and by law. 
(d)  He shall disburse all city funds in accordance with the provisions of law and this charter, and shall sign or countersign all checks or warrants accordingly. 
(e)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by law, this charter, the Mayor and/or ordinances or resolutions of the Council. 
Section 4.17. - City Assessor. 
    The Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in him and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon assessing officers by statute. He shall prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this charter, or ordinance, or by statute. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him in this charter by the Council. 
Section 4.18. - City Engineer. 
    The Engineer shall be the administrative head of the engineering department, who shall be a registered engineer and qualified to act within the State of Michigan, and he shall be accountable and responsible to the Mayor for the performance of his duties. 
    He shall be responsible for all engineering work required in the administration of the functions of the city government. 
    He shall be responsible for the preparation of all necessary plats, maps, surveys, diagrams and estimates of cost required by the Council or the administrative services of the city relating to the buildings, grounds, streets, parks and public improvements of the city. 
    He shall have and exercise within the city the right, powers and duties as are conferred by law upon county surveyors. 
    He shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by law, this charter, the Mayor and/or ordinances or resolutions of the Council. 
Section 4.19. - Chief of Police. 
    The Chief of Police shall be the administrative head of the Police Department, and he shall be accountable and responsible to the Mayor for the performance of his duties. He shall perform all duties as may be prescribed for him by law, this charter, the Mayor and/or ordinances or resolutions of the Council. 
Section 4.20. - Fire Chief. 
    The Fire Chief shall be the administrative head of the Fire Department, and he shall be accountable and responsible to the Mayor for the performance of his duties. He shall perform all duties as may be prescribed for him by law, this charter, the Mayor and/or ordinances or resolutions of the Council. 
Section 4.21. - Director of Public Works. 
    The Director of Public Works shall be the administrative head of the Department of Public Works, and he shall be accountable and responsible to the Mayor for the performance of his duties. 
    He shall be responsible for the maintenance, alteration, improvement and repair of streets, sidewalks, sewers, sewage disposal facilities, water mains and water facilities, and all other public grounds, buildings, facilities and equipment which are not placed under the charge of some other department by this charter, the Mayor and/or by the Council in accordance with the authority granted by this charter. 
    He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, this charter or as may be required of him by the Mayor or Council. 
Section 4.22. - Personnel. 
    The personnel of the city other than elected and appointive officers shall be deemed city employees. The Council may with respect to city employees establish a merit system for their selection, tenure, promotion, demotion, discharge and discipline in the selection, discharge and fixing of terms and conditions of employment of city employees. The city shall not discriminate on the grounds of race, color, religion or national origin. 
    The head of each department shall have the power to hire, suspend, discharge or otherwise take other appropriate disciplinary action against the employees of his department, with confirmation by the Mayor. An employee who has been discharged may within ten days thereafter petition the Council to hear the facts regarding such discharge, and in such case the Council may in its sole discretion order a hearing and inquire into such facts, and may make such decision in the matter as it considers proper. 
Section 4.23. - Relationship of Council to Administrative Service. 
    Neither the Council nor any of its members shall dictate the appointment of any person to office by the Mayor, or in any way interfere with the Mayor or appointive officers to prevent them from exercising their judgment in the appointment or employment of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the Mayor, and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the Mayor, the city administrative officer. 
Section 4.24. - Deputy Administrative Officers. 
    The Clerk, Treasurer and Assessor may appoint their own respective deputies, subject to the consent and confirmation of the Council. Such deputies shall in each case possess all the powers and authorities of their superior officers, except as may be from time to time limited by their superiors or by the Council. 
Section 4.25. - Planning and Zoning. 
    The Council shall maintain a City Planning Commission in accordance with and having the powers and duties granted by the provisions of statute relating to such commissions. 
    The Council shall maintain a Zoning Ordinance in accordance with the provisions of statute relating to such ordinances. Insofar as may be, such ordinance shall provide that zoning be coordinated with the work of the City Planning Commission. 
Section 4.26. - Independent Boards and Commissions. 
    The Council may not create any board or commission, other than those provided for in this charter, to administer any activity, department or agency of the city government except (a) a municipal hospital, (b) a municipal cemetery, (c) recreation, or (d) any activity which by statute is required to be so administered. The Council may, however, establish (a) quasi-judicial appeal boards, and (b) boards or commissions to serve solely in an advisory capacity. 
    All members of the city boards and commissions shall be appointed by the Mayor, but such appointment shall not be effective until it is confirmed by majority vote of the city Council, in which case the Mayor as a member of the Council shall be precluded from voting. 
CHAPTER V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OF THE CITY 

Section 5.1. - Eligibility for Office and Employment in City. 
    No person shall hold any elective office in the city unless he has been a resident of the Village or city for at least two years immediately prior to the last day for filing original petitions for such office or prior to the time of his appointment to fill a vacancy. No person shall hold any elective office unless he is a qualified and registered elector of the city on such last day for filing or at such time of appointment and throughout his tenure of office. 
    No person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive city office who is in default to the city. The holding of office by any person who is in such default shall create a vacancy unless such default shall be eliminated within thirty days after written notice thereof by the Council or unless such person shall in good faith be contesting the liability for such default. 
    Each candidate for elective office shall file with his petition his affidavit that he possesses the qualifications for such office provided in this section. Failure to file such affidavit shall invalidate his petition. 
    Each member of a city board or commission shall have been a resident of the city for at least two years prior to the date of his appointment, and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the city on such day and throughout his tenure of office. 
    The Council shall be the sole judge of the election and qualification of its own members. 
    All officers of the city shall be United States citizens. 
    No elective officer may be appointed to any city office or be employed by the city during the term of office for which he was elected. 
    Any elected city officer whose normal term does not expire and who files a petition for any elective office of the City, other than the one he occupies, shall at least 30 days prior to the filing of such petition, resign from his office effective ten (10) days prior to the date of the regular election for the office for which he filed his nominating petition. 
(Amended 11-7-1972) 
Editor's note- A two-year residency requirement for elected officials similar to that found in the first sentence of charter § 5.1 was held to violate the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in Green v. McKeon , 335 F. Supp. 630 (E.D. Mich. 1971), aff'd 468 F.2d 883. The last paragraph is derived from the amendment approved on November 7, 1972, which amendment amended this section, but did not specify where in the section it was to be included. 
Section 5.2. - Vacancies in Elective Offices. 
    Any elective city office shall be declared vacant by the Council upon the occurrence of any of the following events before the expiration of the term of such office: 
(a)  For any reason specified by statute or by this charter as creating a vacancy in office; 
(b)  If no person is elected to, or qualified for, the office at the election at which such office is to be filled; 
(c)  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this charter; 
(d)  If the officer shall absent himself continuously from the city for more than thirty consecutive days in any one year without the permission of the Council; 
(e)  In the case of any members of the Council, if such officer shall miss all consecutive regular meetings of the Council for a period of two months, or twenty-five per cent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absence shall be excused by the Council and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings of the Council at the time of each absence; 
(f)  If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
Section 5.3. - Vacancies in Boards and Commissions. 
    The office of any member of any board or commission created by, or pursuant to, this charter shall be declared vacant by the Council before the expiration of the term of such office: 
(a)  For any reason specified by statute or by this charter as creating a vacancy in office; 
(b)  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this charter; 
(c)  If such officer shall miss all consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission for a period of two months, or twenty-five per cent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absences shall be excused by such board or commission, and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings of such board or commission at the time of each absence; 
(d)  If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
Section 5.4. - Removal from Office. 
    Removals by the Council of elective officers or of members of boards or commissions shall be made for either of the following reasons: 
(a)  For any reason specified by statute for removal of city officers by the Governor; 
(b)  For any act declared by this charter to constitute misconduct in office. Such removals by the Council shall be made only after hearing of which such officer has been given notice by the Clerk at least ten days in advance, either personally or by delivering the same at his last known place of residence. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against such officer. The hearing shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by attorney, to be heard in his defense, to cross-examine witnesses and to prevent [present] testimony. If such officer shall neglect to appear at such hearing and answer such charges, his failure to do so may be deemed cause for his removal. A majority vote of the members of the Council in office at the time, exclusive of any member whose removal may be being considered, shall be required for any such removal. 
Section 5.5. - Resignations. 
    Resignations of elective officers and of members of boards and commissions shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk, and shall be immediately acted upon by the Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to the appointing officer or body and shall be acted upon immediately. 
Section 5.6. - Filling Vacancies in Elective Offices. 
(a)  Office of Mayor. A vacancy in the office of Mayor shall be filled, for the balance of the unexpired term, by the Mayor Pro Tem, unless the vacancy occurs more than ten days before the deadline for filing nominating petitions for the regular City Council Election following the election at which the Mayor is elected, in which case the Mayor Pro Tem shall serve as Mayor only until the new Mayor is elected and certified. The resulting vacancy occurring in the office of Mayor Pro Tem shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term of the Mayor Pro Tem by appointment of a member of the Council in accordance with Section 4.8 of this Charter. Such appointment shall create a vacancy in the office of Councilman for the unexpired term of that Councilman. 
(b)  Offices of Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor and Justice of the Peace. Vacancies in the office of Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor or Justice of the Peace occurring sixty days or more before the next regular city election, shall be filled on or before the second regular Council meeting following such vacancy by a majority vote of the members of the Council, said appointee or appointees to hold office until the Monday following such election, at which election such vacancies shall be filled as provided in Section 3.6 for any balance of the original unexpired term. 
    Vacancies in the office of Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor and Justice of the Peace occurring sixty days or less before the next regular city election, shall not be filled. 
(c)  Office of Council. Vacancies occurring in the office of Council for more than one hundred twenty days before the next regular city election shall be filled on or before the third regular Council meeting following such vacancy by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council, said appointee to hold office until the Monday following such election at which election such vacancies shall be filled as provided in Section 3.6 for any balance of the original unexpired term. 
    Any vacancies which occur for one hundred twenty days or less before the next regular city election, shall not be filled. 
    If any such vacancy in the office of Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor or Council which the Council is authorized to fill is not so filled within the hereinabove specified time after such vacancies occur, or if three or more vacancies exist simultaneously in the office of Council, such vacancies shall be filled for the respective unexpired terms at a special election. In connection with any special election to fill a vacancy or vacancies in any elective office no primary election shall be held; candidates shall be nominated by petitions in a manner identical to that provided in Sections 3.8 to 3.11 inclusive; the names of all qualified candidates who file sufficient valid nomination petitions thirty days before each special election shall be certified to the Election Commission and placed on the ballot; and all other provisions of this charter, not inconsistent with this Section 5.6 shall govern. 
    The provisions of this Section 5.6 shall not apply to the filling of vacancies resulting from recall. 
(Amended 11-5-2002) 
Editor's note- References in charter § 5.6 to a justice of the peace are obsolete, as the position of justice of the peace has been abolished. See MCL 600.9921, 600.9930. 
State Law reference- Vacancies in city offices to be filled as provided in charter, MCL 201.37; special election required when less than quorum on legislative body, MCL 168.321. 
Section 5.7. - Residence Requirements for Appointive Officers. 
    All full time administrative officers of the city if not residents of the city at the time of their appointment, shall become residents thereof within six months thereafter, and shall so remain while so serving. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 5.7 are superseded by MCL 15.601 et seq. 
Section 5.8. - No Change in Term of Office or Compensation. 
    Except by procedures provided in this charter, the terms of Councilmen and of members of boards or commissions appointed for a definite term shall not be shortened or extended beyond the period for which the officer was elected or appointed, except that a Councilman shall, after his term has expired, continue to hold office until his successor is elected or appointed and has qualified. Where several terms of Councilmen expire simultaneously, the Councilman who was elected by the highest number of votes (or any appointee who filled his position) shall be deemed to be succeeded by the candidate who received the highest number of votes, that Councilman who was elected by the second highest number of votes, by the candidate who receives the second highest number of votes, etc. The Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any officer or employee after the service has been rendered. 
    The salary of any elective officer shall not be changed from the day he is elected until the end of the term of office for which he was elected. 
Section 5.9. - Compensation of Employees and Officers. 
(a)  The compensation of all employees and officers of the city whose compensation is not provided herein, shall be fixed by the Council within the limits of budget appropriations, and in accordance with any pay plan adopted by the Council. 
(b)  No officers shall be paid on a fee basis. The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees as fixed pursuant to this charter shall be in full for all official services of such officers or employees and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other compensation receivable by such officers or employees for their services. 
(c)  Any such fees, commissions and other compensation shall belong to the city and shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees and be paid into the city treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically with the Clerk. The provisions of paragraph "b" of this section shall not apply to, (1) fees, commissions or other compensation paid by the County of Wayne to any officer or employee serving as a city representative on the Board of Supervisors, (2) fees to Justices of the Peace for performance of marriage ceremonies and for administering oaths in matters not connected with suits and proceedings in this court as provided in Section 16.2 of this charter, and (3) statutory fees to which constables are entitled as provided in Section 16.14 of this charter. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the city. 
(Res. No. 2014-21, 6-16-2014) 
Editor's note- References in charter § 5.9(c) to the board of supervisors and to justices of the peace are obsolete. See MCL 46.401 et seq., 600.9921, 600.9930. 
Section 5.10. - Financial Interest Prohibited. 
(a)  Except as permitted by this section no contract or purchase involving an amount in excess of one hundred dollars shall be made by the city in which any officer or any member of his family has any financial interest direct or indirect. A "contract" shall for the purposes of this section include any arrangement or agreement pursuant to which any material, service or other thing of value is to be furnished to the city for a valuable consideration to be paid by the city, or is to be sold or transferred by the city, except the furnishing of personal services as an officer or employee of the city; and the term "member of his family" shall include only spouse, child, grandchild, father, mother, sister, brother and the spouse of any of them. 
(b)  Without limiting the generality of paragraph "a" of this section, an officer shall be deemed to have a financial interest in a contract if he or any member of his family is an employee, partner, officer, director or sales representative of the person, firm or corporation with which such contract is made or of a sales representative of such person, firm or corporation. Ownership, individually or in a fiduciary capacity, by an officer or member of his family of securities, or of any beneficial interest in securities, of any corporation with which a contract is made or which is a sales representative of any person, firm or corporation with which such contract is made, shall not be deemed to create a financial interest in said contract unless the aggregate amount of such securities, or interest in such securities, so owned by such officer and the members of his family, shall amount to ten per cent of any class of the securities of such corporation then outstanding. 
(c)  A contract in which an officer or member of his family has a financial interest may be made by the city if the members of the Council having no such interest shall unanimously determine that the best interests of the city will be served by the making of such contract, and if such contract is made after comparative prices are obtained. 
(d)  Any officer who knowingly permits the city to enter into any contract or purchase in which he has a financial interest without disclosing such interest to the Council prior to the action of the Council in authorizing such contract, shall be guilty of misconduct in office. Except in the instances specified in paragraph (c) of this section, the unanimous determination (by vote or written instrument) of all members of the Council that in a particular case an officer or member of his family will not have a financial interest in any contract or purchase to be entered into by the city shall be final and conclusive in the absence of fraud or misrepresentation. 
(e)  No officer shall stand as surety on any bond to the city or give any bail for any other person which may be required by the charter or any ordinance of the city. Any officer of the city who violates the provisions of this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 5.10 are preempted by MCL 15.321 et seq. See MCL 15.328. 
Section 5.11. - Anti-Nepotism. 
    Unless the Council shall by unanimous vote, which vote shall be recorded as part of its official proceedings, determine that the best interests of the city shall be served, the following relatives of any elective or appointive officer are disqualified from holding any appointive office or employment during the term for which said elective or appointive officer was elected or appointed; spouse, child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister or the spouses of any of them. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are bona fide appointive officers or employees for the city at the time of the election or appointment of said official. 
Section 5.12. - Oath of Office and Bond. 
    Every officer, elective or appointive, before entering upon the duties of his office shall take the oath of office prescribed for public officers by Section 2 of Article XVI of the Constitution of the state of 1908 and shall file the oath with the clerk, together with any bond required by statute, this charter or the Council. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days from the date he is notified in writing of his election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon become vacant unless the Council shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify. 
Editor's note- The reference in the provisions of charter § 5.12 to art. XVI, § 2 of the Michigan Constitution of 1908 is obsolete. The oath is now in Michigan Constitution (1963) art. XI, § 1. 
Section 5.13. - Surety Bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all officers of the city whose duties involve the custody of public property or the handling of public funds, either by way of receipt or disbursement or both, and all other officers and employees so required by the Council, shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, file with the city an official bond, in such form and amount as the Council shall [prescribe, which shall] be conditioned that he will faithfully perform the duties of this office, and will on demand deliver over to his successor in office, or other proper officer or an agent of the city, all books, papers, moneys, effects and property belonging thereto, or appertaining to his office, which may be in his custody as an officer or employee; and such bonds may be further conditioned as the Council [shall] prescribe. The official bond of every officer whose duty it may be to receive or pay out money, besides being conditioned as above required, shall be further conditioned that he will, on demand, pay over or account for to the city or any proper officer or agent thereof, all moneys received by him as such officer or employee. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by the purchase of one or more appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all, or a group of city employees and officers. 
    All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. All bonds of all officers or employees shall be filed with the Clerk, except that any bond pertaining solely to the Clerk shall be filed with the Treasurer. 
Section 5.14. - Delivery of Office. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment for any reason whatsoever, he shall within five days or sooner on demand, deliver to his successor in office or to his superior all the books, papers, moneys and effects in his custody as such officer or employee. Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under statute. Any employee found guilty of violating this provision by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine of not to exceed one hundred dollars or imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
Section 5.15. - Employee Welfare Benefits. 
    The Council shall have the power to adopt and make available to the administrative officers and employees of the city and its departments and boards, any recognized standard plan of group life, hospital, health or accident insurance, either independently of, or as a supplement to, any retirement plan provided for such employees and officers. 
Section 5.16. - Civil Merit System. 
    The Council may submit to the electors by referendum a proposal for the establishment of a civil merit system for city employees. Provided however, the Council shall upon a majority vote of the electors voting for the aforesaid proposal, provide by ordinance for a civil merit system for city employees. 
State Law reference- Civil service systems authorized by charter, MCL 117.4i(h). 
Section 5.17. - Employees Retirement System. 
    The Council may provide by ordinance for a retirement system for the city employees. The objective of the retirement system, if created, shall be for a sound and efficient means of providing retirement allowances for the employees of the city to the end that economy and efficiency in public service may be effected and an ordinary method of retirement be provided without hardship and prejudice to employees who have become superannuated or incapacitated. The terms and conditions of the ordinance if enacted, shall be determined by the Council, provided however, the provisions thereof shall not reduce the benefits and privileges now enjoyed by the municipal employees and the Police and Firemen under their respective pension and retirement systems. 
CHAPTER VI. - THE COUNCIL: PROCEDURES AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES 

Section 6.1. - Regular Meetings. 
    The Council shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two such meetings each month. A regular meeting shall be held on the Monday following each regular city election. 
Section 6.2. - Special Meetings. 
    Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor or any three members of the Council on at least twenty-four hours written notice to each member of the Council, served personally or left at his usual place of residence, but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or have waived notice thereof in writing. 
Section 6.3. - Business of Special Meetings. 
    No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. However, other than the enactment of an ordinance, any business which may lawfully come before a regular meeting may be transacted at a special meeting if all the members of the Council present consent thereto, and all of the members absent file their written consent. 
Section 6.4. - Meeting to be Public. 
    All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 6.4 requiring all meetings to be public are superseded by MCL 15.261 et seq. See MCL 15.261. See also MCL 117.3(l). 
Section 6.5. - Quorum: Adjournment of Meeting. 
    A majority of the members of the Council in office shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all Council meetings, but in the absence of a quorum a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or date, and in the absence of all members the Clerk may adjourn any meeting for not longer than one week. 
Section 6.6. - Compulsory Attendance and Conduct at Meeting. 
    Any three or more members of the Council may by vote either request or compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the city at any meeting. Any member of the Council or other officer who when notified of such request for his attendance fails to attend such meeting for reason other than confining illness or absence from Wayne County, shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office, unless excused by the Council. The presiding officer shall enforce orderly conduct at meetings and any member of the Council or other officer who shall fail to conduct himself in an orderly manner at any meeting shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. Any police officer designated by the presiding officer of the meeting shall serve as the Sergeant-at-arms of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
Section 6.7. - Organization and Rules of the Council. 
    The Council shall determine its own organization, rules and order of business subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  A journal of the proceedings of each meeting in the English language shall be kept by the Clerk and shall be signed by the presiding officer and clerk of the meeting; 
(b)  A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" and "No" vote and entered upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state; 
(c)  No member of the Council shall vote on any question in which he has a financial interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question concerning his own conduct, but on all other questions each member who is present shall vote when his name is called, unless excused by the unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote except when not so required by this paragraph, shall be guilty of misconduct in office; 
(d)  In all roll call votes the names of the members of the Council shall be called in alphabetical order, and the name to be called first shall be advanced one position alphabetically in each successive roll call; 
(e)  The proceedings of the Council, or a brief summary thereof, shall be published within fifteen days following each meeting. Any such summary shall be prepared by the Clerk and approved by the Mayor, and shall show the substance of each separate proceeding of the Council; 
(f)  There shall be no standing committees of the Council. 
Section 6.8. - Investigations. 
    The Council or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer and to make investigations as to matters in which the municipality has an interest. The Council for the purposes stated herein, may summon witnesses, administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other evidence. 
    Failure on the part of any officer to obey such summons or to produce books, papers and other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section, shall constitute misconduct in office. Failure on the part of any employee or other person to obey such summons or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section, shall constitute a violation of this charter, and such person when found guilty of such violation by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine of not to exceed one hundred dollars or imprisonment not to exceed ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
    It is provided further that, in case of failure on the part of any person to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence as so ordered, the Council may invoke the aid of the Circuit Court of Wayne County in requiring obeyance of such summons or production of such books, papers and other evidence. The Circuit Court of Wayne County, in case of contumacy or refusal to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence, may issue an order requiring such person to obey such summons or to produce such books, papers and other evidence and to give evidence touching the matter in question, and any failure to obey such order of the court may be punished by such Court as contempt thereof. 
Section 6.9. - Public Health and Safety. 
    The Council shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. The Council may create by ordinance a Board of Health and until such adoption thereof, the Mayor shall appoint a Health Officer who shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to Board of Health by statute, and who shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by statute, the charter, the Mayor and/or the Council, and whose compensation shall be fixed by the Council. 
Editor's note- The references in the provisions of charter § 6.9 to a board of health are obsolete. See MCL 324.2411 et seq. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property, (MCL 117.3(j)). 
CHAPTER VII. - LEGISLATION 

Section 7.1. - Prior Legislation. 
    All valid bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the Village of Trenton which are not inconsistent with this charter, and which are in full force and effect at the time of the effective date of this charter, shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. If any such ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation provides for the appointment of any officers or any members of any boards or commissions by the President and/or President and Council, such officers or members of any boards or commissions shall after the effective date of this charter, be appointed in accordance with the provisions of this charter. 
    Those provisions of any effective valid bylaw, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this charter, are hereby repealed. 
Section 7.2. - Ordinances and Resolutions. 
    All official action of the Council shall be by ordinance, resolution, motion or order. Action by resolution, motion or order shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be so done by this charter or by state or federal law or pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the city government. All other acts of the Council and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a short title and by a number, and by a code section number if and when the codification of ordinances is completed. 
    Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The style of all ordinances shall be: "The City of Trenton ordains." 
Section 7.3. - Enactment, Amendment, Repeal and Effective Date of Ordinances. 
    Subject to the exceptions which follow hereafter, 
(a)  Ordinances may be enacted by the affirmative vote of not less than four members of the Council; 
(b)  No ordinance shall be amended or repealed except by an ordinance adopted as aforesaid; 
(c)  No ordinance shall be enacted at the meeting at which it is introduced nor until after publication of the proposed ordinance or summary thereof; and 
(d)  The effective date of all ordinances shall be prescribed therein but the effective date shall not be earlier than ten days after enactment nor before publication thereof. 
    It is provided however, that an ordinance which is declared therein to be an emergency ordinance which is immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health or safety may be enacted at the meeting at which it is introduced or before publication of the proposed ordinance or summary thereof, and may be given earlier effect than ten days after its enactment by the affirmative votes of six members of the Council if seven members are present at the meeting at which it was enacted, or by the affirmative votes of five members if five or six members of the Council are present at the meeting at which it is enacted. 
    In case an ordinance is given effect earlier than ten days after its enactment, the requirements for publication before such ordinance becomes operative may be met by posting copies thereof in conspicuous locations in three public places in the city, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding, and the Clerk shall, immediately after such posting, enter in the Ordinance Book under the record of the ordinance, a certificate under his hand stating the time and place of such publication by posting, which certificate shall be prima facie evidence of such publication by posting of the ordinance, but the failure to so record and authenticate such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. Such ordinance shall also be published in accordance with Section 7.4., but not as a requirement for the effectiveness thereof. 
    No ordinance granting any public utility franchise shall be enacted except in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.2. 
    No ordinance shall be amended by reference to the title only, but the amended section or sections of the ordinance as amended shall be re-enacted and published. However, an ordinance or section thereof may be repealed by references to its title and ordinance or code number only. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for adopting, continuing, amending, and repealing the city ordinances and for the publication of each ordinance before it becomes operative, MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 7.4. - Publication and Recording of Ordinances. 
    Each ordinance shall be published within fifteen (15) days after its enactment in one of the following methods: (a) the full text thereof may be published in a newspaper as defined in Section 17.4, or (b) the full text thereof may be published on the City's official internet webpage together with hard copies which shall be posted at City Hall, the Westfield Activity Center and the Public Library, or (c) the full text thereof may be posted on the public access site of all cable and satellite providers serving the City, with hard copies which shall be posted at City Hall, the Westfield Activity Center and the Public Library. In cases of ordinances over 500 words in length, a digest, summary or statement of purpose of the ordinance approved by the Council may be posted in any of the above referenced media either separately or as part of the published Council proceedings or summary thereof. In such cases, then printed copies shall promptly be made available in the Clerk's office as stated in such ordinance. 
    All ordinances shall be recorded by the Clerk and a book to be called "The Ordinance Book" and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such records by their official signature thereon but the failure to so record and authenticate any such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operations. 
(Res. No. 2011-22, 6-20-2011) 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 7.4 are superseded by the provisions of MCL 117.3(k) to the extent that § 7.4 requires that only ordinances in excess of 500 words may be published by summary. 
Section 7.5. - Penalties for Violations of Ordinances. 
    The Council may provide in any ordinance for the punishment of those who violate its provisions. The punishment for the violation of any city ordinance shall not exceed a fine of five hundred dollars or imprisonment for ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 7.5 are superseded by the provisions of MCL 117.3(k) to the extent that § 7.5 does not authorize imposition of terms of imprisonment of 93 days in certain situations. See also MCL 117.4i(k). Pursuant to MCL 117.4l, 117.4m, the city may provide that ordinance violations are municipal civil infractions. 
Section 7.6. - Special Procedure on Vote on Certain Council Actions. 
(a)  Action to vacate, discontinue or abolish any highway, street, lane, alley or other public place, or part thereof, shall be by resolution. After the introduction of such resolution and before its final adoption the Council shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall publish notice of such hearing at least one week prior thereto. 
(b)  The following actions shall require the affirmative vote of five members of the Council for the effectiveness thereof: 
(1)  Vacating, discontinuing or abolishing any highway, street, lane, alley or other public place, or part thereof; 
(2)  Leasing, selling or disposing of any city owned real estate or interest therein; 
(3)  Authorizing the condemnation of private property for public use; 
(4)  Creating or abolishing any office; 
(5)  Appropriating any money; 
(6)  Imposing any tax or assessment; 
(7)  Reconsidering or rescinding any vote of the Council; 
(c)  The Council shall not have power to engage in any business enterprise requiring an investment of money in excess of the amount permitted to be so invested by statute unless approved by a three-fifths vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
Section 7.7. - Technical Codes Adopted by Reference. 
    Subject to the provisions of this section, there may be adopted as a city ordinance or code, by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance, in whole or part, provisions of (a) any Michigan Statute, or (b) any detailed technical regulation promulgated or enacted by (1) any state or federal agency, (2) any municipality, or (3) any organization or association which has developed a recognized standard code or set of such technical regulations. Such adopting ordinance shall clearly identify and state the purpose of the provisions or regulations so adopted. Where any ordinance or code, or amendment thereto, adopting provisions by reference is enacted, all requirements for its publication may be met, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding, by, (a) publishing the ordinance citing such provisions in a manner provided by this charter for the publication of other ordinances and including as part of such publication a notice that printed copies of the provisions so cited are available for inspection by the distributor to the public at the office of the Clerk, and (b) so making copies available for public inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 7.7 are superseded by MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 7.8. - Severability of Ordinances. 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not effect [affect] the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
Section 7.9. - Compilation or Codification of Ordinances. 
    Within two years after the effective date of this charter, the Council shall direct the compilation or codification and printing in loose-leaf or pamphlet form of all ordinances of the city then in force. Such compilation or codification shall be completed within one year thereafter. If a codification is completed it shall be maintained thereafter in current form; if a compilation is completed, a recompilation shall be completed at least once in every ten years thereafter. Any codification may include provisions not previously contained in ordinances of the city. 
    All requirements for publication of such compilation or codification, and of the ordinances contained therein, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding, may be met by making copies thereof available for inspection by, and distribution to, the public at a reasonable charge and by publishing notice of the printing and availability thereof before the effective date thereof. 
    The copies of the ordinances and of any compilation, code or codes referred to in the charter may be certified by the Clerk and when so certified shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally established tribunals as to the matter contained therein. 
Section 7.10. - Initiative and Referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an enacted ordinance may be had by petition, as hereinafter provided. 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(g). 
Section 7.11. - Initiatory and Referendary Petitions. 
    An initiatory or referendary petition shall be signed by not less than twenty-five per cent of the registered electors of the city, as of the date of the last regular city election, and all signatures on said petitions shall be obtained within thirty days before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the Council and may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers identical as to contents and simultaneously filed by one person. An initiatory petition shall set forth in full the ordinance it proposes to initiate, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance. A referendary petition shall identify the ordinance, or part thereof, it proposes to have repealed. 
    Each signer of a petition shall sign his name and place thereon after his name the date and his place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereof, and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petitions shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within fifteen days, canvass the signatures thereon. If the petition does not contain a sufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the city, the Clerk shall notify forthwith the person filing such petition and fifteen days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this section, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
Section 7.12. - Council Procedure on Initiatory and Referendary Petitions. 
    Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty days, unless otherwise provided by statute, either, 
(a)  Adopt the ordinance as submitted by initiatory petition; 
(b)  Repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, referred to by a referendary petition; or 
(c)  Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors. 
Section 7.13. - Submission of Initiatory and Referendary Ordinances to Electors. 
    Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election called for that specific purpose. In the case of an initiatory petition, if no election is to be held in the city for any other purpose within one hundred and fifty days from the time the petition is presented to the Council and the Council does not adopt the ordinance, then the Council shall call a special election within sixty days from such time for the submission of the initiative proposal. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting therein, except in cases where otherwise required by statute or the Constitution. 
Section 7.14. - Ordinance Suspended: Miscellaneous Provisions on Initiatory and Referendary Ordinance. 
    The presentation to the Council by the Clerk of a valid and sufficient referendary petition containing a number of signatures equal to twenty-five percent of the registered electors of the city as of the date of the last regular election shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed for a period of one year after the date of the election at which it was adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be reenacted for a period of one year after the date of the election at which it was repealed. It is provided, however, that any ordinance may be adopted, amended or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiatory procedure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or if submitted to the electorate by the Council on its own motion. 
    If two or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
CHAPTER VIII. - GENERAL FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; keeping of public monies, MCL 129.11 et seq.; Revised Municipal Finance Act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; mandatory that charter provide for annual appropriation of money for municipal purposes, MCL 117.3(h); mandatory that charter provide for system of accounts conforming to uniform system of accounts as required by law, MCL 117.3(n). 

Section 8.1. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the city and of all its agencies shall begin on the first day of July of each year, and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. 
Section 8.2. - Budget Procedure. 
    The Mayor shall be responsible for the preparation and shall submit to the Council at the second regular Council meeting in April of each year, a recommended budget covering the next fiscal year, which budget shall include thereon at least the following: 
(a)  Detailed estimates, with supporting explanations, of all proposed expenditures for each department and office of the city, together with the expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year in full and for the current fiscal year to March 1, and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year. 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued and the condition of sinking funds, if any. 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from sources other than taxes, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full and for the current fiscal year to March 1, and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year. 
(d)  A statement of the estimated balance or deficit for the end of the current fiscal year. 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bonds issued, which, together with any available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
(f)  Such other supporting information as the Council may request. 
Section 8.3. - Budget Hearing. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption at such time and place as the Council shall direct. Notice of such public hearing shall be published at least one week in advance of the hearing, which shall also include notice that the proposed budget and the three preceding fiscal budgets are on file in the office of the Clerk. The complete proposed budget and the three preceding fiscal budgets shall be on file for public inspection during office hours at such office for a period of not less than one week prior to such hearings. 
Section 8.4. - Adoption of Budget. 
    Not later than the second regular monthly meeting in May the Council shall, by resolution, adopt a budget for the next fiscal year and shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes during such year, and shall in such resolution provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes, subject to the limitations contained in Section 9.1. 
Section 8.5. - Budget Control. 
    Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment, or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city except in accordance with an appropriation thereof, for such specific purpose, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year. 
    The Council by resolution may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from one account, department, fund or agency to another. 
    The Council may make additional appropriations during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the city, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year exceed the revenues as estimated in the budget unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety. 
    Except in those cases where there is no logical account to which an expenditure can be charged, expenditures shall not be charged directly to the contingent fund (or other similar fund); instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for the contingent fund (or other similar fund) shall be transferred to the logical account and the expenditures then charged to such account. 
    At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Council, the Mayor shall submit to the Council a statement showing the balances at the close of the preceding month in all fund and budget items, the amounts of the city's known liabilities and the fund and budget items to which the same are to be chargeable, and all other information necessary to show the city's financial condition, and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated the Council may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. 
    The balance in any budget appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year, subject to statutory restrictions, [shall] revert to the general fund. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for annual appropriation of money for municipal purposes, MCL 117.3(h). 
Section 8.6. - Depository. 
    The Council shall designate depositories for the city funds and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys. The Council shall provide for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by statute, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
State Law reference- Keeping of public monies, MCL 129.11 et seq. 
Section 8.7. - Independent Audit: Annual Report. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all city accounts at least annually, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit shall be made by a Certified Public Accountant experienced in municipal accounting selected by the Council. 
    The Mayor shall submit an annual report of the affairs of the city, including a financial report. Copies of such audit and annual report shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the Clerk within thirty days after receipt of the audit. 
CHAPTER IX. - TAXATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for levy, collection, and return of state, county, and school taxes in conformance with general law, MCL 117.3 (g), (i). 

Section 9.1. - Power to Tax: Tax Limit. 
    The city shall have power to assess taxes and levy and collect rents, tolls and excises. The annual general ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed the statutory limitation of two per cent of the assessed value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the city, exclusive of any levies authorized by statute to be made beyond charter tax limitations. 
State Law reference- Charter may provide tax limit, MCL 117.3(g). 
Section 9.2. - Subjects of Taxation. 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this charter city taxes shall be levied, collected and returned in the manner provided by statute. 
State Law reference- Mandatory charter provisions, MCL 117.3(f). 
Section 9.3. - Exemption from Taxes. 
    No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed, except as expressly required or permitted by statute. 
Section 9.4. - Tax Day. 
    Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by statute, the taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the first day of January, which shall be deemed the tax day. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 9.4 are superseded by MCL 211.2(2), as such statute provides that December 31 is the date for determining taxable status, notwithstanding the provisions of any city charter to the contrary. 
Section 9.5. - Personal Property-Jeopardy Assessment. 
    If the Treasurer finds that any person, who is, or may be, liable for taxes upon personal property, the taxable situs of which was in the City on tax day, intends to depart from the City or to remove therefrom personal property, which is, or may be, liable for taxation, or intends to conceal himself or his property, or intends to do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partly ineffectual, the proceedings to collect the tax, unless proceedings therefor cannot be brought without delay, he shall cause notice of his finding to be given such person, together with a demand for the immediate payment of the tax. Thereupon, the tax shall become immediately due and payable and the Treasurer shall have and exercise all the powers granted by law to township and city treasurers for the collection thereof. If the exact amount of any such tax has not, at the time of such finding, been determined because the same has not been spread upon the tax roll, the Treasurer shall estimate the amount of the tax upon such personal property and the estimate shall be presumed to be the amount of tax upon such property which, together with other taxes which have accrued thereon, shall become payable as hereinabove provided. 
    The tax so estimated by the Treasurer shall, upon the giving of the notice herein provided, become a lien upon the property liable for the tax. The lien shall be of the same type and legal effect as the lien upon personal property provided in Section 9.15. of this chapter. If the estimate of the Treasurer is in excess of the amount of tax spread against such property upon the tax roll, he shall refund the excess upon the demand of the person from whom it was collected or his legal representative. If such person furnishes evidence, satisfactory to the Treasurer, by bond or otherwise, that he will duly pay the tax or taxes to which the Treasurer's findings relates, then such tax or taxes shall not be payable prior to the time otherwise fixed for payment thereof. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 9.5 are superseded by MCL 211.691 et seq. 
Section 9.6. - Preparation of the Assessment Roll. 
    On or before the first Monday in March in each year the Assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the city subject to taxation, and shall file the same in the office of the City Clerk for public examinations. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to give notice by publication in one or more of the daily newspapers printed and circulated in the city, by not less than three insertions, the last of which shall be published not less than five days preceding said last mentioned date, that said assessment rolls will be on file in his office subject to public examination, from the first Monday in March until the meeting of the Board of Review, when they shall be delivered to said Board. Such rolls shall be prepared in accordance with statute and this charter. Values shall be estimated according to recognized methods of systematic assessment. The records of the Assessor shall show separate figures for the value of the land, of the building improvements and of personal property; and the method of estimating all such values shall be as nearly uniform as possible. 
    On or before the first Monday in March the Assessor shall give by first class mail a notice of any increase over the previous year in the assessed value of any property where such increase does not involve additional construction to the owner as shown by such assessment roll. The failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 9.6 are obsolete as the county now prepares tax rolls and extends the taxes thereon for the city pursuant to MCL 211.24a. 
Section 9.7. - Board of Review. 
    The Board of Review shall be composed of three freeholders who are qualified and registered electors of the city who during their term of office shall not be city officers or employees or be nominees or candidates for elective city office. The filing by a member of the Board of Review of his nomination petition for an elective city office or the filing of a consent thereto shall constitute a resignation from the Board of Review. One member of the Board shall be appointed by the Council annually in January, 1959 and each year thereafter for a term of three years, to replace the member whose term expires that year. The Council shall fix the compensation of the members of the Board. 
    The Board of Review shall annually in February select its own chairman for the ensuing year, and the Assessor shall be clerk of the Board and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for board of review, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 9.8. - Meetings of the Board of Review. 
    The Board of Review shall convene in its first session in the forenoon of the Tuesday following the second Monday in March of each year at the Council chambers, and shall continue in session for six hours during that day and each of the following three days, for the purpose of reviewing and correcting the assessment roll of the city. The Council may by appropriate action extend this period. 
    In each case in which the assessed value of any property is increased over the amount shown on the assessment roll as prepared by the Assessor, or any property is added to such roll by the Board, or the Board has resolved to consider at its second session such increasing of an assessment or the adding of any property to such roll, the Assessor shall give notice thereof to the owners as shown by such roll by first class letter mailed not later than the second day following the end of the first session of the Board. Such notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the second session of the Board. The failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
    The Board of Review shall convene in its second session on the Tuesday following the third Monday in March of each year at such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Council. Provided however, that at least one session thereof shall begin at 3:00 P.M. and shall continue in session until all interested persons have had an opportunity to be heard, but in no case for less than six hours. At the second session, the Board may not increase any assessment or add any property to the rolls, except in those cases in which the Board resolved at its first session to consider such increase or addition at its second session. 
(Amended 11-6-2007) 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 9.8 are superseded by MCL 211.29 et seq. See also MCL 211.161. 
Section 9.9. - Notice of Meetings [of Board of Review]. 
    The Council shall provide for giving notice to the public of the time and place of the meeting of the Board of Review. Such notice shall be given not less than ten days before the convening of the Board and as often thereafter as the Council deems fit. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 9.9 are superseded by MCL 211.29(6). See also MCL 211.161. 
Section 9.10. - Duties and Functions of Board of Review. 
    For the purpose of reviewing and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are by statute conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this charter. It shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments, and if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. In all cases the roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the tax day and no change in the status of any property after said day shall be considered by the Board in making its decisions. Except as otherwise provided by statute, no person other than the Board of Review shall make or authorize any change upon, or additions or corrections to, the assessment roll. It shall be the duty of the Assessor to keep a permanent record of all proceedings and to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 9.10 are superseded by MCL 211.29 et seq. See also MCL 211.161. 
Section 9.11. - Endorsement of Roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and not later than the first Monday in April, the majority of its members shall endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll. 
State Law reference- Completion of tax roll, MCL 211.30a; effect of roll, MCL 211.31. 
Section 9.12. - Clerk to Certify Tax Levy. 
    Within three days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Council determines shall be raised by general ad valorem tax. He shall also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all other amounts which the Council requires to be assessed, reassessed or charged upon any property or against any person. 
Section 9.13. - City Tax Roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the "City Tax Roll," and upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, as provided in Section 9.12., the Assessor shall spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the Council to be charged, assessed or reassessed against persons or property. He shall also spread the amount of the general ad valorem city tax, county tax and school tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. To avoid fractions in computation on any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by statute. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city. 
State Law reference- Tax roll preparation, MCL 211.42. 
Section 9.14. - Tax Roll Certified for Collection. 
    After spreading the taxes the Assessor shall certify the tax roll, and the Mayor shall annex his warrant thereto directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect prior to March first of the following year from the several persons named in said tax roll, the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments and charges on such roll all statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes. On or before June fifth, the roll shall be delivered to the Treasurer for collection. 
State Law reference- Tax collections, MCL 211.44 et seq. 
Section 9.15. - Tax Lien on Property. 
    On July first, the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon such real property, for such amounts and for all interest and charges thereon, and all personal taxes shall become a first lien on all personal property of such persons so assessed. Such lien shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances and liens to the extent provided by statute and shall continue until such taxes, interest and charges are paid. 
State Law reference- Lien for taxes, MCL 211.40. 
Section 9.16. - Taxes Due: Notification Thereof. 
    City taxes shall be due on July first of each year. The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon the persons named in the city tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall (a) publish between June fifteenth and July first, notice of the time when said taxes will be due for collection and the penalties and fees for late payment of same, and (b) mail a bill to each person named in such roll, but in cases of multiple ownership of property, only one bill need be mailed. 
    Failure on the part of the Treasurer to publish said notice or mail such bills shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll, nor release the person or property assessed from the penalties and fees provided in this chapter in case of late payment or non-payment of the same. 
Section 9.17. - Collection Fees. 
    All taxes paid on or before August thirty-first of each year shall be collected by the Treasurer without collection fee. On September first he shall add to all taxes paid thereafter a collection fee as the Council may determine not to exceed however, four per cent of the amount of said taxes. Such collection fee shall belong to the city and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. 
    It is provided however, that if delivery of the tax roll to the Treasurer, as provided in Section 9.14., is delayed for any reason by more than thirty days after June fifth, the application of the schedule of collection fees provided herein shall be postponed thirty days for the first thirty days of such delay, and shall be postponed an additional thirty days for each additional thirty days, or major fraction thereof, of such delay. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 9.17 are superseded by MCL 211.87. See MCL 211.16. 
Section 9.18. - Failure or Refusal to Pay Personal Property Tax. 
    If any person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any personal property tax assessed to him or them by October first, the Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal property of such person, firm or corporation to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees and charges for subsequent sale, wherever the same may be found in the state, and from which seizure no property shall be exempt. He may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges in accordance with statutory provisions. The Treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal property, sue, in accordance with statute, the person, firm or corporation to whom it is assessed. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 9.18 are superseded by MCL 211.89-211.91. See MCL 211.161. 
Section 9.19. - Delinquent Tax Roll to County Treasurer. 
    All city taxes on real property remaining uncollected by the Treasurer on the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by him shall be returned to the County Treasurer in the manner and with like effect as provided by statute for returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall include all the additional assessments, charges and fees hereinbefore provided, which shall be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each property or person. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the County Treasurer are collected, in accordance with statute, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid. If by change in statute or otherwise, the Treasurer of the County of Wayne is no longer charged with the collection of delinquent real property taxes, such delinquent taxes shall be collected in the manner then provided by statute for the collection of delinquent township, school and county taxes. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 9.19 appear superseded by MCL 211.55 et seq. See MCL 211.161. 
Section 9.20. - State, County and School Taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of statute relative to the collection of and accounting for such taxes shall apply. For these purposes the Treasurer shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as township treasurers under statute. 
CHAPTER X. - BORROWING POWER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Permissible charter provisions, MCL 117.4a, 117.5(e), (g); bond issues generally, MCL 133.1 et seq. 

Section 10.1. - Grant of Authority to Borrow. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of statute and constitution, the Council may by ordinance or resolution borrow money and issue bonds and other evidence of indebtedness therefor, for any purpose within the scope of powers vested in the city. Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include, but not be limited to, the following types: 
(a)  General obligation bonds which pledge the full faith, credit and resources of the city for the payment of such obligations, including bonds for the city's portion of public improvements; 
(b)  Notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes, but the proceeds of such notes may be spent only in accordance with appropriations as provided in Section 8.5. 
(c)  In case of fire, flood or other calamity, emergency loans due in not more than five years for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property; 
(d)  Special assessment bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such special assessments. Such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts, or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and a general obligation of the city. 
(e)  Mortgage bonds for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving or operating of any public utility which the city is authorized by this charter to acquire or operate; provided such bonds shall not impose any liability upon such city but shall be secured only upon the property and revenues of such public utility, including a franchise, stating the terms upon which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same, which franchise shall in no case extend for a longer period than twenty years from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise on foreclosure. A sinking fund shall be created in the event of the issuance of such bonds, by setting aside such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the public utility as may be deemed sufficient for the payment of the mortgage bonds at maturity, unless serial bonds are issued of such a nature that no sinking fund is required. 
(f)  Bonds issued at a rate of interest not to exceed six percent per annum to refund money advanced or paid on special assessments. 
(g)  Bonds for the refunding of the funded indebtedness of the city. 
(h)  Revenue bonds as authorized by statute which are secured only by the revenues from a public improvement and do not constitute a general obligation of the city. 
Section 10.2. - Limits of Borrowing Powers. 
    The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed ten percent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city, provided that in computing such net bonded indebtedness there shall be excluded money borrowed under the following sections of this chapter: 10.1(b) (tax anticipation notes), 10.1(c) (emergency loans), 10.1(d) (special assessment bonds even though they are also a general obligation of the city), 10.1(e) (mortgage bonds), 10.1(f) (special assessment refunding bonds), 10.1(h) (revenue bonds), and other bonds which do not constitute a general obligation of the city. 
    The amount of emergency loans which the Council may make under the provisions of Section 10.1(c) of this charter may not exceed three-eighths of one percent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city. 
    The total amount of special assessment bonds pledging the full faith and credit of the city shall at no time exceed five percent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city, nor shall such bonds be issued in any consecutive period of twelve months in excess of one percent of such assessed value unless authorized by a three-fifths vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
Section 10.3. - Authorization of Electors Required. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 10.3(b), no bonds pledging the full faith and credit of the city shall be issued without the approval of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(b)  The restriction of Section 10.3(a) shall not apply to general obligation bonds issued to pay for the city's portion of public improvements the remainder of which are to be financed by special assessments, tax anticipation notes issued under Section 10.1(b), emergency bonds issued under Section 10.1(c), special assessment bonds issued under Section 10.1(d), refunding bonds issued under Section 10.1(g) or to bonds the issuance of which cannot, by statute, be so restricted by this charter. 
(c)  Only those persons who have property assessed for taxes in the city and their husbands and wives shall be entitled to vote on the approval of any issue of bonds which constitute a general obligation of the city, but no person may so vote unless he is a registered elector. 
Editor's note- The freeholder requirement in charter § 10.3(c) is unconstitutional. Phoenix v. Kolodziejski , 399 U.S. 204 (1970). 
Section 10.4. - Applicability of Other Statutory Restrictions. 
    The issuance of any bonds not requiring the approval of the electors shall be subject to applicable requirements of statute with regard to public notice in advance of the authorization of such issues, filing of petitions for a referendum on such issuance, holding of such referendum and other applicable procedural requirements. 
Section 10.5. - Preparation and Record of Bonds. 
    Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued, and it shall be unlawful for any officer of the city to use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose. Any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be kept by the Treasurer. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "Cancelled." 
Section 10.6. - Unissued Bonds. 
    No unissued bonds of the city shall be issued or sold to secure funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if any such bonds are not sold within three years after authorization such authorization shall, as to such bonds, be null and void, and such bonds shall be cancelled. 
Section 10.7. - Deferred Payment Contracts. 
    The city may enter into installment contracts for the purchase of property or capital equipment. Each of such contracts shall not extend over a period greater than five years nor shall the total amounts of principal payable under all such contracts exceed the sum equal to one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of one (1) percent of the total assessed valuation of the city in any one fiscal year. 
    All such deferred payments shall be included in the budget for the year in which the installment is payable. 
CHAPTER XI. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Permissible charter provisions, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5. 

Section 11.1. - General Power Relative to Special Assessments. 
    The Council shall have the power to determine, by resolution, with or without petition, that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property in special districts especially benefited, in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived, except as provided in Section 11.3. 
Section 11.2. - Detailed Procedure to be Fixed by Ordinance. 
    The Council shall prescribe by ordinance, the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, creation of districts, notices and hearings, making and confirming of assessment rolls, correction of errors in the rolls, the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, for the collection of interest at a rate not to exceed six percent per year on assessments payable in installments, collection of assessments, refunds, and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment method. 
    Such ordinance shall be subject to the following specific provisions, as well as to other provisions of this Chapter: 
(a)  No public improvement to be financed in whole or part by special assessment shall be undertaken, or any contract let therefor, before adoption by the Council of a resolution finally determining to proceed with such improvement and establishing a special assessment district therefor. 
(b)  No resolution, finally determining to proceed with an improvement and establishing any special assessment district therefor, shall be adopted, until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing has been held on the advisability of so proceeding, which hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district, as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. 
(c)  No resolution finally determining to proceed with an improvement and establishing any special assessment district therefor shall be adopted, except by the affirmative vote of five members of the Council if, prior to such adoption written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owners of property in the district which, according to estimates, will be required to bear more than fifty percent of the amount of such special assessment. 
(d)  No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed by the Council, until after a meeting of the Council has been held for the purpose of reviewing such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. 
    For the purposes of subsection (c) of this Section, only: (1) in the case of tenancies by the entirety or joint tenancies, any one tenant shall be considered an owner entitled to file objections; (2) in the case of tenancies in common, objections shall be valid only if signed by all the common tenants; and (3) in the case of property being sold under land contract, the party in whose name the property is assessed for taxation shall be deemed to be the owner. 
Section 11.3. - Assessment for Paving Improvement on Local Streets. 
    Special assessments made for the purpose of paying the cost of paving any local street shall be assessed pro-rata and according to the frontage of each parcel abutting upon the improvement. Provided however, in the case where the paving abuts the side of any corner lot the cost thereof shall be assessed as follows: A corner lot shall be assessed sixty percent thereof, and the remaining forty percent shall be assessed pro-rata and according to the frontage of each parcel lying within fifty percent of the block in which the corner lot is located. Provided further however, that if from the shape or size of any such parcel of land an assessment thereof according to the above set forth formula would be unjust or disproportionate to the assessments on the other parcels of land in the district, the Council may assess such parcel of land as in their opinion will be just. 
Section 11.4. - Initiatory Petitions. 
    A public improvement the cost of which in whole or part to be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived, may be initiated by a petition as hereinafter provided. 
    An initiatory petition shall be signed by not less than fifty-one percent of the property owners in the proposed public improvement district, and all signatures on said petition shall be obtained within thirty days before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the Council and set forth the proposed public improvement and the proposed public improvement district. 
    For the purpose of obtaining signatures to the petition as property owners, a signature by one tenant in the case of tenants by the entireties or joint tenancies shall be considered adequate. In the case of tenancies in common the signature of all the known tenants shall be a requirement, and in the case of property being sold under land contract, the party in whose name the property is assessed for taxation, shall be deemed to be the owner. 
Section 11.5. - Council Procedure on Initiatory Petitions. 
    Upon receiving such initiatory petition from the Clerk, the Council shall submit a copy thereof to each of the city departments for the purposes of review and examination. Such city departments shall upon completion of the review and examination submit to the Council a written report in relation to its application with their respective department. In the absence of written objections being received from the city departments, the Council shall resolve to proceed with the prescribed special assessment procedure for the making of any public improvement to a public hearing on the petition for public improvement. Provided however, should the written reports from the city departments disclose objections thereto, the Council shall provide a hearing to be held on the advisability of so proceeding with the petitioned improvements, which meeting shall be held not less than one week after notice thereof has been sent by first class mail to all of the property owners who have petitioned for the proposed district. 
Section 11.6. - Special Assessment Powers. 
    In addition to the other improvements which the city may make and finance, in whole or in part, by special assessments, the city may: 
(a)  Construct, establish, and extend facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits as a public improvement, and finance the same in whole or in part by special assessments. 
(b)  Install a boulevard lighting system on any street and finance the same, in whole or in part, by special assessment upon land abutting thereon. 
(c)  Install and connect sewers and waterworks on and to property within the city and finance the same in whole or in part by special assessments. 
(d)  Provide for the payment of special assessments in one installment or in annual installments not to exceed ten in number. The first such installment to be due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll, and subsequent installments to be due on July first of each succeeding year and to be placed upon the annual city tax roll, if delinquent, and for an interest charge only until the due date of each such deferred installment not to exceed six percent per year, subject to the right of advance payment of any such installment with interest only to the date of payment. 
Section 11.7. - Disposition of Excessive Special Assessments. 
    The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is five percent or less of the assessment, but should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five percent the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro-rate basis to the owners of the property assessed. Such refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special assessments. 
Section 11.8. - Additional Assessments: Corrections of Invalid Special Assessments. 
    Additional pro-rate assessments may be made when any special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incident thereto, or to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such assessment roll. Provided, that the additional pro-rate assessment shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the assessment as originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the Council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be published and mailed as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessments have been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for an original assessment and, whenever any sum or part thereof, levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside, has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment, or if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be made. 
    No judgment or decree, nor any act of the Council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or which by regular mode of proceeding, might have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
Section 11.9. - Limitation on Suits and Actions. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment (a) unless, within thirty days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the Council of intention to file such suit or action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and (b) unless such suit or action shall be commenced within sixty days after confirmation of the roll. 
Section 11.10. - Lien and Collection of Special Assessments. 
    Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll the special assessment shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and shall until paid be a lien upon the property assessed for the amount of such assessment and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by this charter for city taxes. 
    Special assessments or installments thereof, which become due on July first of any year shall be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on July 1 of the same year, and if uncollected on the following first day of March, shall be returned to the County Treasurer with unpaid taxes as provided in Section 9.19. 
    The initial special assessment installments which become due other than on July first shall, if unpaid for ninety days or more on May first of any year be certified as delinquent to the Council by the Treasurer, and the Council shall place such delinquent assessments on the tax roll for that year together with accrued interest to July first of such year. The total amount of such assessment and interest shall thereafter be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on July first of that year, shall be subject to the same fees and penalties as are city taxes due on that date, and if uncollected on the following March first shall be returned to the County Treasurer with unpaid taxes as provided in Section 9.19. 
Section 11.11. - Special Assessment Accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special assessment account, and shall be used to pay for the costs of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and of expenses incidental thereto, to repay any principal or interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments. 
Section 11.12. - Assessments for Sidewalks, Hazards, Etc. 
    The assessment for the cost of the construction or maintenance of any sidewalk or the abatement of any hazard or nuisance to be made pursuant to subsections (v), (w), (x) and (y) of Section 2.3 or for any similar assessment, against an individual or property, shall be made by resolution of the Council. Notice of the time at which the Council will act thereon shall be given by first class mail to the owner of the property to be assessed as shown by the current tax roll of the city, except that no notice shall be required in the case of assessments for the removal of weeds or any hazard. For the purposes of collection of such assessments, the adoption of such resolution shall be equivalent to the confirmation of a special assessment roll. The amount of any such assessment shall become a debt to the city, upon adoption of such resolution, and shall be subject to the collection fees and become a lien as provided in Section 11.10. 
Section 11.13. - Assessments on Single Lots. 
    When any expenditure is made on account of any separate or single lot, parcel of land, or lands, or premises, which, by the provisions of this charter or by law, the City is authorized to charge and collect as a special assessment against the same, and which assessment is not of that class of special assessments required to be made pro rata upon lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district, a statement of the labor or services for which such expenditure was incurred, verified by the Controller, with a description of the lot and the name of the owner or person chargeable therewith, if known, shall be reported to the Council in the manner prescribed by it. The Council shall determine the part of such expenditure that shall be charged, and the person against whom, if known, and the premises upon which the same shall be levied, as a special assessment. As often as the Council deems expedient, the Clerk shall give notice of the several amounts so determined and reported to the several persons chargeable therewith. Such notice shall be sent by first class mail to the last known addresses of such persons as shown on the assessment roll of the City, or by publication. Such notice shall state the basis of the assessment, and the amount thereof, and shall give a reasonable time, not less than thirty days, within which payment shall be made to the Treasurer. In all cases where payment is not made within the time set, the fact shall be reported by the Treasurer to the Assessor, who shall charge such amounts, together with a penalty of ten percent of such amounts, against the persons or real property chargeable therewith, on the next tax roll. 
Section 11.14. - Failure to Mail Notice. 
    The requirement for mailing any notice required to be so sent by this charter or by ordinance, respecting any step in the special assessment procedure, shall not be a jurisdictional requirement and shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll. 
CHAPTER XII. - PURCHASES-CONTRACTS-LEASES 

Section 12.1. - Purchase and Sale of Property. 
    The Council may create by ordinance a purchasing department, and until such adoption the Mayor shall designate an administrative officer of the city in charge of purchasing who shall be known as the purchasing officer, who shall be responsible for the purchase and sale of all city property, and shall also be responsible for the procurement, storage and distribution of all city supplies and equipment. 
    Comparative prices shall be obtained in writing or by phone from prospective suppliers for purchases of all materials, supplies and capital improvements of less than Four Thousand and 00/100 [($4,000.00)] Dollars value, not including personal service contracts not associated with capital improvements, except (a) when the Mayor shall determine that no advantage to the city would result or, b) in the case of emergencies. 
    Comparative written quotes shall be obtained from at least three prospective suppliers for purchases of all materials supplies and capital improvement of between Four Thousand and 00/100 ($4,000.00) [Dollars] and Eight Thousand and 00/100 ($8,000.00) Dollars in value not including personal service contracts not associated with capital improvements, except a) when the Mayor shall determine that no advantage to the City would result or b) in the case of emergencies. 
    For all purchases of materials supplies and capital improvement in excess of Eight Thousand and 00/100 ($8,000.00) [Dollars] in value (a) the purchases shall be approved by the Council, and (b) sealed bids shall be obtained unless the Council by formal unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting determine that no advantage to the City would result from competitive bidding. 
    All purchases and sales shall be evidenced by written contract or purchase order. Purchases in excess of Eight Thousand [and 00/100] ($8,000.00) Dollars in value shall be made from the lowest competent bidder meeting specification, unless the Council shall determine (a) the public interest would be better served by accepting a higher bid, or (b) rejection of all submitted bids. 
    No purchase shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitation contained in this section. 
    Sales of city owned materials, supplies and capital improvements shall be as prescribed by the Council. 
    The city may not purchase, sell or lease any real estate or any interest therein, except by the affirmative vote of five or more members of the Council. 
    The Council may authorize the making of public improvements or the performance of any other city work by any city agency without competitive bidding. 
    The purchase and sale of all city property shall be subject to the provisions of Section 5.11. 
    The Council shall by resolution establish detailed purchasing, sale and contract procedures not inconsistent with this charter. 
(Amended 11-7-1994; Res. No. 2014-19, 6-16-2014) 
Editor's note- Language in the 1994 amendment to § 12.1 indicates that the section had been amended by a prior proposition. 
Section 12.2. - Contracts. 
    The authority to contract on behalf of the city is vested in the Council, and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of statute and of this charter, provided that purchases and sales be made by the purchasing officer subject to the provisions of Section 12.1. 
    Any contract or agreement in an amount of one thousand dollars or more made with form or terms other than the standard city purchase order form, shall before execution be submitted to the attorney and his opinion obtained with respect to its form and legality. A copy of all contracts or agreements requiring such opinion shall be filed in the office of the Clerk together with a copy of the opinion. 
    Before any contract, agreement or purchase order obligating the city to pay an amount of one thousand dollars or more is executed, the controller of the city shall first have certified that an appropriation has been made for the payment thereof, or that sufficient funds will be available if it be for a purpose being financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessments, or for some other purpose not chargeable to a budget appropriation. In the case of a contract or agreement obligating the city for periodic payments in future fiscal years for the furnishing of a continuing service or the leasing of property, such certification need not cover those payments which will be due in future fiscal years, but this exception shall not apply to a contract for the purchase or construction of a public improvement unless such purchase of [or] construction is being financed by an installment contract under authority of Section 10.7. Certification by the purchasing officer of the city shall be endorsed on each contract, agreement or purchase order requiring same or shall be filed as an attachment thereto. 
    No contract or purchase order shall be subdivided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitations contained in this Section. 
    No contract shall be amended after the same has been made except upon the authority of the Council, provided that the purchasing officer may amend contracts for those purchases and sales made by him under the authority of Section 12.1. 
    No compensation shall be paid to any contractor or vendor except in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
    No contract shall be made with any person, firm or corporation in default to the city. 
    An individual agreement of employment shall not be deemed a contract requiring opinion by the attorney or certification by the controller of the city. 
Section 12.3. - Restriction on Powers to Let Property. 
    Any agreement or contract for the renting or letting of public property for a period longer than three years shall be subject to the same referendum procedure as provided in the case of ordinances passed by the Council. However, a summary of the terms of any such agreement or contract shall be published within ten days after its approval by the Council and any petition for such referendum must be filed within thirty days after such publication to be effective. 
    The transfer or assignment of any agreement or contract for the renting or letting of public property may be made only upon approval of the Council, but approval of such transfer shall not be subject to referendum. 
    Rentals and leases and renewals thereof shall be for a fair consideration as determined by the Council. 
    The city shall not sell any park, cemetery or part thereof, except where such park is not required under an official master plan of the city, unless approved by three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
Section 12.4. - Debts. 
    The city shall not repudiate any debt by any change in its charter or by consolidation with any other municipality. 
CHAPTER XIII. - MUNICIPAL OWNED UTILITIES 

Section 13.1. - General Powers Respecting Utilities. 
    Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and statute, the city shall have the power to acquire, own, establish, construct, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, a public utility for supplying water to the municipality and its inhabitants for domestic, commercial and municipal purposes, and may sell and deliver water without its corporate limits in an amount not to exceed the limitations set by the Constitution and statutes. Subject to statutory provisions, the city shall also have the power to acquire, own, establish, construct, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including, but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment and garbage facilities, and facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits. 
Editor's note- Charter may provide for acquisition, etc., of utilities, MCL 117.4c; authority to acquire, operate, etc., water system, MCL 124.251 et seq. 
Section 13.2. - Management of Municipally Owned Utilities. 
    All municipally owned or operated utilities shall be administered as a regular department of the city government under the management and supervision of the Mayor. 
Section 13.3. - Rates. 
    The Council shall have power to fix from time to time such just and reasonable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the city and others with such public utility services as the city may provide. There shall be no discrimination in such rates within any classification of users thereof, nor shall free service be permitted, but higher rates may be charged outside the corporate limits of the city. 
State Law reference- Water or sewer rates, MCL 117.5e. 
Section 13.4. - Utility Rates and Charges-Collection. 
    The Council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility rates and charges of the city. Such ordinance shall provide at least: 
(a)  That the city shall have as security for the collection of such utility rates and charges a lien upon the real property supplied by such utility, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of such utility service and shall be enforced in the manner provided in such ordinance. 
(b)  The terms and conditions under which utility services may be discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges. 
(c)  With respect to the collection of rates charged for water the city shall have all the powers granted to cities in Act 178 of the Public Acts of 1939, as amended [now repealed]. 
State Law reference- Collection of water and sewer charges, MCL 123.161 et seq. 
Section 13.5. - Disposal of Utility Plants and Property. 
    Unless approved by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors voting thereon at a regular or special election, the city shall not sell, exchange, lease or in any way dispose of any property, easements, equipment[,] privilege or asset belonging to and appertaining to any municipally owned public utility which is needed to continue operating such utility. All contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases or other forms of transfer in violation of this section shall be void and of no effect as against the city. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of any articles of machinery or equipment of any city owned public utility which are worn out or useless or which have been, or could with advantage to the service be, replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment, to the leasing of property not necessary for the operation of the utility, or to the exchange of property or easements for other needed property or easements. It is provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not extend to vacation or abandonment of streets, as provided by statute. 
State Law reference- Sale of capital assets of municipally owned utility, MCL 117.4e(3). 
Section 13.6. - Utility Finances. 
    The rates and charges for any municipal public utility for the furnishing of water, light, heat, power, gas or sewage treatment and garbage disposal shall be so fixed as to at least meet all the costs of such utility including depreciation. 
    Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation by the city of each public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts under an appropriate fund caption, which accounts shall be classified in accordance with generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for all service furnished to, or rendered by, other city departments or agencies shall be recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the financial position of each utility and the results of its operation, which report shall be available for inspection at the office of the Clerk. 
CHAPTER XIV. - PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES 

Section 14.1. - Franchises Remain in Effect. 
    All franchises to which the City of Trenton is a party when this charter becomes effective, shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and conditions. 
Section 14.2. - Granting of Public Utility Franchises. 
    Public utility franchises and all renewals and extensions thereof and amendments thereto, shall be granted by ordinance only. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than thirty years. 
    No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the Council shall be enacted nor become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the people at a regular or special election and received the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the Council nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be ordered unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the Council shall have first been paid to the Treasurer by the grantee. 
    A franchise ordinance or renewal or extension thereof or amendment thereto which is subject to revocation at the will of the Council may be enacted by the Council without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally enacted and shall have so been on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection for at least four weeks after publication of a notice that such ordinance is so on file. 
Section 14.3. - Conditions of Public Utility Franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the city, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise any provision within the powers of the city to impose or require: 
(a)  To repeal the same for misuse, non-use or failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency, which in any event shall be at least in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission, or its successor; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. The rates and charges shall in no event exceed the rates and charges as prescribed by the Michigan Public Service Commission, or its successor; 
(d)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)  To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and other public places and the space above and beneath them; 
(f)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
Section 14.4. - Regulation of Rates. 
    All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares and charges, and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits. 
Section 14.5. - Use of Public Places By Utilities. 
    Every public utility whether it has a franchise or not shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and other public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and other public places of the city by the city and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable, and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final. 
Section 14.6. - Revocable Permits. 
    Temporary permits for public utilities, revocable at any time at the will of the council, may be granted by the council by resolution on such terms and conditions as it shall determine, provided that such permits, shall in no event be construed to be franchises or amendments to franchises. 
CHAPTER XV. - SUPERVISORS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter ch. XV are superseded by MCL 46.401 et seq. 

Section 15.1. - Number of Supervisors. 
    The city shall have the maximum number of representatives on the County Board of Supervisors to which it is entitled by statute. 
Section 15.2. - Appointment of Supervisors. 
    The representatives of the city on the Board of Supervisors shall be appointed by the Council for an indefinite period, and may be removed at the will of the Council. Such representatives shall meet all the requirements of Section 5.1, and who shall hold elective office at the time of their appointment. In case any representative of the city on the Board of Supervisors shall be unable to perform the duties of his office for any reason, the Council may appoint another qualified person holding elective office to serve temporarily in his stead. 
Section 15.3. - Duties of Supervisors. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the representatives of the city on the Board of Supervisors shall perform the statutory duties of Supervisors. In the performance of his duties each Supervisor shall represent the city, its inhabitants and its government to the best of his ability. 
Section 15.4. - Compensation of Supervisors. 
    Representatives of the city on the Board of Supervisors shall be entitled to retain any compensation and expense allowances paid to them by the county as members of the Board of Supervisors, but shall receive no extra compensation from the city for their work as Supervisors. 
CHAPTER XVI. - JUSTICE COURT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter ch. XVI are obsolete. See MCL 600.9921, 600.9930. 

Section 16.1. - Establishment of Court. 
    There is hereby established a Justice Court in the city to be presided over by two Justices of the Peace elected in accordance with Section 3.6. At the time of the framing of this charter the city is without required statutory population per the 1950 decennial census to establish a Municipal Court. At such time as the city is authorized by statute to establish a Municipal Court, the Council shall by ordinance establish a Municipal Court of the City of Trenton, and shall abolish the Justice Court as herein established. Provided, however, the two Justices of the Peace who are holding office at the time thereof, shall continue in office for the balance of the term of office to which they were elected. 
Section 16.2. - Compensation of the Justices. 
    The compensation for each of the Justices of the Peace under this charter shall be fixed at $3,000.00 per annum. Thereafter, the Council may be ordinance otherwise change the annual salaries of the Justices of the Peace. No ordinance changing the annual salaries of the Justices of the Peace may be enacted or amended less than sixty days before the next primary election at which the Justices of the Peace are to be nominated. Such salaries are to be paid in the same manner as other city officers are paid. 
    The salary for the office provided by charter or ordinance, shall be in lieu of all fees both in civil and criminal cases to which the Justices might be entitled under statutory law, except those for the performance of marriage ceremonies and for administering oaths in matters not connected with suits and proceedings in this court. 
Section 16.3. - Bond. 
    Each Justice of the Peace in addition to any other security required by law to be given for the performance of his official duties, shall before entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond to the city in such sum as the Council shall prescribe, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of Justice of the Peace within and for the city, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the city. 
Section 16.4. - Power and Jurisdiction-General. 
    The Justices of the Peace of the city shall have and exercise therein and within the county, the same jurisdiction, powers and duties as are or may be conferred by law on Justices of the Peace in townships by statutes, and shall be subject to such general laws with respect to such Justices, except as otherwise provided in this charter. They shall have concurrent jurisdiction with other Justices in the County of Wayne as to all crimes, offenses, and misdemeanors alleged to have been committed outside of the city but within the County of Wayne. 
Section 16.5. - Jurisdiction in Charter and Ordinance Cases. 
    The Justices of the Peace shall have authority to hear, try, and determine all suits and prosecutions for the recovery and enforcing of fines, penalties, and forfeitures imposed by this charter and the ordinances of the city, and to punish offenders for the violation of such charter and ordinances, as, in such charter or ordinances, is prescribed and directed. 
Section 16.6. - Extended Jurisdiction. 
    The Justices of the Peace shall also have: 
(a)  Jurisdiction to the amount of $500.00 in all civil matters ex contractu and ex delicto with such exceptions and restrictions as are provided by law. 
(b)  Such power and authority as can, under Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq), as amended, be conferred by this Charter to set aside the verdict or judgment in any civil cause and grant a new trial therein, to be exercised in such manner and on such conditions as provided in said act. The filing of a motion for new trial or to set aside a verdict or judgment shall have such an effect on the time for taking an appeal from any judgment and upon the issuance and levy of execution or other similar process and sale thereunder and on other proceedings in said cause as provided in said act. 
(c)  Such additional powers and authority as may now or hereafter be conferred upon city Justices of the Peace by statute. 
Section 16.7. - Procedure in Justice Court. 
    The proceedings in all suits and actions before the Justices of the Peace and the exercise of the powers and duties conferred upon and required of them, shall, except as otherwise provided in this charter, be according to and governed by the general laws applicable to justice courts in home rule cities and to the proceedings before such courts. 
Section 16.8. - Place and Conduct of Court. 
    The Council shall furnish necessary supplies and a suitable place for the conducting of court by the Justices. It may regulate the hours of court of said Justices and may make other necessary and property rules and regulations for the conduct of the business of the court, which are not inconsistent with this charter or the statutes. 
Section 16.9. - Clerk and Personnel of the Court. 
    The Council may provide by ordinance for a clerk, one or more deputy clerks and personnel for the Justice Court, whose duties shall be prescribed by the Justices of the Peace and the Council, and whose compensation shall be fixed by the Council. 
Section 16.10. - Fees, Fines and Penalties: Prosecution of State Penal Cases. 
    All fees in lieu of which a salary is paid such Justices and all fines, penalties, forfeitures and moneys collected or received by the Justices shall be paid over by such Justices to the Treasurer on or before the first day of the next month after the collection or receipt thereof; and the Justices shall take the receipt of the Treasurer therefor and file the same with the Clerk. Failure of the Justices to comply with the foregoing provisions shall constitute misconduct in office. 
    All such fees and all fines, penalties, forfeitures and moneys collected in city ordinance and charter cases shall be credited to the general fund of the city. All costs and fines recovered for the violation of the penal laws of the state, when collected and paid into the city treasury, shall be disposed of as provided by law. 
    The expenses of prosecution before the Justices for alleged violations of penal laws of the state, and in punishing the offenders, shall be paid by the County of Wayne. 
Section 16.11. - Docket. 
    The Justices of the Peace shall keep, at the place of holding court, a docket in the manner required by statute. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Section 16.12. - Transfer of Cases. 
    In case of the absence, disability or disqualification of the Justices, any other Justice of the Peace or Municipal Judge of the County of Wayne shall be qualified to act in the place of and for the Justices in the performance of any of the duties imposed upon them by statute or this charter. 
    The Council shall be ordinance fix the compensation to be paid any such Justice or Judge for such services, and the procedure to be followed in calling upon him so to act. Unless the Council shall so provide by ordinance, no such Justice shall so act or be entitled to compensation therefor. 
Section 16.13. - Violations Bureau. 
    The Council shall have power and authority to establish, by ordinance, a Traffic Violations Bureau within the Court for the handling only of violations of ordinances and regulations of the city restricting the parking of vehicles. The creation of such a bureau by the Council shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in court should such person so choose. 
Section 16.14. - Constables. 
    The Council shall appoint one or more constables. Such constables shall have like powers and authorities in matters of civil and criminal nature, and in relation to the service of process, civil and criminal, as are conferred by law on constables in townships. They shall have power also to serve all process issued for breaches of ordinances of the city, and shall receive the statutory fees of their office. The bond of the constables shall be that required of constables in townships, and shall be paid by the city in accordance with Section 5.13. 
CHAPTER XVII. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 17.1. - City Liability. 
    The city shall not be liable for damages sustained by any person either to his person or property by reason of the negligence of the city, its officers or employees, nor by reason of any defective condition of or obstruction in any public place, unless such person shall serve or cause to be served upon the Clerk within sixty days after the injury resulting in such damages shall have occurred a notice in writing, which notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the manner in which it occurred, the extent of such damages as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time by the claimant and a statement that the person sustaining such damages intends to hold the city liable for such damages as may have been sustained by him. 
    The city shall not be liable for any damages to person or property arising out of any such injury unless there shall have been first presented to the Clerk a claim in writing and under oath setting forth particularly the time, place, nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed by reason thereof. No person shall bring any action against the city for any damages until such claim shall have been filed with the Clerk and until the Council shall have been given opportunity to act thereon either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim. 
    It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the city under this section that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim as in this section required were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as herein provided. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter § 17.1 are superseded by MCL 691.1401 et seq. 
Section 17.2. - No Estoppel. 
    No estoppel may be created against the city. 
Section 17.3. - Records to be Public. 
    All records of the city shall be public, shall be kept in city offices except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safe keeping to be elsewhere, and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
State Law reference- Records to be available to general public in compliance with MCL 15.231 et seq., MCL 117.3(l). 
Section 17.4. - Definition of Publication, Mailing of Notices. 
    The requirement contained in this Charter for the publishing or publication of locally required notices or ordinances shall be met either by publishing an appropriate insertion in a newspaper published in the English language for the dissemination of news of a general character which newspaper shall have a general circulation at regular intervals in the City for at least two years immediately preceding the time that it is used for such publication purposes or; by posting local notices and ordinances on the City's official internet website, or the public access channel of any cable or satellite provider serving the City together with a posting of a written copy at City Hall, the Westfield Activity Center, and the Public Library. The Publisher of the newspaper, or in the case of website, cable, satellite and hard copy posting, the City Clerk or his or her assistant, shall annex to a printed copy of such notice, ordinance or proceeding, an affidavit specifying the times of publication or posting, which shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
    In any case in which this Charter requires the mailing of notices, the affidavit of the officer or employee responsible for such mailing that such notice was mailed, shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing. 
(Res. No. 2011-22, 6-20-2011) 
Section 17.5. - Vested Rights Continued. 
    After the effective date of this charter, the city shall be vested with all the property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects and the records, files, books and papers belonging to the Village. No right or liability, either in favor of or against the Village, existing at the time this charter becomes effective and no suit or prosecution of any character shall in any manner be affected by any change, resulting from the adoption of this charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the Village shall be the debts and liabilities of the city, and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such change shall be collected. 
Section 17.6. - Trusts. 
    All trusts established for any municipal purpose shall be used and continued in accordance with the terms of such trust, subject to the cy pres doctrine. The Council may in its discretion receive and hold any property in trust for any municipal purpose and shall apply the same to the execution of such trust and for no other purposes, except in cases where the cy pres doctrine shall apply. 
Section 17.7. - Vacancies in Appointive Boards and Commissions. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, if a vacancy occurs in the membership of any appointive board or commission, the authority responsible for the appointment of the person whose position has become vacant shall fill such vacancy by appointment of a qualified person for the unexpired term of such person. 
Section 17.8. - Definitions and Interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context: 
(a)  All words used in this charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. 
(b)  The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
(c)  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate, and to partnerships as well as to individuals. 
(d)  The words "printer" and "printing" shall include reproductions by printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing or any similar method. 
(e)  Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include printing and typewriting. 
(f)  The word "Village" shall mean the municipal corporation of Trenton as it existed prior to the effective date of this charter, including the period from and after its incorporation as a city and until such effective date. 
(g)  The word "officer" shall include the Mayor and other members of the Council, the administrative officers, members of city boards and commissions created by or pursuant to this charter, and the Justices of the Peace. 
(h)  The word "statute" shall denote the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in effect at the time the provision of the charter containing the word "statute" is to be applied. 
(i)  All references to specific Public Acts of the State of Michigan shall be to such acts as are in effect at the time the reference to such act is to be applied. 
(j)  The words "law" or "general laws of the state" shall denote the Constitution and the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in effect at the time the provision of the charter containing the words "law" or "general laws of the state" is to be applied, and applicable common law. 
(k)  The word "freeholder" shall include persons purchasing property on land contract. 
(l)  All references to section numbers shall refer to section numbers of this charter. 
Section 17.9. - Sundays and Holidays. 
    Whenever the date fixed by this charter for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
Section 17.10. - Charter and Section Headings. 
    The chapter, section and sub-section headings used in this charter are for convenience only, and shall not be considered part of the charter. 
Section 17.11. - Processes Against City. 
    All process against the city shall run against the city in the corporate name thereof, and may be served by leaving a true copy with the Mayor or Clerk. 
Section 17.12. - Quorum. 
    Except as provided otherwise in this charter, a quorum of any board or commission created by or pursuant to this charter shall be a majority of the members of such board or commission in office at the time, but not less than two members. 
Section 17.13. - Penalties for Misconduct in Office. 
    Any officer of the city found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of any act declared by this charter to constitute misconduct in office may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days or both, in the discretion of the court. The punishment provided in this section shall be in addition to that of having the office declared vacant as provided in Section 5.2. 
Section 17.14. - Amendments. 
    This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by statute. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Law reference- Charter amendments, MCL 117.21. 
Section 17.15. - Severability of Charter Provisions. 
    If any provision, section, article or clause of this charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the charter which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end this charter is declared to be severable. 
CHAPTER XVIII. - SCHEDULE 

Section 18.1. - Status of Schedule Chapter. 
    The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the government of the city under this charter and to accomplish the transition from Village to city government, and it shall constitute a part of this charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish this end. 
Section 18.2. - Election on Adoption of Charter. 
(1)  Date. This charter shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electors of the City of Trenton at a special election to be held on Tuesday, July 16, 1957. At the same special election the elective officers provided for in this charter shall also be elected as hereinafter provided. The charter shall be adopted if a majority of the ballots cast thereon are in favor of adoption. 
(2)  Form of Ballot. The form of the ballot for the submission of this charter shall be as follows 
Instructions: A cross (X) in the square ? before the word "Yes" is in favor of the proposed charter, and a cross (X) in the square ? before the word "No" is against the proposed charter. 
Shall the proposed charter for the City of Trenton, drafted by the Charter Commission elected on January 21, 1957 be adopted. 
?  Yes 
?  No 
(3)  Election Commission. The Charter Commission of the City of Trenton shall be the Election Commission for this election. The Chairman of the Charter Commission shall be Chairman of the Election Commission, and the Village Clerk shall act as Secretary of the Commission and shall perform such duties in connection with the work of the Commission as are prescribed by the Commission and this charter. 
(4)  Inspectors of Election. The inspectors of election for this election shall be those persons designated by the Charter Commission in its meeting on April 30th, 1957. 
(5)  Board of Canvassers. The board of canvassers for this election shall be those persons designated by the Charter Commission in its meeting on April 30th, 1957. The board shall meet in the Municipal Building of the village and city at 8:00 P.M., Wednesday, July 17, 1957, to canvass the results of such election. 
(6)  Registration. The persons designated to act as inspectors of this election shall constitute a board of registration for the purpose of making the first registration of qualified voters in the city. Said board shall be authorized to procure the necessary books or files and forms to conduct such registration. The last day for registration shall be June 15, 1957, the thirty-first day preceding the election. The board of registration shall on such last day for registration procure from the Village Clerk the records of the Clerk of the persons who are registered Village electors and shall incorporate such records with their records and shall cause all such persons to be registered as city electors in the same manner as though such persons had then and there applied for registration and all such persons shall be deemed to be registered as city electors. Subsequent to the election, the registration records shall be delivered to the Clerk. 
(7)  Notice of Registration. The Secretary of the Election Commission shall give notice for the board of registration of the days, hours and place that the registration will be conducted by publishing the same in the Trenton Times on May 29, 1957, and June 6, 1957, said first publication being not less than ten days prior to the last day for receiving registration. 
(8)  Notice of Election. The Secretary of the Election Commission shall cause to be published with the publication of this charter in the Trenton Times on June 27, 1957, a notice of this election, the location of the polling places, that on the date fixed therefor the question of adopting such proposed charter will be voted on and that the elective officers provided for in the charter will be elected on the same date. He shall also post such notice in at least ten public places within the city not less than ten days prior to such election. 
(9)  Procedure Governing Election. In all respects not otherwise provided for in Chapter 18 of this charter, the election procedure shall be in accordance with the provisions of the other chapters of this charter. 
Section 18.3. - First Election of City Officers. 
(1)  Election. The first election of officers provided for in this charter shall be held on Tuesday, July 16, 1957, in conjunction with the election on the adoption of this charter. At this election the voters shall be entitled to vote for a Mayor, a Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor, not more than six candidates for Council, and not more than two candidates for the office of Justice of the Peace. 
(2)  Terms. The candidate for Mayor who receives the highest number of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning at 8:00 P.M., on Monday, July 22, 1957, and ending at 8:00 P.M., on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1959. 
    The candidate for Clerk who receives the highest number of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning at 8:00 P.M., on Monday, July 22, 1957, and ending at 8:00 P.M., on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1959. 
    The candidate for Treasurer who receives the highest number of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning at 8:00 P.M., on Monday, July 22, 1957, and ending at 8:00 P.M., on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1959. 
    The candidate for Assessor who receives the highest number of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning at 8:00 P.M., on Monday, July 22, 1957, and ending at 8:00 P.M., on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1959. 
    The three candidates for Council who receive the three highest number of votes, shall be declared elected for a term beginning at 8:00 P.M., on Monday, July 22, 1957, and ending at 8:00 P.M., on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1961. The three candidates for Council who receive the fourth, fifth and sixth highest number of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning at 8:00 P.M., on Monday, July 22, 1957, and ending at 8:00 P.M., on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1959. 
    The candidate for the office of Justice of the Peace who receives the highest number of votes, shall be declared elected for a term beginning at 8:00 P.M., on Monday, July 22, 1957, and ending at 8:00 P.M., on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1961, and the candidate for the office of Justice of the Peace who receives the second highest number of votes, shall be declared elected for a term beginning at 8:00 P.M., on Monday, July 22, 1957, and ending at 8:00 P.M., on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1959. 
    After this election the provisions contained in this charter relative to elections and terms of elective officers shall govern. 
(3)  Nomination. Candidates shall be nominated by petition in a manner identical to that provided for in Sections 3.8 to 3.11, inclusive, and Section 5.1, except that (1) petitions shall be filed with the Secretary of the Election Commission who shall perform all the duties in connection with such nomination petitions as are required by this charter of the Clerk, and (2) nomination petitions shall be filed at least fourteen days and not more than twenty-one days prior to July 16, 1957. The Secretary of the Election Commission shall, not later than June 18, 1957, make available a supply of official petition forms as required by Section 3.9. Notice of the days permitted for filing nomination petitions and the number of persons to be elected to each office shall be published by the Secretary of the Election Commission in the Trenton Times on June 13, 1957, and June 20, 1957, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding. The names of those candidates who file valid and sufficient nomination petitions and have the qualifications required for their respective office shall be certified to the Election Commission to be placed on the ballot. 
(4)  Other Election Procedure. In all respects not otherwise provided for in this section, the procedure for the election of officers shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.2. 
Section 18.4. - Effective Date of Charter. 
    For the purpose of initiating the procedure for the election on the adoption of this charter, and for nominating and electing the first city officers this charter shall take effect on April 30, 1957. For all other purposes this charter shall take effect on Monday, July 22, 1957, at 8:00 P.M. Eastern Standard Time. At such time the officers first elected under this charter shall assemble in the municipal Council chambers. The meeting shall be called to order by the Chairman of the Charter Commission. Each elective officer shall take and subscribe to his oath of office as administered by said Chairman, and shall thereupon be qualified for, and shall assume the duties of, his office. 
    At the time the elective officers of the city assume the duties of their respective offices, the Village Council shall cease to be and the office of each and every member thereof shall terminate, and all other elective Village offices shall thereupon cease to be and terminate. The control of such Village Council and Village officers and of the officers of the Township of Monguagon over that territory which was formerly the Village shall cease and be superseded by that of the Council and officers of the City of Trenton. 
Section 18.5. - Continuation of Appointed Officers and Employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this charter, all appointive officers and all employees of the city shall continue in that city office or employment which corresponds to the city office or employment which they held prior to the effective date of the charter as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this charter, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this charter; except that the terms of office of all members of the Board of Review shall terminate as provided in Section 18.6., and except that any officer or employee who holds a position which this charter provides be held at the pleasure of the appointing officer or body shall hold such position only at such pleasure regardless of the term for which originally appointed. 
Section 18.6. - First Board of Review. 
    In January, 1958 the Council shall appoint a Board of Review of three freeholders who meet the qualifications for such office, as provided in this charter and shall fix their compensation. One such member shall be designated to serve for a term expiring in January, 1959, one for a term expiring in January, 1960, and one for a term expiring in January, 1961. 
Section 18.7. - Interim Financial Provisions. 
    The Council shall at its first meeting on July 22, 1957, by resolution continue as city appropriations the unencumbered balances of the appropriations made by the previous Village Council of Trenton until February 28, 1958, and these appropriations shall then be deemed to be city appropriations and the fiscal year of the Village shall be completed by the city as though no governmental change had been made. At the close of business on February 28, 1958, the balances of all appropriations not then encumbered shall, subject to statutory restrictions, revert to the general fund of the city for re-appropriation during the next fiscal period. 
    The period from March 1, 1958, to June 30, 1958, inclusive, shall constitute a special interim fiscal budget and tax period to accomplish the transition from the previously existing fiscal year. A budget for such special fiscal period shall be prepared and adopted and administered in accordance with Sections 8.2 to 8.5 inclusive, except that the Mayor shall submit the budget to the Council on or before February 1, 1958, and the budget shall be adopted not later than February 28, 1958. At the time of the adoption of the budget the Council shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes for the four month interim fiscal period, and may provide a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for such purposes. Such levy shall not exceed one-quarter of the annual limit of two per cent of the assessed value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the city. Such levy shall be spread on the tax roll which becomes due and payable on July 1, 1958, in addition to the regular taxes for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1958, and the amounts of taxes for these two levies may be combined for the purpose of convenience in spreading of the roll and preparation of the tax bills. Taxes for the interim period shall be collected in all respects as provided in this charter for the collection of city taxes. 
    There shall be an audit of this interim fiscal period in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.7. 
Section 18.8. - Township Assets and Liabilities. 
    As soon as practicable the Council shall take all necessary and proper action to obtain the division between the city and the Township of Monguagon of the assets and liabilities of such township. 
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION 
    At a regular meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Trenton held on the 30th day of April, 1957, the following resolution was offered by Commissioner James R. Osborn: 
    RESOLVED, that the Charter Commission of the City of Trenton does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed charter for the City of Trenton, and the Secretary of this Commission is directed to transmit two copies of this Charter to the Governor of the State of Michigan for his approval in accordance with statute, to file with the Village Clerk a copy of this charter, and to cause this proposed charter to be published in the Trenton Times on June 27, 1957. 
    The resolution was seconded by Commissioner Doris T. McCauley, and adopted by the following vote: 
    YES: Commissioners Robert E. Teifer, Sr., John Felder, Clifford G. Turner, Don Ball, Peter J. Stanlis, Clinton L. LaFayette, James R. Osborn, Francis S. Thomas and Doris T. McCauley. 
    NO: None. 
    ABSENT: None. 
    The Chairman declared the foregoing resolution carried unanimously and requested the members of the Charter Commission to authenticate said resolution and also the two copies of the charter to be presented to the Governor and the copy to be filed with the Village Clerk. The members thereupon authenticated said resolution and the copies of the charter to be presented to the Governor and filed with the Village Clerk by subscribing their names as follows: 
Robert E. Teifer, Sr. John Felder Clifford G. Turner Don Ball Peter J. Stanlis Clinton L. LaFayette James R. Osborn Francis S. Thomas Doris T. McCauley  
    All the Commissioners having attested as to said resolution and also having attested the copies to be signed by the Governor, and filed with the Village Clerk, the meeting adjourned subject to the call of the Chairman. 
STATE OF MICHIGAN ) ) SS COUNTY OF WAYNE )  
    Doris T. McCauley, Secretary (Clerk) of the Charter Commission of the City of Trenton, being duly sworn says that at an election duly called and held in the Village of Trenton on the 21st day of January, 1957, the following named persons were duly elected as the Charter Commission to frame a charter for the city, namely: Robert E. Teifer, Sr., John Felder, Clifford G. Turner, Don Ball, Peter J. Stanlis, Clinton L. LaFayette, James R. Osborn, Francis S. Thomas and Doris T. McCauley, and that the annexed and foregoing charter was duly adopted by said Charter Commission by the foregoing resolution which is a true and correct copy thereof, and that the said Charter Commission directed that said charter be presented to the electors of the City of Trenton in accordance with the requirements of this charter and the laws of the State of Michigan. 
    Further deponent sayeth not. 
Doris T. McCauley 
Secretary (Clerk) of the Charter Commission of the City of Trenton.  
Dated: May 7, 1957. 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this 7th day of May, 1957. 
Clyde C. Ludwig 
Notary Public, Wayne County, Michigan. 
My Com. Exp. Jan. 9, 1959.  
    I do hereby approve the above and foregoing charter of the City of Trenton. 
Approved: 
G. Mennen Williams 
Governor of the State of Michigan.  
Dated: June 4, 1957. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. 
Referendum 
Date  Section 
this Charter 11- 7-1972 5.1 11- 8-1994 12.1 11- 7-1995 4.7 11- 5-2002 3.6 5.6 3.6 11- 6-2007 3.6 9.8  
Charter 
Resolution 
Number Adoption 
 Date  Section 
this Charter 2011-22  6-20-2011 7.4, 17.4 2014-19  6-16-2014 12.1 2014-20  8-11-2014 3.7 2014-21  6-16-2014 5.9(a)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Trenton, Michigan" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Trenton Code." 
(Code 1974, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, § 7.9. 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the city. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Trenton, Michigan. 
    City council. The term "city council" means the city council of Trenton, Michigan. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Trenton, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to included the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either...or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Wayne County, Michigan. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
    Includes, including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
    Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" includes an "affirmation" in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" includes the term "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person who appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing. 
    Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, or governmental unit, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
    Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 168 of 1959 is a reference to Act No. 158 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1959.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to such act as amended. 
    Real property, real estate, land, lands. The terms "real property," "real estate," "land" and "lands" include land, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Road, street, highway, alley. The terms "road," "street," "highway" and "alley" mean the entire width subject to an easement for a public right-of-way or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The term "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress to and from property. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Swear. The term "swear" includes affirm. 
    Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
    Written. The term "written" includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
    Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
(Code 1974, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Editor's notes, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive any repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
(Code 1974, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4, 8.4a. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Trenton, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Trenton, Michigan, is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 1974, § 1-6) 
Charter reference- Ordinance enactment procedures, § 7.2 et seq. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1974, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" includes causing, securing, aiding or abetting a violation of this Code as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(d)  This subsection does not apply to any municipal civil infraction. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted a violation of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both; however, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code that is declared to be a misdemeanor that substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, imprisonment for a term of not more than 93 days, or both. A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be responsible for costs. In addition: 
(1)  Upon a person being convicted of two or more violations of this Code within a two-year period, a complaint may be issued against such person setting forth the number of convictions of violations of this Code and the dates thereof. 
(2)  If any person over 17 years of age is convicted of two or more violations of this Code within a period of two years, such person shall be adjudged a repeated violator and the court may in lieu of fine and imprisonment as provided in this subsection place such person on probation and direct such person to perform such manual labor at such times and places and for such duration as the court in its discretion may deem suitable. Such manual labor shall consist of cleaning municipal buildings, cleaning drains and ditches, landscaping, gardening, pruning or such other public work as the court may direct. The performance of such work shall be under the supervision of the department head of the city having responsibility for such work. 
(e)  The following provisions apply to municipal civil infractions: 
(1)  Violations of this Code are municipal civil infractions only if declared elsewhere to be municipal civil infractions. 
(2)  The sanction for a violation that is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in an amount as set forth in this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.) and other applicable laws. 
(3)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a first violation shall be not less than $25.00, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. 
(4)  Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this Code. As used in this subsection, the term "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision: 
a.  Committed by a person within any six-month period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code); and 
b.  For which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. 
(5)  Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense which is a repeat offense shall be twice that of the first offense, plus costs. 
b.  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be four times that of the first offense, plus costs. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(h)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasijudicial enforcement. 
(Code 1974, §§ 1-8-1-10, 2-306, 19-21) 
Charter reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, § 7.5. 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 117.4(k); municipal civil infractions, MCL 117.4l, 600.8701 et seq. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Code are severable as provided in Charter section 7.8 and such section is incorporated into this Code and shall be applicable to this Code as if set out in full in this section. 
(Code 1974, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Severability of state statutes, MCL 8.5. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u. 
Sec. 1-11. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed in this section, and all such provisions continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(5)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(7)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(8)  Adopting or amending a comprehensive plan. 
(9)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(10)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any road, street, sidewalk or alley. 
(11)  Establishing the grade or any road, street or sidewalk. 
(12)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat. 
(13)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(14)  Granting a tax exemption for specific property. 
(15)  Not codified in this Code: 
a.  Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations; or 
b.  Ordering, requiring or authorizing the erection or installation of traffic control signs, signals, devices or markings. 
(16)  Rezoning property or amending the zoning map. 
(17)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(18)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(19)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-12(4); administration and enforcement of animals, § 14-31 et seq.; community development, ch. 26; elections, ch. 30; administration and enforcement of flood damage prevention, § 46-61 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 58; special assessments, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 98; fees and administration, § 98-271 et seq.; administration and enforcement of zoning, § 110-31 et seq.; fees and charges, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
(a)  Authorized. The city shall have a city seal which shall be the official seal of the city. 
(b)  Description. The city seal shall be composed of an outline of the boundaries of the city on which shall appear a sailing ship, a surveyor's instrument, a miner's pick and a quill pen, and at the base of which shall appear the words "Seal of the City of Trenton." Such seal shall also include the words "Incorporated July 22, 1957" and "Wayne County, Michigan." 
(c)  Dies. The official dies of the city seal shall remain at the seat of government at the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Use. An impression of the city seal shall be placed on all official documents and be attested to by the city clerk. 
(e)  Facsimiles or reproductions. No facsimile or reproduction of the city seal shall be used in a manner unconnected with official functions of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Fees for publications and documents. 
    Upon payment of the charges established by the council, the city shall furnish copies of the following documents: 
(1)  Zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Zoning or city maps. 
(3)  Zoning maps (three feet by five feet). 
(4)  Fire and ambulance reports. 
(Code 1974, § 13-1) 
Sec. 2-3. - Fees for appeals and rezoning requests. 
    Fees in the amount established by the city council shall be charged for a zoning appeal or request pursuant to chapter 110, a construction code board of appeals request, or a rezoning request. 
(Code 1974, § 13-2) 
Secs. 2-4-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL (RESERVED)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Mayor and city council, chs. IV, VI. 

Secs. 2-31-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Officers and employees generally, chs. IV, V. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-12(6); emergency management coordinator, § 34-35; enforcement officers, § 54-31 et seq.; director of parks and recreation, § 70-71 et seq., § 110-31. 

Sec. 2-61. - Salary of city assessor. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of chapter IV, section 4.7(c) of the City Charter, the city council does hereby increase the annual salary of the city assessor to the applicable level as set forth in the schedule below, which shall be dependent upon the assessor's certification level as determined by the state assessor's board: 
State Certificate Level In 
Assessment Administration Percentage Annual Salary Effective upon election certification, November, 2015 MAAO Level 3 100% $ 65,574 MAAO Level 2  85% $ 55,738 MAAO Level 1  75% $ 49,181 No Certification  65% $ 42,623 Effective November 1, 2016 MAAO Level 3 100% $ 66,230 MAAO Level 2  85% $ 56,296 MAAO Level 1  75% $ 49,673 No Certification  65% $ 43,050  
(b)  In addition, the fringe benefits of health, prescriptive drug, dental and optical insurance coverages, which are subject to periodic adjustment, and shall mirror those provided to other non-union employees, incorporating equivalent benefit levels, co-payments, deductibles and premium sharing, and excepting residency incentives; as well as a group life insurance policy rounded to the nearest $1,000.00 of salary, including accidental death and dismemberment during their term of office, shall be paid for the city assessor. The city assessor may elect supplemental life insurance through the city's group insurance carrier subject to the provisions of the insurance company, but the cost of the supplemental coverage must be paid by the assessor. 
(c)  A city assessor with five years of continuous service shall receive $500.00 and an additional $50.00 for each year of service thereafter, payable on the payroll cycle following the employee's anniversary date. 
(d)  The prescribed levels shall become effective as of the date set forth in the above schedules. 
(e)  The city assessor's salary level shall initially be fixed in accordance with his/her certification level as of the commencement of the next term of office, and periodically adjusted during the term of office in accordance with the current salary schedule and any changes in certification levels of the assessor by the state assessors board. 
(Code 1974, § 2-2; Ord. No. 661, § 1, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 687, § 1, 5-23-2005; Ord. No. 709, § 3, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 775, § 1, 5-6-2013; Ord. No. 783, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Sec. 2-62. - City clerk. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of chapter IV, section 4.7(c) of the City Charter, the city council does hereby increase the annual salary of the city clerk to $65,574.00 per year effective upon election certification, November 2015; $66,230.00 per year effective November 1, 2016: 
(1)  Certified municipal clerk, by the Institute of Municipal Clerks, and accreditation by the state as an election inspector training coordinator shall receive 100 percent of the stated salary. 
(2)  A non-certified municipal clerk and accredited training coordinator, shall receive 75 percent of the stated salary. 
(b)  In addition, fringe benefits shall include health, prescriptive drug, dental and optical insurance coverages, which are subject to periodic adjustment, and shall mirror those provided to other non-union employees, incorporating equivalent benefit levels, co-payments, deductibles and premium sharing, and excepting residency incentives, as well as a group life insurance policy rounded to the nearest $1,000.00 of salary, including accidental death and dismemberment during their term of office, shall be paid for the city clerk. The city clerk may elect supplemental life insurance through the city's group insurance carrier subject to the provisions of the insurance company, but the cost of the supplemental coverage must be paid by the city clerk. 
(c)  A city clerk with five years of continuous service shall receive $500.00 and an additional $50.00 for each year of service thereafter, payable on the payroll cycle following the employee's anniversary date. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 784, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 746, § 1, adopted March 7, 2011, repealed the former § 2-62, and enacted a new § 2-62 as set out herein. The former § 2-62 pertained to the salary of city clerk and derived from the Code of 1974, § 2-3; Ord. No. 662, adopted June 2, 2003 and Ord. No. 709, adopted May 21, 2007. 
Sec. 2-63. - Duties and salary of the treasurer. 
(a)  As part of the 2011 consolidation and reorganization of city departments, and pursuant to section 4.9 of the Charter, the duties of the city treasurer shall be reduced to those which may be required under state law and those incorporated in the City's Charter at section 4.16.(a)(c)(d) and(e). All other duties and responsibilities performed by the treasurer at the time of enactment of this section, including but not limited to, those set forth in Charter section 4.16(b) for the collection of fees and other receivables, shall hereinafter be transferred to, consolidated and reside with, and become duties and responsibilities of the office of the city controller, to be performed in addition to those currently held and performed by the controller and set forth in section 4.13 of the Charter. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority of chapter IV, section 4.7(c) of the City Charter, the city council does hereby increase the annual salary of the city treasurer to the sum of $12,000.00 per year, effective upon election certification, November 2015. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 1, 5-21-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 785, § 1, adopted May 21, 2015, changed the catchline from "duties of the treasurer" to the current catchline. Ord. No. 745, § 1, adopted February 22, 2011, repealed the former § 2-62, and enacted a new § 2-62 as set out herein. The former § 2-62 pertained to the salary of city treasurer and derived from the Code of 1974, § 2-3; Ord. No. 663, adopted June 2, 2003 and Ord. No. 709, adopted May 21, 2007. 
Sec. 2-64. - Use of the title of city administrator. 
(a)  The administrative assistant officer shall have the authority to use the title of city administrator in performing the administrative duties of such position, except to the extent that the Charter expressly prohibits such use. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed as creating any new administrative office or the combination thereof, but solely the authorization to use an administrative title in addition to the title set forth in the Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 2-5) 
Charter reference- Administrative assistant officer, § 4.11. 
Sec. 2-65. - Local officer's compensation commission. 
(a)  Pursuant to Public Act 106 of 1978, a local officer's compensation commission shall be created, which shall determine the salaries of each elected official. 
(b)  The commission shall consist of five members, provided the city's population is 20,000 or less, or seven members should it exceed 20,000. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall be registered electors of the city appointed by the mayor, and subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city council. Each member of the five-member commission shall have a term of office of five years, except that of the member's first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years. The first member shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance [Ordinance No. 709]. Members other than the first member shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled only for the remainder of an unexpired term but shall serve until a successor is appointed. A member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of the government, or member of the immediate family, shall not be eligible to serve as a member of the commission. 
(d)  The commission shall determine the salary only for the following city elected officials for a period not to exceed two years: clerk, treasurer, and assessor beginning with the first Monday following the Tuesday general election in each odd numbered year. The determination of the commission shall be the established salary unless the council, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the legislative body, rejects it. The salary determinations of the commission shall be effective 30 days following its filing with the city clerk, unless rejected as provided herein by the council. If the determination is rejected, the then existing salary of such elected officials shall continue. 
(e)  The commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in each odd-numbered year, providing separate opportunities for consultation with each affected elected official and administration, and, after examining internal and external comparables, shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting but before the city's regular general election. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The commission shall not take action or make a determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission, irrespective of the existence of a quorum. The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. The members shall not receive compensation, but shall be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
(f)  The business which the commission may perform shall be conducted only at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with the Michigan Open Meetings Act. 
(g)  Any writing prepared, owned or used in the possession of, or retained by the commission in the performance of an official function shall be available for public inspection and compliance with the Michigan Freedom of Information Act. 
(h)  After one year following the date the ordinance [Ordinance No. 709] goes in effect, the procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by charter amendment or revision. 
(Ord. No. 709, § 2, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-66. - Veteran's preferences. 
(a)  In accordance with Public Act 205 of 1897, honorably discharged veterans, as defined by 1965 PA 190, shall be preferred for appointment and employment by the city. 
(b)  To qualify, the veteran's qualifications must be at least comparable to other applicants in the estimation of the hiring authority. 
(c)  This provision shall not preclude the city from hiring a nonveteran applicant if the city reasonably believes that the nonveteran applicant is substantially better qualified than the veteran. 
(d)  This provision shall not apply to heads of departments, members of commissions and boards, or heads of institutions appointed directly the mayor under the provisions of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 1-7-2013) 
Secs. 2-67-2-69. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-70. - Director of police and fire services. 
    There is hereby established an administrative office to oversee and coordinate the delivery of public safety services between the police and fire departments pursuant to the authority of chapter IV, section 4.9 of the City Charter, which shall bear the designation of: "Director of Police and Fire Services." 
(Ord. No. 778, § 1, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 2-71. - Duties of the director of police and fire services. 
(a)  The director shall be responsible for the overall management of the police and fire departments as well as emergency communications and shall plan, develop and direct a complete program of police, fire and emergency communications service to enforce laws and ordinances, protect the lives and property of the public and to preserve overall peace in the city pursuant to the authority of chapter IV, section 4.9 of the City Charter. 
(b)  The director may perform any or all of the essential job functions, duties and responsibilities of an officer in either department including but not limited to: Planning, organizing and directing all aspects of departmental operations, recruitment and hiring of departmental personnel and coordination of proper supervision, work assignments and workload, performance evaluation, training and professional development opportunities; directing internal and high profile investigations; participating as a team member in the labor negotiation process for all bargaining units and for the administration of collective bargaining agreements, including grievances and arbitrations; develop policies and procedures to improve efficiency and safety; review and recommend ordinance additions and modifications; prepare and administer departmental budgets and enforce adherence thereto; prepare, monitor and control departmental grants; develop and maintain cooperative relations with outside law enforcement and fire agencies, including mutual aid compacts and inter-local agreements; establish, coordinate and monitor task force assignments, requirements and training; act as departmental spokesperson and direct public relations; respond to public safety emergencies and major crime scene and accidents as warranted; establish departmental uniforms; and attend and participate in meetings of the city council as required. 
(c)  The mayor and council may assign by resolution, such other duties and responsibilities to the director as deemed necessary and appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 781, § 1, 3-17-2014) 
Secs. 2-72-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 42-31 et seq.; police department, § 58-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-91-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENGINEERING AND BUILDING DEPARTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 

Sec. 2-111. - Established. 
    There is hereby established an administrative office of the city to be known as the city engineering and building department. 
(Code 1974, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-112. - City engineer to perform duties of health officer. 
(a)  The duties and responsibilities of the city engineer include the responsibilities of the city's health officer as set forth in the following sections: 
(1)  Chapter 54, article II, regarding food and food establishments. 
(2)  Chapter 22, article VI, regarding massage parlors and schools. 
(3)  Such other sections of the Code referencing a health officer, unless otherwise provided for in this Code. 
(b)  The city engineer shall be authorized to retain the services of any appropriate and duly qualified and licensed clinicians to advise and assist the engineer in the performance of duties where clinical expertise may be warranted or required. 
(Code 1974, § 2-17) 
Sec. 2-113. - Code officials; appearance tickets. 
(a)  The city engineer shall be authorized to appoint, with the approval of the council, certain employees of the city engineering and building department, including the building inspector, field and housing inspector, electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, and mechanical inspector, as code officials for enforcing violations of certain city codes through the issuance of appearance tickets before the local district court, when such code officials are assigned, as part of their employment duties, to conduct an investigation concerning an ordinance violation. 
(b)  Those persons authorized in subsection (a) of this section may issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket if they have reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an offense within the class of offenses described in this section. 
(c)  An appearance ticket shall mean a complaint or notice upon which an authorized code official shall record an occurrence which involves the commission of one or more code violations by the person cited and directs a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal court on a designated future time in connection with his alleged commission of a designated violation of local ordinance for which the maximum permissible penalty does not exceed 90 days in jail and a fine of $500.00. Each citation shall be numbered consecutively, shall be on an appropriate form, and shall consist of the following parts: 
(1)  The original copy shall be a complaint or notice to appear issued by the code official and shall be filed with the court in which the appearance is to be made. 
(2)  The first copy shall be the abstract of court record. 
(3)  The second copy shall be retained by the local code official. 
(4)  The third copy shall be delivered to the alleged violator. 
(Code 1974, § 2-18) 
Sec. 2-114. - City engineer to perform duties of director of public services. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the city engineer shall include the responsibilities formerly held by the administrator of the department of public works, and set forth in section 4.21 of the City Charter, city resolutions, policy manuals, and organizational charts. 
(Ord. No. 757, § 2, 12-19-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 757, § 2, adopted December 19, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as § 2-113. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 2-114. 
Secs. 2-115-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 98. 

Sec. 2-131. - Established. 
    As part of the 2012 consolidation and reorganization of city departments, and pursuant to section 4.9 of the Charter, the duties of the department of public works/services which may be required under state law and those incorporated in the city's charter at section 4.21, shall be transferred to the department of engineering. All other duties and responsibilities performed by the director of the department of public services/works at the time of enactment of this section, including but not limited to, those set forth in Charter section 4.21, shall hereinafter be transferred to, consolidated and reside with, and become duties and responsibilities of the office of the city engineer, to be performed in addition to those currently held and performed by the engineer and set forth in section 4.18 of the Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 2-28; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 12-19-11) 
Secs. 2-132-2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Finance, ch. VIII; borrowing power of city, ch. X. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-12(3); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-12(5); downtown development plan and tax increment financing plan #98-1, § 26-101 et seq.; taxation, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; Revised Municipal Finance Act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; keeping of public moneys, MCL 129.11 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-161. - Acceptance of checks. 
    The departments and agencies of the city are authorized to accept a personal check in payment of any tax or fee; provided that the city council may by resolution require that any or all types of payments to a city department or agency be made by United States currency, cashier's check, certified check, or money order, and that the city controller or his designated agent may require that any or all further payments to the city from an individual who has previously tendered payment to the city by instrument which was dishonored when presented for payment be made only by United States currency, cashier's check, certified check, or money order. 
(Code 1974, § 13-61) 
Sec. 2-162. - Dishonored checks. 
(a)  Acceptance of any payment to the city by any negotiable instrument, including bank check, is upon the condition that, if the instrument is for any reason dishonored after being duly presented for payment, there shall be assessed a service charge in the amount established by the council to recover the costs incurred by the city in bank charges, labor costs, and miscellaneous expenses associated with the handling of the dishonored instrument, in addition to any other penalties permitted by law. 
(b)  Any permit or license issued by the city upon payment of a fee made by instrument, including bank check, shall be automatically revoked if the instrument is dishonored after being duly presented by the city for payment. 
(Code 1974, §§ 13-62, 13-63) 
State Law reference- Fee authorized, MCL 600.2952. 
Sec. 2-163. - Vehicle storage fees. 
    Vehicles in the custody or possession of the city pursuant to seizure or forfeiture shall be subject to a storage fee calculated on a 24-hour period, or any fraction thereof, as established by the council, payable by the title owner of the vehicle prior to, or at the time of, retrieval. 
(Code 1974, § 13-64) 
Sec. 2-164. - Property taxes. 
(a)  All taxes paid after February 14 of each year shall be subject to a one percent property tax administration fee and a late penalty charge equal to three percent of the tax by the city. 
(b)  All taxes paid after August 31 of each year, shall be subject to a one percent property tax administration fee and a late penalty charge equal to three percent of the tax by the city. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 1, 10-20-2003) 
Secs. 2-165-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT RESERVE FUND[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Public improvements fund, MCL 141.261 et seq. 

Sec. 2-181. - Fund continued. 
    Pursuant to Public Act No. 177 of 1943 (MCL 141.261 et seq.), the public improvement reserve fund heretofore established is continued. 
(Code 1974, § 27-1) 
Sec. 2-182. - Purpose. 
    Moneys accumulated in the public improvement reserve fund shall not be transferred, encumbered or otherwise disposed of, except for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, extending, altering, repairing or equipping public improvements or public buildings which the city may by the provisions of its Charter or the general law be authorized to acquire, construct, extend, alter, repair or equip. 
(Code 1974, § 27-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 141.262. 
Sec. 2-183. - Source of funds. 
(a)  The controller is hereby directed to allocate and credit the public improvement reserve fund with moneys now on hand or hereafter acquired which are derived from unexpended moneys on hand at the end of any fiscal year, received in payment of taxes by the city, which moneys are not allocated by budget appropriations, and are otherwise unencumbered. 
(b)  The city council may annually, by and in accordance with the budgetary procedure set forth in the Charter, include in the annual budget or appropriation bill an item of money to be raised by taxation in the year, which money when collected shall be credited to the public improvement reserve fund. 
(c)  The city council may from time to time during any fiscal year transfer moneys from the contingent fund to the public improvement reserve fund or may direct that any miscellaneous revenues derived from sources other than taxation, and not otherwise encumbered, be credited to the public improvement reserve fund. 
(Code 1974, § 27-3) 
Sec. 2-184. - Restrictions on use of funds. 
    All moneys or credits hereafter assigned, transferred and appropriated to the public improvement reserve fund shall be held in the fund as reserve for the use by the city for general public improvements that are specifically authorized by the city council to be constructed at some future time. Moneys so accumulated in the fund shall not be transferred, encumbered or otherwise disposed of except for the construction of public improvements as provided in this division. 
(Code 1974, § 27-4) 
Sec. 2-185. - Investment of funds. 
    The moneys accumulated in the public improvement reserve fund shall from time to time, upon authority of the city council, be invested by the controller in such securities as are authorized by the Charter and the general laws of the state for the investment of sinking and interest funds for the repayment of outstanding bond issues of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 27-5) 
Sec. 2-186. - Manner of authorizing disbursements. 
(a)  Whenever the city council determines the need and advisability to acquire any public improvement, the cost of which is to be defrayed wholly or in part by moneys from the public improvement reserve fund, the provisions of the Charter shall be complied with by the city council, which shall cause to be prepared maps, plans, specifications, and estimates of costs of the proposed improvements and the adoption of a specific resolution authorizing the improvement. 
(b)  Separate proceedings shall be taken for each separate type or kind of public improvement to be authorized. 
(c)  The city council shall provide for the transfer of all or part of the costs of such improvement from the public improvement reserve fund; provided that, if any part of the cost of any improvement is to be paid for by special assessment, the moneys from the public improvement reserve fund shall only be used to defray such part of such public improvement as shall have been determined by the city council to be of general benefit to the entire city. 
(Code 1974, § 27-6) 
Secs. 2-187-2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SELF-INSURANCE FUND 

Sec. 2-211. - Established. 
    There is hereby created a fund to be known as the City of Trenton Self-Insurance Fund, referred to in this division as the "fund." 
(Code 1974, § 2-220) 
Sec. 2-212. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby established and declared to be the purpose of the city self-insurance fund to offset insurance costs through the use of self-insurance programs as specifically approved by the city council on an annual basis. 
(Code 1974, § 2-221) 
Sec. 2-213. - Claims. 
    The self-insurance fund may be used to pay claims or judgments which are not covered under insurance policies or deductible limits where insurance exists, or where insurance policy limits have been exhausted due to a judgment in excess of policy limits. The claim or judgment may include court costs, witness or subpoena fees, court filing fees, investigation reports, service company fees, deposition costs, attorneys' fees, expert witness fees, transcript fees, appeal fees and/or bonds, and any other cost directly related to the defense of or a prosecution of the city's legal or equitable interests. 
(Code 1974, § 2-222) 
Sec. 2-214. - Administration. 
    The self-insurance fund shall be under the control and responsibility of the city treasurer and the city controller as to the accounting and investment of the monies in the fund. The city controller shall give periodic financial reports as to the status of the fund, or as requested by the city council. The fund shall be held apart from the general fund or any other funds of the city and all receipts and disbursements shall be separately accounted for in accordance with acceptable accounting standards. Any disbursement from the fund to a claimant or for any expense connected therewith requires the prior approval of the city council. Transfer within the fund for investment purposes does not require the prior approval of the city council, but does require notification to the city council. All disbursements from the fund or within the fund require the signature of both the controller and the city treasurer. Transfers into the fund shall be approved by the city council. The city controller and the city treasurer shall have the responsibility of the investment of the fund balance so as to provide sound security and retain liquidity and may, with the consent of the city council, utilize recognized investment services. 
(Code 1974, § 2-223) 
Sec. 2-215. - Authorization of payments. 
    The city council has the sole authority for the authorization of the payment of any monies from the fund for the purposes set forth in this division. 
(Code 1974, § 2-224) 
Secs. 2-216-2-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HEALTH CARE FUND 

Sec. 2-220. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a fund to be known as the City of Trenton Health Care Fund, referred to in this division as "fund", pursuant to Public Act 149, of 1999. 
(Ord. No. 683, § 1, 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 2-221. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby established and declared to be the purpose of the city's health care fund is for the accumulation and investment of funds to assist in providing for health care benefits for retired city employees. 
(Ord. No. 683, § 1, 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 2-222 - Claims. 
    The health care fund may be used to pay claims by qualified employees for eligible benefits and, at the discretion of the council, those benefits which are not covered under other insurance policies, including certain co-payments and deductibles or; for the purpose of purchasing additional insurance coverage. 
(Ord. No. 683, § 1, 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 2-223. - Administration. 
    The health care fund shall be under the control of a board consisting of the treasurer and the two citizen members of the Trenton Fire and Police Pension Board of Directors, appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. The city controller shall be responsible for an accounting of monies in the fund. The city controller shall make periodic financial reports as to the status of the fund, or as requested by the city council. The fund shall be held apart from the general fund or any other funds of the city and all receipts and disbursements shall be separately accounted for in accordance with acceptable accounting standards. Transfers within the fund for investment purposes do not require the prior approval of the city council. All disbursements from the fund or within the fund require the signature of the city treasurer and one other board member or shall be approved by board resolution. Disbursements shall be restricted to the payment of claims as defined in section 2-222 and the payment of the expenses of the administration of the fund. Transfers into the fund shall be approved by the city council. The health care fund board shall have the responsibility of the investment of the fund balance in accordance with the investment limitations governing investment of assets of public retirement systems pursuant to Public Act 314 of 1965, as may be amended from time to time, so as to provide sound security and retain liquidity. 
(Ord. No. 683, § 1, 3-21-2005) 
Secs. 2-224-2-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Purchases, contracts and leases, ch. XII. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City purchasing agent and agent mean the purchasing agent of the city. 
    Contractual services means and includes all telephone, gas, water, electric light and power service; towel and cleaning service; insurance; leases for all grounds, buildings, office or other space required by the using agencies; and the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other city-owned personal property. The term shall not include professional and other contractual services which are in their nature unique and not subject to competition. 
    Supplies means and includes all supplies, materials and equipment. 
    Using agency means any department, agency, commission, bureau or other unit in the city government using supplies or procuring contractual services as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 2-138) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-242. - Accepting rebates or gifts. 
    The city purchasing agent and every officer and employee of the city are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person to whom any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, or money or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 2-145) 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq. 
Sec. 2-243. - Performance bonds. 
    The city purchasing agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract, in such amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 2-146) 
Sec. 2-244. - Petty expenditures revolving fund established; use. 
    There is hereby established a the petty expenditures revolving fund. From this fund shall be paid all purchases of incidentals not in excess of $5.00 each, made by the heads of using agencies with the approval of the city purchasing agent. The city purchasing agent shall promulgate rules and regulations for use of the petty expenditures revolving fund. 
(Code 1974, § 2-147) 
Sec. 2-245. - Monthly statement on use of petty expenditures revolving fund; reimbursement of fund. 
    At the end of each month, the city purchasing agent shall render to the controller a statement showing the actual expenditures for each using agency made out of the petty expenditures revolving fund, and the city treasurer shall reimburse the revolving fund for such expenditures in the same manner as other expenditures of such using agencies are paid. 
(Code 1974, § 2-148) 
Sec. 2-246. - Control warehousing. 
(a)  The city purchasing agent shall control and supervise storerooms and warehouses and shall administer the storerooms revolving fund, which fund is hereby established. 
(b)  Requisitions from supplies in a storeroom or warehouse shall be credited by the agent to the storerooms revolving fund by a charge against the appropriation of the using agency. 
(c)  The city purchasing agent shall maintain a perpetual inventory record of all materials, supplies or equipment stored in storerooms and warehouses. 
(Code 1974, § 2-149) 
Sec. 2-247. - Price agreement contract procedure. 
    The head of the using agency shall have the authority to submit requisitions to the city purchasing agent for supplies available under the terms of a price agreement contract made by the city purchasing agent. 
(Code 1974, § 2-150) 
Sec. 2-248. - Emergency purchases by purchasing agent. 
(a)  In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, the mayor shall be empowered to authorize the city purchasing agent to secure by open market procedure as set forth in this article, at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual services not in excess of $500.00. 
(b)  A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the city purchasing agent with the city council and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1974, § 2-151) 
Sec. 2-249. - Emergency purchases by department head. 
(a)  In case of actual emergency, and with the consent of the city purchasing agent and the approval of the mayor, the head of any using agency may purchase directly any supplies whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using agency which may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of citizens in an amount not in excess of $500.00. 
(b)  The head of the using agency shall send to the city purchasing agent a requisition and a copy of the delivery record together with a full written report of the circumstances of the emergency. The report shall be filed with the city council as provided in section 2-248. 
(c)  The city purchasing agent shall prescribe by rules and regulations the procedure under which emergency purchases by heads of using agencies may be made. 
(Code 1974, § 2-152) 
Sec. 2-250. - Inspection and testing. 
(a)  The city purchasing agent shall inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies or contractual services to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. 
(b)  The city purchasing agent shall have the authority to authorize using agencies having the staff and facilities for adequate inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such using agencies under rules and regulations which the city purchasing agent shall provide. 
(c)  The city purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the city purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the city government or of any outside laboratory. 
(Code 1974, § 2-153) 
Sec. 2-251. - Surplus stock. 
(a)  All using agencies shall submit to the city purchasing agent, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. The city purchasing agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to other using agencies. 
(b)  The city purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange such supplies for or trade in such supplies on new supplies pursuant to provisions of the Charter. Sales under this section shall be made to the highest responsible bidder and in conformance with division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 2-154) 
Sec. 2-252. - Cooperative purchasing. 
    The city purchasing agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby with approval of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-155) 
Secs. 2-253-2-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BIDDING PROCEDURE GENERALLY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Bidders on public works, MCL 123.501 et seq. 

Sec. 2-281. - Competitive bidding required. 
    All purchases of and contracts for supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable, shall, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, be based wherever possible on competitive bids. 
(Code 1974, § 2-189) 
Sec. 2-282. - Formal contract procedure. 
    All supplies and contractual services shall be purchased and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable shall be sold pursuant to the provisions of section 12.1 of the Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 2-190) 
Sec. 2-283. - Notice inviting bids. 
(a)  Publication in trade journals. Notice inviting bids may be published once in at least one trade journal at least five days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. The trade journal notice shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and shall state the time and place for opening bids. 
(b)  Notice to suppliers on bidders' list. The city purchasing agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a bidders' list which the city purchasing agent shall maintain, by sending them a copy of such trade journal notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidders' list shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent. 
(c)  Posting on bulletin board. The city purchasing agent shall also advertise all pending purchases or sales by a notice posted on the public bulletin board in the city hall. 
(Code 1974, § 2-191) 
Sec. 2-284. - Bid deposits. 
    When deemed necessary by the city purchasing agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of any surety which the city purchasing agent has required. A successful bidder shall forfeit any deposit required by the city purchasing agent upon failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten days after the award. 
(Code 1974, § 2-192) 
Sec. 2-285. - Bids to be sealed. 
    Bids shall be submitted sealed to the city purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. 
(Code 1974, § 2-193) 
Sec. 2-286. - Tabulation of bids. 
    A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for public inspection and a tabulation report forwarded to the city council for necessary action thereon. 
(Code 1974, § 2-194) 
Sec. 2-287. - Bids to be opened in public. 
    Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
(Code 1974, § 2-195) 
Sec. 2-288. - Bidders in default to city. 
    The city purchasing agent shall not accept the bid of a person who is in default on the payment of taxes, license fees or other moneys due to the city. 
(Code 1974, § 2-196) 
Sec. 2-289. - Authority of purchasing agent to award contracts. 
    The city purchasing agent shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 2-197) 
Sec. 2-290. - Contracts to be awarded to lowest responsible bidder; manner of determining lowest responsible bidder. 
    Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining who the lowest responsible bidder is, the city purchasing agent shall consider, in addition to price: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services. 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with the laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service. 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service. 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Code 1974, § 2-198) 
Sec. 2-291. - Reasons to be stated when award is not given to lowest bidder. 
    When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the city purchasing agent and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction. 
(Code 1974, § 2-199) 
Sec. 2-292. - Procedure in case of tie bids. 
(a)  Local vendors. If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. 
(b)  Outside vendors. Where subsection (a) of this section is not in effect, the city purchasing agent shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
(Code 1974, § 2-200) 
Sec. 2-293. - Contracts or purchases not to be subdivided. 
    No contracts or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1974, § 2-201) 
Secs. 2-294-2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-311. - Disposal of surplus items at public auction. 
    Upon approval of the city council, nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of a public auction as a method of disposing of obsolete and unusable items of personal property in lieu of formal sealed bids. 
(Code 1974, § 2-207) 
Sec. 2-312. - Number of bids required. 
    All open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three competitive bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the standards set forth in section 2-290. 
(Code 1974, § 2-208) 
Sec. 2-313. - Manner of soliciting bids. 
    The city purchasing agent shall solicit bids required by this division by: 
(1)  Direct mail request to prospective vendors; 
(2)  Telephone; and 
(3)  Public notice posted on the bulletin board of the city hall. 
(Code 1974, § 2-209) 
Sec. 2-314. - Record of orders and bids. 
    The city purchasing agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and the bids submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1974, § 2-210) 
Secs. 2-315-2-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ABANDONED, STOLEN AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-341. - Duty of police to take possession of property. 
    All stolen, abandoned, unclaimed or other property, except motor vehicles, taken or found by any police officer in the possession of any person arrested or charged with a violation of the law, or property or money taken on suspicion of having been feloniously obtained or being the proceeds of crime and for which there is no other claimant than the person from which it was taken, or lost property coming into the possession of the police department, and all property and money taken from any insane or intoxicated person otherwise incapable of taking care of himself, shall be deposited, handled and accounted for under regulations prescribed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1974, § 19-122) 
Sec. 2-342. - Claim of ownership. 
    The owner entitled to the possession of property coming into the possession of the police department pursuant to section 2-341 must claim the property within 60 days. If the owner fails to so claim such property, the finder may claim ownership, provided he does so within 30 days following the expiration of the 60-day period. If neither the owner nor finder claims ownership within the 90-day period provided in this section, the property shall be claimed by the city as personal property. 
(Code 1974, § 19-123) 
Sec. 2-343. - Sale, use or donation. 
    Unclaimed property reverting to the city under section 2-342 may be retained for use by the city, sold at an auction sale under the direction of the chief of police or, by resolution by the council, donated to any tax-exempt charitable organization operating within the city limits. In the event of an auction, the date, time, and place of any auction sale shall be advertised by publication in the official city newspaper at least seven days prior to the date of sale. 
(Code 1974, § 19-124) 
Secs. 2-344-2-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS 

Sec. 2-371. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized city official means a police officer or other personnel of the city authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
    Bureau means the city municipal ordinance violations bureau as established by this article. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.8396, 600.8707(6)). 
(Code 1974, § 2-300) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-372. - Commencement of action. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of: 
(1)  A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or 
(2)  A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(Code 1974, § 2-301) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 600.8703, 600.8707. 
Sec. 2-373. - Issuance and service of citations. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)  The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the 33rd District Court. 
(3)  Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 8705 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.8705). 
(4)  A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(5)  An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(6)  An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a.  Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.  Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7)  Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a.  Except as provided by subsection (7)b of this section, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b.  If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Code 1974, § 2-302) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 600.8705, 600.8707. 
Sec. 2-374. - Contents of citations. 
(a)  A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)  The citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following: 
(1)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or in person, or by representation. 
(3)  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
b.  Appearing in district court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)  The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)  That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the district court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)  That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the district court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)  That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)  That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)  That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)  The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, § 2-303) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 600.8709. 
Sec. 2-375. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Established. The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau as authorized under section 8396 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.8396) to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance. 
(b)  Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at city hall, and shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. The city treasurer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(c)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this article shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and any person may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law. 
(d)  Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any act or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(e)  Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in section 2-373(6) and (7). In addition to any other information required by this Code or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f)  Appearances; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(g)  Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by sections 8705 and 8709 of the Revised Judicature Act (MCL 600.8705, 600.8709), but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Code 1974, § 2-304) 
State Law reference- Municipal ordinance violations bureau, MCL 600.8396; municipal ordinance violation notices, MCL 600.8707. 
Sec. 2-376. - Schedule of civil fines. 
(a)  A schedule of civil fines payable to the municipal ordinance violations bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices shall be established. 
(b)  A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted at the bureau. 
(Code 1974, § 2-305) 
Sec. 2-377. - Persons authorized to issue citations or notices. 
(a)  The following city officials are hereby authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations or notices of the following municipal civil infractions: 
Chapter Official 6 Police officers 14 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 18 City engineer and his designees 42 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 
Fire chief 
Fire marshal 62 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 66 Police officers 70 Police officers 
Director, parks and recreation, and his designees 74 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 
Director of public service and his designees 82 Police officers 
Director of public service and his designees 98 Director of public service and his designees 102 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 
Director of public service and his designees 106 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 110 City engineer and his designees  
(b)  The following persons are hereby authorized to issue notices of the following municipal civil infractions pursuant to section 2-372: 
Section Official 14-85 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 
Contracted animal control officers designated by chief of police 14-114 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 
Contracted animal control officers designated by chief of police 14-115 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 
Contracted animal control officers designated by chief of police 14-143 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 
Contracted animal control officers designated by chief of police 70-103 Police officers 
City engineer and his designees 
Contracted animal control officers designated by chief of police 74-71 City engineer and his designees 
City director of department of public services and his designees  
(Code 1974, § 2-307; Ord. No. 706, § 5, 3-5-2007) 
Sec. 2-378. - Failure to respond to citation or notice. 
    Any person who fails to answer a municipal civil infraction citation or a notice to appear in court for a municipal civil infraction, issued pursuant to this article or chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 2-308) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 600.8727(9). 
Secs. 2-379-2-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference- Boards and commissions, § 4.26; election commission, § 3.12; board of review, § 9.7 et seq. 
Cross reference- Downtown development authority, § 26-61 et seq.; environmental advisory board, § 38-31 et seq.; cable communications commission, § 50-91 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 70-31 et seq.; port commission, § 106-31 et seq.; zoning commission, § 110-32; zoning board of appeals and adjustments; appeals and variances, § 110-91 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-401. - Compensation of members. 
    Each member of an appointed board, appointed commission or council of the city shall receive $15.00 per meeting as full compensation for services. 
Secs. 2-402-2-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-421. - Continued. 
    There is hereby continued the city beautiful commission, which shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-64) 
Sec. 2-422. - Composition; compensation of members. 
    The city beautiful commission shall be composed of nine members to be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval by a majority vote of the members of the city council. Members shall be compensated as provided in section 2-401. 
(Code 1974, § 2-65) 
Sec. 2-423. - Ex officio members. 
    The city beautiful commission shall consist of the following ex officio members, who shall have no voting powers on the commission: 
(1)  One representative from the mayor's office. 
(2)  One representative from the parks and recreation department. 
(3)  One representative from the engineering and building department. 
(4)  The chairperson of the planning commission. 
(Code 1974, § 2-67) 
Sec. 2-424. - Term of office of members. 
    The term of office of the members of the city beautiful commission shall be three years. 
(Code 1974, § 2-68) 
Sec. 2-425. - Vacancies. 
    Any vacancy in the city beautiful commission shall be filled by the mayor with the approval of the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1974, § 2-69) 
Charter reference- Vacancies in boards and commissions, §§ 5.3, 17.7. 
Sec. 2-426. - Chairperson. 
    The city beautiful commission shall select its own chairperson, who shall serve for a term of one year, but who shall be subject to reelection if the other commission members so desire. 
(Code 1974, § 2-71) 
Sec. 2-427. - Objectives and purposes. 
    The objectives and purposes of the city beautiful commission shall be to keep the city beautiful in the following manner: 
(1)  Promote public education against the discarding of litter in the city's streets, alleys, sidewalks, gutters, parks and recreational areas or similar public places. 
(2)  Enlist the active support of interested individuals, businesses, industry, Trenton's National Farm and Garden Association, and schools and civic organizations that would share the same objectives. 
(3)  Encourage developers, absentee owners and businessmen to accept basic responsibilities in preserving and enhancing the beauty of public and private properties. 
(4)  Sponsor, plan and promote a special spring and fall fix-up, paint-up, cleanup campaign. 
(5)  Investigate, study, and recommend plans for improving the general health, sanitation, safety and cleanliness of the city. 
(6)  Encourage the placing, planting and preservation of trees, flowers and shrubbery, and sponsor and promote Arbor Week. 
(7)  Sponsor a program of general improvement of appearance of all properties in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 2-72) 
Sec. 2-428. - Assistance by city departments. 
    The several departments of the city shall work in harmony with the city beautiful commission and provide such necessary assistance and cooperation as may be necessary to assist the commission in carrying out its objectives and purposes. 
(Code 1974, § 2-73) 
Sec. 2-429. - Annual estimate of required funds. 
    The city beautiful commission shall annually prepare and present to the city council an estimate of any necessary costs and expenses required to carry on the work of the commission. 
(Code 1974, § 2-74) 
Secs. 2-430-2-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CIVIC COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-451. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a civic commission of the city, which is an advisory commission, and whose functions, duties and powers are as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1974, § 2-128) 
Sec. 2-452. - Composition; term of office of members; vacancies; compensation of members. 
    The civic commission shall consist of nine members, who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the city council, as provided in Charter section 4.26. Members shall serve for three-year terms. Vacancies on the commission occurring before the expiration of any term shall be reported by the commission to the mayor and council, and filled by appointment as set forth in this section for the unexpired term. No person shall be eligible for appointment who is the holder of any public office, elective or appointive, under the Charter and who does not meet the eligibility requirements for appointment to public office. Members shall be compensated as provided in section 2-401. 
(Code 1974, § 2-129) 
Sec. 2-453. - Organization; meetings. 
    The civic commission shall immediately after appointment meet and organize by the election of one of its members as chairperson, and by the election of such other officers as it deems necessary. The commission will adopt bylaws for the orderly conduct of its meetings and for the proper process of its functions. Meetings of the commission will be held monthly, or as often as may be deemed necessary by the chairperson. 
(Code 1974, § 2-130) 
Sec. 2-454. - Purpose and functions; assistance by city agencies. 
(a)  The civic commission shall act as an advisory commission to the mayor and members of the city council to coordinate all civic events occurring within the city for such suggested events as the Christmas parade, Labor Day parade, Fourth of July events, Memorial Day, boat races, and City of Trenton Day. These events are listed in this section only by way of example and there is no requirement that all of such stated events be carried out, nor are the events limited to those stated in this section. 
(b)  The commission shall prepare and submit to the city council a projected program and budget within three months after its first meeting. 
(c)  Any person requesting participation of the city in a civic event shall file an application, which will be referred to the civic commission for its study, review and a recommendation to the city council for approval or disapproval of participation in the event, with a recommended city cost participation. 
(d)  The commission may call upon any municipal department, board or commission for such technical or advisory assistance as may be needed. 
(Code 1974, § 2-131) 
Secs. 2-455-2-470. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CULTURAL COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-471. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a cultural commission of the city, to act solely in an advisory capacity. 
(Code 1974, § 2-80) 
Sec. 2-472. - Composition; appointment of members. 
    The cultural commission shall consist of nine members, who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the city council. The parks and recreation director shall serve as a nonvoting permanent member of the commission. 
(Code 1974, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-473. - Qualifications of members. 
    No person shall be eligible for appointment to the cultural commission who is the holder of any elective or appointive city office. 
(Code 1974, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-474. - Term of office of members. 
    The term of office of the members of the cultural commission shall be three years. 
(Code 1974, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-475. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the cultural commission occurring before the expiration of any term shall be reported by the commission to the mayor and council and filled by appointment as set forth in section 2-472 for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1974, § 2-84) 
Charter reference- Vacancies in boards and commissions, §§ 5.3, 17.7. 
Sec. 2-476. - Officers; bylaws; meetings. 
    The cultural commission shall immediately after appointment meet and organize by the election of one of its members as chairperson, and by the election of such other officers as it deems necessary. It shall adopt bylaws for the orderly conduct of its meetings and for the proper process of its functions. Meetings of the commission shall be held monthly, and as often as may be deemed necessary by the chairperson. 
(Code 1974, § 2-85) 
Sec. 2-477. - Approval of expenditures. 
    Neither the cultural commission or any of its members shall incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. In the event any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the cultural commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-478. - Filing of minutes. 
    A copy of the minutes of all cultural commission meetings shall be filed with the city clerk for submittal to the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-87) 
Sec. 2-479. - Powers and duties. 
    The cultural commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Act as an advisory commission to the city council. 
(2)  Consider, study and recommend plans for the development of citywide cultural programs. 
(3)  Promote, coordinate and develop the performing and creative arts by making recommendations for programs for cultural opportunities and experiences for the citizens of the city and, further, facilitate communication with the state council for the arts. 
(4)  Call on any municipal department, board or commission for such technical and advisory assistance as may be needed. 
(Code 1974, § 2-88) 
Secs. 2-480-2-500. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HISTORICAL COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-501. - Continuation; purpose. 
    A historical commission for the city is considered advisable for promoting the recording of the origin and development of the Trenton area, and to that end the commission known as the Historical Commission of Trenton, Michigan, which shall act solely in an advisory capacity to the city council, is hereby continued. 
(Code 1974, § 2-94) 
State Law reference- Historical commissions authorized, MCL 399.172. 
Sec. 2-502. - Composition; appointment of members. 
    The historical commission shall be composed of nine members, to be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of a majority vote of the members of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-95) 
Sec. 2-503. - Qualifications of members. 
    None of the members of the historical commission shall be employees of or hold any municipal office in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 2-96) 
Sec. 2-504. - Term of office of members. 
    The term of each member of the historical commission shall be three years. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1974, § 2-97) 
Sec. 2-505. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the historical commission occurring other than through the expiration of the term of office shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor, with the approval of a majority vote of the members of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-98) 
Charter reference- Vacancies in boards and commissions, §§ 5.3, 17.7. 
Sec. 2-506. - Compensation of members. 
    Members of the historical commission shall be compensated as provided in section 2-401. 
(Code 1974, § 2-99) 
Sec. 2-507. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The powers and duties of the historical commission shall be to collect, develop and compile historical data and information concerning the origin and development of the Trenton area, and advise the city council by periodic reports of its findings. 
(b)  The scope, powers and duties of the historical commission shall include the duty to recommend to the city council the following areas of responsibility pertaining to the historical museum: 
(1)  Operations. 
(2)  Development. 
(3)  Addition of artifacts. 
(4)  Maintenance. 
(5)  Special events and exhibits. 
(6)  Personnel and staffing (full- or part-time). 
(7)  Fund-raising activities. 
(8)  Receipt of gifts of historical importance in the name of the city. 
(9)  Other matters relating to the historical museum. 
(Code 1974, § 2-100) 
Sec. 2-508. - Annual estimate of required funds; approval of expenditures. 
    The historical commission shall annually prepare and present to the city council an estimate of necessary costs and expenses required to carry on the work of the commission, and the commission shall not obligate itself or the city in any financial undertaking unless and until first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-101) 
Secs. 2-509-2-530. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LIBRARY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-531. - Continued; purpose. 
    An advisory library commission for the city is considered advisable for the study and review of existing facilities and policies of the library in the city and for recommending any improvements thereof, and to that end the Trenton Library Commission is continued and shall act solely in an advisory capacity to the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-120; Ord. No. 657, § 1(2-120), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 2-532. - Composition; appointment of members; term of office of members. 
    The advisory library commission shall be composed of five members to be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval by a majority vote of the members of the city council. Members shall serve for terms of three years each. 
(Code 1974, § 2-121) 
Sec. 2-533. - Qualifications of members. 
    All members of the library commission shall be residents and electors of the city in compliance with the city Charter and shall be appointed from persons who are knowledgeable of library operations. 
(Code 1974, § 2-122; Ord. No. 657, § 1(2-122), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 2-534. - Term of office of members. 
    The term of office of each member of the library commission shall be one year, and all members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1974, § 2-123) 
Sec. 2-535. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies occurring on the library commission other than through the expiration of the term of office shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor, with the approval of a majority vote of the members of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-124) 
Charter reference- Vacancies in boards and commissions, §§ 5.3, 17.7. 
Sec. 2-536. - Compensation of members. 
    Any member of the library commission who shall attend a duly called meeting of the commission shall receive as compensation thereof the sum of $10.00. Attendance records shall be furnished to the city controller. 
(Code 1974, § 2-125; Ord. No. 657, § 1(2-125), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 2-537. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the library commission shall be to collect, develop, and prepare necessary data and information on the existing library system service, formulate and recommend policies on operation of the library under generally accepted standards and guidelines developed by the American Library Association and the Michigan Library Association. The library commission shall make recommendations to the city council on hours of operation and improvements to the library. 
(Code 1974, § 2-126; Ord. No. 657, § 1(2-126), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 2-538. - Annual estimate of required funds; approval of expenditures. 
    The library commission annually shall prepare and present to the city council an estimate of any necessary costs and expenses required to carry on the work of the commission, and the commission shall not obligate itself or the city in any financial undertaking unless and until first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 2-127) 
Secs. 2-539-2-560. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PLANNING COMMISSION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal planning commissions, MCL 125.31 et seq. 

Sec. 2-561. - Continuation; purpose. 
    A considered plan for the general physical development of the city is a matter of necessity and will promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of its citizens, and to that end the city planning commission is hereby continued. 
(Code 1974, § 25-16) 
State Law reference- Authority to create planning commission, MCL 125.32. 
Sec. 2-562. - Composition; appointment of members. 
    The planning commission shall be composed of nine members, to be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval by a majority vote of the members of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 25-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.33(1). 
Sec. 2-563. - Qualifications of members. 
    All members of the planning commission shall be citizens of the city and shall be appointed, insofar as possible, as representative of different professions or occupations. None of the members shall be employees of or hold any municipal office in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 25-18) 
State Law reference- Qualifications of planning commission members, MCL 125.33. 
Sec. 2-564. - Term of office of members. 
    The term of each member of the planning commission shall be three years. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1974, § 25-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.33(1). 
Sec. 2-565. - Compensation of members. 
    Members of the planning commission shall be compensated as provided in section 2-401. 
(Code 1974, § 25-21) 
Sec. 2-566. - Removal of members. 
    Any member of the planning commission, after public hearing, may be removed by the mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1974, § 25-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.33(1). 
Sec. 2-567. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the planning commission occurring other than through the expiration of the term of office shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor, with the approval of a majority vote of the members of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 25-20) 
Charter reference- Vacancies in boards and commissions, §§ 5.3, 17.7. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.33(6). 
Sec. 2-568. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the planning commission shall be as provided by Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.) and Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.) to the same extent and same regular result and effect as if the powers and duties of the commission as declared and provided by such acts had been at length set forth in this division. 
(Code 1974, § 25-23) 
Sec. 2-569. - Annual estimate of costs and expenses; approval of expenditures. 
    The planning commission shall annually prepare and present to the city council an estimate of the necessary costs and expenses required to carry on the work of the commission, and the commission shall not obligate itself or the city in any financial undertaking unless and until first authorized and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 25-24) 
Secs. 2-570-2-590. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - YOUTH COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-591. - Established. 
    The city youth commission is hereby created. The youth commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council, administration and other city officials. 
(Code 1974, § 2-132) 
Sec. 2-592. - Composition; appointment of members; compensation of members. 
    The youth commission shall consist of up to 15 members to be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of a majority vote of the members of the city council, all of whom shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1974, § 2-133; Ord. No. 660, § 1, 1-6-2003) 
Sec. 2-593. - Qualifications of members. 
    All members of the youth commission shall be residents of the city, enrolled in a public or private schools, who are not less than 13 and not more than 19 years of age. 
(Code 1974, § 2-134) 
Sec. 2-594. - Term of office of members. 
    The term of office of the members of the youth commission shall be one year or until a successor is appointed and approved. 
(Code 1974, § 2-135) 
Sec. 2-595. - Removal of members. 
    Members of the youth commission may be removed by the city council or by a unanimous vote of its members, not including the vote of the subject of removal. 
(Code 1974, § 2-136) 
Sec. 2-596. - Chairperson. 
    The youth commission shall select its own chairperson from among its members, who shall serve for a term of one year, but who may be reelected upon approval of the members. 
(Code 1974, § 2-137) 
Sec. 2-597. - Objectives and purposes. 
    The purpose of the youth commission is to identify issues and concerns of the community's youth and to make recommendations for projects and programs to address them for the betterment of the community. 
(Code 1974, § 2-137.1) 
Sec. 2-598. - Advisory board. 
    The youth commission shall be assisted from time to time by an advisory board consisting of five residents of 21 years of age or older, or owners of businesses located within the city limits who are 21 years of age or older, who shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of one year and shall serve as ex officio members of the commission. 
(Code 1974, § 2-137.2) 
Secs. 2-599, 2-600. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - BOARD OF REVIEW 

Sec. 2-601. - Establishment of alternates. 
    The city council shall appoint not more than two alternate members to the board of review for the same term as regular members of the board of review. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 2-602. - Qualifications of alternates. 
    Each alternate member shall be a property tax payer of the city and shall qualify by taking the constitutional oath of office within ten days following appointment. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 2-603. - Vacancies. 
    The city council shall fill any vacancy which occurs in the alternate membership in the Board of Review. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 2-604. - Eligibility. 
    A member of the city council, or spouse, mother, father, sister, brother, son, or daughter of a council member, including an adopted child of member, or of the assessor, is not eligible to serve as an alternate member or to fill any vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 1, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 2-605. - Duties. 
    An alternate member may be called upon by the assessor to perform the duties of a regular member of the board of review in the absence of a regular member or, for purposes of reaching a decision in issues protested in which a regular board member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 1, 3-3-2008) 
Secs. 2-606-2-700. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HUMAN RIGHTS 

Sec. 2-701. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the city that no person be denied equal protection of the laws; nor shall any person be denied the enjoyment of his or her civil or political rights or be discriminated against because of actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, condition of pregnancy, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income, family responsibilities, sexual orientation, gender identity or HIV status. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-702. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meaning: 
    Age means chronological age. 
    Discriminate means to make a decision, offer to make a decision, or refrain from making a decision, based in whole or in part on the actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, condition of pregnancy, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income, family responsibilities, sexual orientation, gender identity, or HIV status of another person, that person's relatives, or that person's associates. Discrimination based on sex includes sexual harassment, which means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct or communication of a sexual nature when (i) submission to such conduct or communication is, either explicitly or implicitly, made a term or condition of obtaining employment, public accommodations, or housing, (ii) submission to or rejection of such conduct or communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting such individual's employment, public accommodations or housing, and/or (iii) such conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's employment, public accommodations or housing, or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive employment, public accommodations, or housing environment. Discrimination based upon actual or perceived physical or mental limitation includes discrimination because of the use of adaptive devices or aids by an individual. 
    Family responsibilities means the state of being or the potential to become a contributor to the support of a person or persons in a family relationship. 
    Gender identity means a person's actual or perceived gender, including a person's gender identity, self-image, appearance, expression, or behavior, whether or not that gender identity, self-image, appearance, expression, or behavior is different from that traditionally associated with the person's sex at birth as being either female or male. 
    HIV status means the physical condition of a person who has, or has been diagnosed as having been infected with, the human immunodeficiency virus, whether or not that person has or has been diagnosed as having acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome related complex. 
    Housing facility means any dwelling unit or facility used for a person to regularly sleep and keep personal belongings including, but not limited to, a house, apartment, rooming house, housing cooperative, hotel, motel, tourist home, retirement home or nursing home. 
    Marital status means the state of being married, unmarried, divorced, or widowed. 
    Mental limitation means a limitation of mental capabilities unrelated to one's ability to safely perform the work involved in jobs or positions available to such person for hire or promotion; a limitation of mental capabilities unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent and maintain property; or a limitation of mental capabilities unrelated to one's ability to utilize and benefit from the goods, services, activities, privileges and accommodations of a place of public accommodation. "Mental limitation" includes, but is not limited to, developmental and psychological disabilities. "Mental limitation" does not include any condition caused by the current use of alcohol or the current illegal use of a controlled substance. 
    Perceived means the perception of the person who acts, and not the perception of the person for or against whom the action is taken. 
    Physical limitation means a limitation or physical capabilities unrelated to one's ability to safely perform the work involved in jobs or positions available to such person for hire or promotion; a limitation of physical capabilities unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent and maintain property; or a limitation of mental capabilities unrelated to one's ability to utilize and benefit from the goods, services, activities, privileges and accommodations of a place of public accommodation. "Physical limitation" includes, but is not limited to, blindness or partial sightedness, deafness or hearing impairment, muteness, partial or total absence of physical member, speech impairment and motor impairment. "Physical limitation" does not include any condition caused by the current use of alcohol or the current illegal use of a controlled substance. 
    Place of public accommodation means an educational, governmental, health, day care, entertainment, cultural, recreational, refreshment, transportation, financial institution, accommodation, business or other facility of any kind, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold or otherwise made available to the public, or which receives financial support through the solicitation of the general public or through governmental subsidy of any kind. 
    Sexual orientation means male or female homosexuality, heterosexuality, or bisexuality, by orientation or practice. 
    Source of income means any legal source from which a person obtains money. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-703. - Discriminatory housing practices. 
(a)  No person shall discriminate in leasing, selling or otherwise making available any housing facilities. 
(b)  No person shall discriminate in the terms, conditions, maintenance, or repair in providing any housing facility. 
(c)  No person shall refuse to lend money for the purchase or repair of any real property or to insure any real property solely because of the location in the city of such real property. 
(d)  No person shall promote real estate transactions by representing that changes are occurring or will occur in an area with respect to race, religion or national origin. 
(e)  No person shall place a sign or other display on any real property which indicates that the property is for sale or has been sold when it is not for sale or has not recently been sold. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-704. - Discriminatory public accommodation practices. 
    No person shall discriminate in making available full and equal access to all goods, services, activities, privileges and accommodations of any place of public accommodation. No person shall prohibit a breastfeeding mother from or segregate a breastfeeding mother within any public accommodation where she and the child would otherwise be authorized to be. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-705. - Discriminatory employment practices. 
(a)  No person shall discriminate in the employment, compensation, work classifications, conditions or terms, promotion or demotion, or termination of employment of any person. 
(b)  No person shall discriminate in limiting membership, conditions of membership or termination of membership in any labor union or apprenticeship program. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-706. - Other prohibited practices. 
(a)  No person shall adopt, enforce or employ any policy or requirement, publish, post or broadcast any advertisement, sign or notice which discriminates or indicates discrimination in providing housing, employment or public accommodations. 
(b)  No person shall discriminate in the publication or distribution of advertising material, information or solicitation regarding housing, employment or public accommodations. 
(c)  No agent, broker, labor union, employment agency or any other intermediary shall discriminate in making referrals, listings or providing information with regard to housing, employment or public accommodations. 
(d)  No person shall coerce, threaten or retaliate against a person for making a complaint or assisting in the investigation regarding a violation or alleged violation of this chapter, nor require, request, conspire with, assist or coerce another person to retaliate against a person for making a complaint or assisting in an investigation. 
(e)  No person shall conspire with, assist, coerce or request another person to discriminate in any manner prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-707. - Information and investigation. 
    No person shall provide false information to any police officer investigating an alleged violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-708. - Conciliation agreements. 
    In cases involving alleged violations of this chapter, the city may enter into agreements whereby persons agree to methods of terminating discrimination or to reverse the effects of past discrimination. A violation of such an agreement shall be a violation of this chapter. The city attorney may commence a civil action to enforce a conciliation agreement. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-709. - Discriminatory effects. 
    No person shall adopt, enforce or employ any policy or requirement which has the effect of creating unequal opportunities according to actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, condition of pregnancy, source of income, family responsibilities, sexual orientation, marital status, physical or mental limitation, gender identity or HIV status for a person to obtain housing, employment or public accommodation, except for a bona fide business necessity. Such a necessity does not arise due to a mere inconvenience or because of suspected or actual objection to such a person by neighbors, customers, or other persons. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-710. - Exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, the following practices shall not be violations of this chapter: 
(1)  For a religious organization or institution to restrict any of its facilities of housing or accommodations which are operated as a direct part of religious activities to persons of the denomination involved or to restrict employment opportunities for officers, religious instructors and clergy to persons of that denomination. 
(2)  For the owner of an owner-occupied one-family or two-family dwelling, or a housing facility or public accommodation facility, respectively, devoted entirely to the housing and accommodation of individuals of one sex, to restrict occupancy and use on the basis of sex. 
(3)  To limit occupancy in a housing project or to provide public accommodations or employment privileges or assistance to persons of low income, over 55 years of age, or who are handicapped. 
(4)  To engage in a bona fide effort to establish an affirmative action program to improve opportunities in employment for minorities and women. 
(5)  To discriminate based on a person's age when such discrimination is required by state, federal or local law. 
(6)  To refuse to enter a contract with an unemancipated minor. 
(7)  To refuse to admit to a place of public accommodation serving alcoholic beverages a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  To refuse to admit persons under 18 years of age to a business providing entertainment or selling literature which the operator of said business deems unsuitable for minors. 
(9)  For an educational institution to limit the use of its facilities to those affiliated with such institution. 
(10)  To provide discounts on products or service to students, minors and senior citizens. 
(11)  To discriminate in any arrangement for the sharing of a dwelling unit. 
(12)  To restrict use of lavatories and locker room facilities on the basis of sex. 
(13)  For a governmental institution to restrict any of its facilities or to restrict employment opportunities based on duly adopted institutional policies that conform to federal and state laws and regulations. 
(14)  To restrict participation in an instructional program, athletic event or on an athletic team on the basis of age or sex. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-711. - Penalties. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, plus the costs of investigation and prosecution. Upon a finding or an admission of responsibility, the court may issue and enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  Each day upon which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit in any way the remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city or any other person for the prevention or correction of discrimination. Private actions and remedies shall be in addition to any actions for a violation which the city may take. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-712. - Nullification. 
    The provisions of this article shall become null and void upon the enactment of federal statute, or state legislation in Michigan, prohibiting those discriminatory practices set forth therein, including but not limited to the enactment of ENDA (Employment Non-Discrimination Act), or facsimile thereof. 
(Ord. No. 777, § 3, 11-12-2013) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; use of alcoholic beverages on premises, § 22-150; carrying while under the influence of alcohol, § 66-171; intoxicants in parks, § 70-117; additional restrictions on consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages, § 70-156. 
State Law reference- Michigan Liquor Control Act of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Consumption in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic liquor on the public highways, or consume any alcoholic liquors, except beer and wine, in public parks and places of amusement not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  Except as in subsection (c) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, consume or possess any alcoholic liquor in any portion of the Kennedy Recreation Center, except on the Mezzanine Level of the Ice Arena, and then only when distributed by an establishment licensed by the state to serve alcohol at that location. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b), alcoholic liquor may be sold and served on the main floor of the Kennedy Recreation Center on a temporary basis upon issuance of a permit approved by the city council, to an appropriately licensed and city recognized non-profit organization authorized to utilize the center in conjunction with an approved special event. 
(Code 1974, § 4-1; Ord. No. 763, § 1, 5-21-12) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Public consumption of alcohol, MCL 436.1915. 
Sec. 6-2. - Sale to intoxicated persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, give or furnish alcoholic liquor, beer or wine to any intoxicated person. 
(Code 1974, § 4-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1707. 
Sec. 6-3. - Sale to underage persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish alcoholic liquor, beer or wine to any person under 21 years of age. 
(Code 1974, § 4-4) 
Cross reference- Underage persons, § 66-331 et seq. 
State Law reference- Sale to underage persons, MCL 436.1701. 
Sec. 6-4. - Purchase, consumption or possession by underage persons; furnishing fraudulent identification to underage person. 
(a)  In this section, the term "minor" means a person less than 21 years of age. 
(b)  A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided by this section. It shall be an affirmative defense that a minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal. A minor who violates subsection (1) hereunder is responsible for a civil infraction, while a minor who violates subsections (2) thru (6) herein is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions: 
(1)  For the first violation, a fine of not more than $100.00, and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.6107), and designed by the state administrator of substance abuse services, and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his own expense as described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  For a violation of this subsection following a prior conviction or juvenile adjudication for a violation of this subsection by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, but only if the minor has been found by court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than $200.00, or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.6107), and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his own expense as described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  For a violation of this subsection following two or more prior convictions or juvenile adjudications for a violation of this subsection, by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, but only if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.6107), and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his own expense as described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(4)  For a violation of this section following a prior conviction of it or any other local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL 436.1703, a person may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 30 days but only if the person has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatments, screening or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction. 
(5)  For a violation of this section following two or more prior convictions of it or any other local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL 436.1703, a person may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 60 days and a fine of not more than $500.00 or both, but only if the person has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatments, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction. 
(6)  Upon violation of a term or condition of probation or upon the finding that the person is utilizing this section or the local ordinance of any other community substantially corresponding to this section, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, and proceed as otherwise provided by law. There may be only one discharge or dismissal of this section as to an individual. The court shall maintain a non-public record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and the person is on probation. 
(c)  A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor, or, notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a minor who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(d)  The court may order the person convicted of violating subsection (b) of this section to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in section 6103 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.6103), in order to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. 
(e)  The secretary of state shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating subsection (b) or (c) of this section as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.319). 
(f)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has consumed alcoholic liquor, or has any bodily alcohol content, may request the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis or require such a test pursuant to a warrant. A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor. A minor who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis as may be required in this subsection is responsible for a state civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00. 
(g)  A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated under Public Act No. 293 of 1968 (MCL 722.1 et seq.) allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased, or attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of subsection (b) of this section, shall notify the parent, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated subsection (b) of this section is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under Public Act No. 293 of 1968 (MCL 722.1 et seq.). The notice may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice, including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first class mail. If an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (b) of this section, his parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(h)  This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his employment if employed by a person licensed by Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.), by the state liquor control commission, or by an agent of the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his personal consumption. 
(i)  This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.). 
(j)  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this section if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course. 
(k)  The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this section. 
(l)  Subsection (b) of this section does not apply to a minor who participates in either or both of the following: 
(1)  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2)  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the state liquor control commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(m)  The state police, the state liquor control commission, or a local police agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (b) of this section, section 801(2) of Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1801(3), or section 701(1) of Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.701(1)). 
(n)  In a criminal prosecution for the violation of subsection (b), "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
(1)  An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or 67 milliliters of urine; 
(2)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than the consumption of alcoholic liquor as part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(Code 1974, §§ 4-1, 4-5; Ord. No. 670, § 1, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 676, § 1, 10-18-2004; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 724, § 1, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 792, § 1, 1-8-2017) 
Cross reference- Underage persons, § 66-331 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1703. 
Sec. 6-5. - False representation to purchase alcohol. 
(a)  No person under 21 years of age shall use altered or false identification or otherwise falsely represent himself to be 21 years of age or older for the purpose of purchasing, acquiring, or attempting to purchase or acquire for himself, or for any other person, any alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalties, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend, for a period of 90 days, the operator's or chauffeur's license of a person who is convicted of using fraudulent identification in violation of this section, and the operator's or chauffeur's license of that person shall be surrendered to the court. The court shall immediately forward the surrendered license and a certificate of conviction to the secretary of state. A suspension ordered under this section shall be in addition to any other suspension of a person's operator's or chauffeur's license. 
(Code 1974, § 4-9) 
Sec. 6-6. - False representation to gain entry. 
    No person shall use altered or false identification or otherwise make any false representation as to his age or the age of another for the purpose of gaining entry or attempting to gain entry to any establishment which sells, serves or furnishes alcoholic beverages. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(2), 4-10) 
Sec. 6-7. - Alcohol vapor devices. 
(a)  Alcohol shall mean the product of distillation of fermented liquor, whether or not rectified or diluted with water, but does not mean ethyl or industrial alcohol, diluted or not, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for beverage purposes. 
(b)  Alcohol vapor device shall mean any device that provides for the use of air or oxygen bubbled through alcoholic liquor to produce a vapor or mist that allows the user to inhale this alcoholic vapor through the mouth or nose. 
(c)  Except for research purposes pursuant to rules promulgated by the state liquor control commission, a person shall not use or offer for use, possess, sell, or offer for sale, an alcohol vapor device. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 1, 2-6-2006) 
ARTICLE II. - COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 6-8. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrase, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substances means a drug, substance or immediate precursor in Schedules 1-5 Pat 72 of the Michigan Public Health Code, Act 368 of 1978, as amended from time to time. 
    Emergency response means: 
(1)  The providing, sending or utilizing of public service, police, fire and rescue services by the city to an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers are operating a motor vehicle under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or the combination of the two; 
(2)  The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when the driver is operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance, or combination of the two. 
    Expense of emergency response means the direct costs associated with the occurrence of an emergency response as defined in subsections (1) and (2) of the preceding paragraph, which ever is applicable, of this section. The expense of making an emergency response shall include the costs of providing police, firefighting, rescue, and emergency medical services at the scene of the accident or arrest, as well as the salaries or wages of the personnel responding to the accident or arrest. Further, the expenses shall include the costs of conducting and analyzing preliminary chemical breath analysis tests and chemical tests of the blood, urine, or breath to determine the amount or presence of alcohol or controlled substance in the blood and the costs of processing or analyzing other physical evidence. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 1, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 6-9. - Civil liability. 
    Any person who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any controlled substance, or the combination of the two, while operating a motor vehicle which results in the city's provision of an emergency response, shall be responsible and liable to the city for the expenses incurred by the city, in providing such response, not to exceed $125.00. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 1, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 6-10. - Liability presumption. 
    For purposes of this article, it shall be presumed that a person is operating a motor vehicle under the influence of an alcoholic beverage if a chemical analysis of the driver discloses that the person has an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 1, 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 6-11. - Conflict with criminal liability. 
    This article shall be construed to be a responsibility and liability of a civil nature on the part of the driver and shall not be construed to conflict with, contravene or enlarge or reduce any criminal liability or responsibility including fines and costs imposed by a court on the driver pursuant to the state motor vehicle code for operating a motor vehicle under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 1, 5-4-2009) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; sports, games and other amusements in parks, § 70-106. 
State Law reference- Carnival-Amusement Safety Act of 1966, MCL 408.651 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOWLING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-31. - License. 
    No person shall conduct, maintain or operate any bowling establishment open to the public without first obtaining a license therefor. The annual fee for a license required by this section shall be as established by the city council. No such license shall be granted except upon approval of the police chief, the fire chief and the health officer. Such approval shall be granted upon a showing of compliance with all laws and ordinances. No person shall be granted a license pursuant to this section unless he is over 18 years of age. 
(Code 1974, §§ 5-33-5-36) 
Secs. 10-32-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANCES AND DANCEHALLS 

Sec. 10-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operator of a dancehall means any person operating a dancehall, including any lessee or manager, and, in the case of an unincorporated club or association, the member thereof who is designated by such organization as the operator. 
    Public dancehall means any room, place or space in which a public dance or public ball shall be held or where admission can be had by payment of a fee or by purchased possession and presentation of a ticket or token or in which a charge is made for care of clothing or other property, or where the public generally may gain admission with or without payment of a fee. 
(Code 1974, § 5-64) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-62. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to municipal dances, dances sponsored by the recreation commission, or dances sponsored by any of the student bodies of the public or parochial schools of the city or service, civic, fraternal or church organizations of the city, if the proceeds of such dance, or the benefits thereof, shall be devoted exclusively to the benefit of such student bodies or clubs, fraternities, organizations or churches. 
(Code 1974, § 5-65) 
Sec. 10-63. - Authority to make additional rules and regulations. 
    The city council is hereby authorized to make any rules or regulations governing the maintenance or operation of any place or establishment where dancing is permitted. No dancing will be permitted in any place or establishment failing to abide by or comply with such rules or regulations. 
(Code 1974, § 5-85) 
Sec. 10-64. - Permitting patrons to violate article. 
    The operator and his agents or servants shall not allow patrons of any public dance to do any of the acts prohibited by this article. 
(Code 1974, § 5-82) 
Sec. 10-65. - Right of entry of city officials. 
    The operator or person in charge of every public dance shall at all times open each and every portion of such public dancehall for the inspection of the police department or other city department for the purpose of enforcing any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 5-72) 
Sec. 10-66. - Permit or license. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to operate any public dancehall in the city without first having obtained either a permit, license or temporary license; however, the city council may issue temporary or probationary permits for the purpose of determining whether or not a license should be issued. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold any public dance or public ball in the city until the hall in which the public dance or public ball is to be held shall have been first duly licensed for such purposes. 
(b)  Fee. The license fee to operate any public dance shall be as established by the council. The annual license fee for all public dancehalls where dances are held and to which the public generally may gain admittance shall be as established by the city council, with the fee to be due January 15 of each year; however, the city council may issue a license for a dancehall for a 24-hour period. The license fee for such dancehall for a 24-hour period shall be as established by the city council. 
(c)  Inspection of premises; standards for premises. Before any such license shall be issued, the chief of police and the chief of the fire department shall inspect such premises where the license was applied for to determine that the premises comply with the rules and regulations of the fire department and the state fire code, and the rules and regulations of the board of health and the police department relating to the safety, health, convenience and comfort of the public. They should also determine that there is adequate ventilation, that there are sufficient toilet conveniences for both men and women, including sanitary towels, that there is at least one sanitary drinking fountain, that the fire exits are marked and lighted and have free and unobstructed means of exit, and that the premises are free of rubbish and flammable material. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be deemed good and sufficient cause for the summary suspension by the city council of any license issued under this section until such time as a hearing may be heard upon an application for the revocation of such license. Any license issued under this section may be permanently revoked by the city council after conducting a public hearing allowing the licensee to appear and present his reasons for not revoking the license. 
(Code 1974, §§ 5-68-5-70, 5-86, 5-87) 
Sec. 10-67. - Hours of operation. 
    No dancing shall be permitted between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:30 a.m., without first having obtained permission from the city council upon the recommendation of the chief of police. 
(Code 1974, § 5-71) 
Sec. 10-68. - Gambling. 
    Gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling apparatus or paraphernalia is prohibited on the premises of any public dance. 
(Code 1974, § 5-76) 
Sec. 10-69. - Alcoholic beverages; intoxicated persons. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises of any public dance is specifically prohibited and no alcoholic beverages of any kind are to be allowed on the premises. 
(b)  No intoxicated person shall be allowed to dance or loiter on the premises of any public dance. 
(Code 1974, § 5-77) 
Cross reference- Public intoxication, § 66-204. 
State Law reference- Liquor in dancehalls, MCL 750.464a. 
Sec. 10-70. - Admittance of persons under 18 years of age. 
    Minors under 18 years of age shall not be permitted on the premises of any public dance, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, or unless a special permit is granted by the city council for a particular occasion. 
(Code 1974, § 5-79) 
Sec. 10-71. - Lighting. 
    There must be adequate lighting at all times at every public dance. Every part of the premises shall be well lighted. 
(Code 1974, § 5-80) 
Sec. 10-72. - Responsibility of operator for acts of agents and employees. 
    Any operator under this article is hereby made responsible and accountable for the violation of any of the terms of this article by any of his agents or servants, whether or not the violation is committed with his knowledge. 
(Code 1974, § 5-81) 
Sec. 10-73. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
    Any place or premises listed under the provisions of this article shall comply with chapter 110, pertaining to zoning. 
(Code 1974, § 5-83) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 110. 
Sec. 10-74. - Police protection. 
    The operator of any public dance shall assist in the proper policing of the dancehall during operating hours by protecting the citizens in attendance there and shall provide at least three uniformed private police who will be present during all hours of the operation of the public dance. 
(Code 1974, § 5-84) 
Secs. 10-75-10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arcade means any premises open to the public wherein are assembled five or more mechanical amusement devices. 
    Location owner means any person who has control over the premises in which are located any mechanical amusement devices and who has contracted or permitted such mechanical amusement devices to be installed or operated in such premises for business purposes. 
    Mechanical amusement device means a machine that upon the insertion of a coin or a slug is operated, or may be operated, for use as a game, including but not limited to such coin-operated devices as pinball machines, electric rifle range machines, jukeboxes, claw, crane or digger machines actuated by a crank, coin-operated bowling alleys, shuffleboard, video or electronic devices or any other type of machine operated as a game of skill for use in connection with gambling and which when operated does not deliver, as a result of the application of an element of chance, any money, property, merchandise or other forms of consideration or which through its operation does not entitle a person to receive, as a result of the application of an element of chance, any money or property and which contains no automatic payoff device or provides for a payoff by any other means or in any other manner, excepting any game replay. 
    Operator means any person who is in charge of or who has control over the operation of any mechanical amusement device. 
    Owner means any person who owns, has title to, or has control over the operation of any mechanical amusement device. 
(Code 1974, § 5-127) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-102. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to mechanical amusement devices located and operated in private residences for the private and nonbusiness use of the family members therein and their guests. With respect to the use and operation of mechanical amusement devices by schools, churches, fraternal societies, or any other nonprofit organization or association, the city council may exempt such use from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 5-139) 
Sec. 10-103. - Conduct on premises. 
    No owner, operator or location owner, by themselves, directly or indirectly, or acting through any agent, manager, lessee or employee, shall, with respect to the following conduct in or about the premises in which the mechanical amusement devices regulated by this article are located and being operated: 
(1)  Permit any indecent, immoral or profane language or any indecent, immoral or disorderly conduct to take place in or about such premises or, having knowledge of such language or conduct being conducted in or about such premises, fail to take active steps to cause such language or conduct to immediately cease; 
(2)  Permit the licensed premises and the area thereabout to become a gathering place for disorderly conduct of any type or fail to take active steps to eliminate such licensed premises becoming such a gathering place upon knowledge of such occurrence; 
(3)  Permit any individual to loiter in or about the premises or, having knowledge of such action, fail to take active steps to eliminate such conduct; 
(4)  Permit immoral, vulgar, lewd, obscene or improper conduct in or about the premises or, having knowledge of such acts occurring on the premises, fail to take active steps to eliminate such conduct; 
(5)  Permit gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling paraphernalia in or about the premises or, having knowledge of such acts taking place in or about the premises, fail to take active steps to eliminate such conduct; 
(6)  Permit intoxicated individuals in or about the premises or, having knowledge of the presence of such persons in or about the premises, fail to take active steps to remove such persons from the premises; 
(7)  Permit any minor individual to be upon the premises in violation of section 66-333, pertaining to curfew hours, or, having knowledge of the presence of such persons in violation of this provision, fail to take active steps to remove such persons from the premises; 
(8)  Permit the possession, use, selling, distributing, or giving away of any alcoholic liquor or beer on the premises or, having knowledge of such occurrence on the premises, fail to take active steps to eliminate such conduct. The prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to the premises if a state liquor control commission license is in effect on the licensed premises; 
(9)  Permit the possession or use of any drug or narcotic or controlled substance, including marijuana, on the premises or, having knowledge of the occurrence of such conduct, fail to take active steps to eliminate such conduct; 
(10)  Permit noise or music to emanate from the premises which is disturbing to the surrounding areas or, having knowledge of the existence of such disturbing conduct, fail to take active steps to eliminate such conduct; 
(11)  Permit on the licensed premises any obstruction of a public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds or screens, either of a permanent or movable nature; or 
(12)  Permit a person under the age of 18 years to be or act as the operator of any mechanical amusement device. 
(Code 1974, § 5-137) 
Sec. 10-104. - Hours of operation. 
    No mechanical amusement devices shall be operated within the city between the hours of 12.00 midnight and 12:00 noon, except where an establishment is licensed by the state liquor control commission, in which event the state liquor control commission regulations shall apply. 
(Code 1974, § 5-136) 
Sec. 10-105. - Gambling; use of non-authorized devices. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as permitting the issuance of a license for the operation of any slot machine or as permitting the use of any coin-operated machine in which is incorporated any gambling feature, and all use of such coin-operated machines for gambling purposes of any kind is hereby prohibited, excepting any game replay. 
(b)  No form of gambling shall be permitted in connection with the operation of any mechanical amusement devices licensed under this article. No form of any mechanical amusement device except those devices which are defined under this article shall be permitted to be located or operated in or about any premises in which mechanical amusement devices, as defined in this article, are permitted to be operated under a license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1974, §§ 5-128, 5-138) 
Secs. 10-106-10-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-121. - Required. 
    No person, owner, operator, or location owner shall operate, cause to be operated, or in any way participate in the operation of or in any way give permission or consent to the operation of any mechanical amusement device within the city for business purposes or as an incidental part of some other type of business unless a license has been obtained from the city permitting the operation of such mechanical amusement device within the city. 
(Code 1974, § 5-129) 
Sec. 10-122. - Application. 
(a)  Application for license to operate any mechanical amusement device within the city shall be made and filed with the city clerk. Such application shall be made by the owner and/or operator of the mechanical amusement devices proposed to be operated within the city and shall state the full name and address, including the street and number, of the owner and/or operator of the mechanical amusement devices. If there is more than one owner and/or operator or if the firm is an association, firm, partnership, or other type of organization, the application shall state the full names and addresses, including the streets and numbers, of all the parties who have a financial or ownership interest in the mechanical amusement devices proposed to be operated within the city. 
(b)  If the owner-applicant is a club, society or corporation, the application shall contain a complete list of the officers of such club, society or corporation, with their names and addresses, and such application will also give the state in which such club, society or corporation is organized and the names of one or more persons whom such club, society or corporation desires to designate as its manager or person in charge of the operation of the mechanical amusement devices, together with their address. 
(c)  The application shall also state the following: 
(1)  The location or premises where such mechanical amusement device is to be operated, including the street and number, and the location owner of such premises. 
(2)  The name and address, including the street and number, of the proposed operator of the mechanical amusement devices proposed to be operated in the premises listed in the application, if such operator is a person different than the owner of the mechanical amusement devices. 
(d)  The application shall be signed by the owner-applicant, or in the case of a club shall be signed by its president and secretary. Any false or incorrect statements made on any such applications shall be immediate and substantial grounds for revocation of a license granted pursuant to such application. 
(Code 1974, § 5-130) 
Sec. 10-123. - Investigation; standards for premises; maximum number of devices. 
(a)  Investigation by police department. Prior to the issuance of a license to operate mechanical amusement devices within the city, the city police department shall make an investigation as to the character of the owner-applicant and of the operator if such party is different from the owner-applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, club, society or any other such business organization or entity, then the police department shall make such investigation with respect to the officers of such entity and of the person who is to have the general management of the business for and on behalf of such entity. The police department shall also make an investigation as to the type and nature of the mechanical devices proposed to be used. The city council may reject any application upon the finding by the police department that any of the persons named in the application are not of good moral character, or that any of such persons have previously been connected with any mechanical amusement device operation where the license has been revoked, or if the premises in which the mechanical amusement devices are to be operated are not suitable and proper for such operation to be conducted, as such relates to the public health, safety and general welfare of the city. No application shall be approved until the types of mechanical amusement devices proposed to be used are approved by the police department. 
(b)  Investigation by fire department. The city fire department shall cause an investigation to be made of the premises in which the proposed mechanical amusement devices are to be located to determine whether or not the premises and any electrical equipment proposed to be used therein comply with all of the applicable ordinances, rules and regulations and statutes regulating the premises and equipment. The application shall be rejected if the fire department shall find any existing violation of such codes, ordinances or statutes, or if the fire department shall find that there is a threat of a probable future violation of any such code, ordinance, statute or rule or regulation. 
(c)  Investigation by engineering and building department. Prior to the issuance of a license as provided for under this division, the city engineering and building department shall cause an investigation to be made of the premises in which mechanical amusement devices are proposed to be located and operated as a business to determine whether or not the building involved meets all of the requirements of the building code and other applicable city ordinances in order to determine whether or not the proposed use is permissible under chapter 110, pertaining to zoning, and whether or not the proposed location meets the off-street parking requirements of chapter 110. If the engineering and building department finds that the proposed use violates any of the provisions of the building code, chapter 110, or any other applicable city ordinance, the application for the license to operate the proposed mechanical amusement devices shall be denied. 
(d)  Location on ground floor; maximum number of devices. No license to operate a mechanical amusement device within the city shall be issued where the proposed location of such mechanical amusement device is other than on the ground floor of any structure or building. This provision may be waived by the city council on an annual basis upon a finding that there is no threat to the public's health, safety or welfare. The total number of machines to be installed in an establishment shall not cover in excess of 20 percent of the usable floorspace. Included in the allowable 20 percent usable floorspace there shall be an allowance, as directed by the building inspector, for the mechanical amusement device plus a reasonable amount of operational space. 
(Code 1974, § 5-131) 
Sec. 10-124. - Fee. 
    Each owner-applicant who makes application for a license to operate a mechanical amusement device within the city shall at the time of filing his application pay to the city an annual license fee for such license in the amount established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 5-132) 
Sec. 10-125. - Expiration; transfer; contents; display. 
    All licenses issued for the operation of any mechanical amusement devices within the city are nontransferable and shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. Such license shall list and identify thereon the mechanical amusement devices covered by the license and such license shall be displayed at all times by the licensee in a conspicuous place in the premises in which the mechanical amusement devices are being operated. 
(Code 1974, § 5-133) 
Sec. 10-126. - Right of entry of city officials; periodic inspections. 
    The police and fire departments of the city and the officers thereof, as a condition of the issuance of the license contemplated by this division, shall have access at all times to all premises where mechanical amusement devices are operated within the city, and it shall be the duty of those departments to periodically investigate and inspect all premises in which mechanical amusement devices are operated in order to ensure that such devices are being operated in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 5-134) 
Sec. 10-127. - Revocation. 
    The city council may revoke any license issued under this division for any violation of any of the provisions of this article by the owner, operator, or location owner with respect to the operation of the mechanical amusement devices licensed under the provisions of this division. The city council may revoke any license issued under this division with respect to the operation of mechanical amusement devices within the city for any acts or conduct of customers, patrons, or other persons in or about the premises in which the mechanical amusement devices are being operated, which acts or conduct are in violation of any of the terms or provisions of this article and which acts or conduct are known to the owner, operator, or location owner. The city council may also revoke any license issued under this division upon a determination by the chief of the fire department that the premises in which the mechanical amusement devices are being operated or the manner in which the business is being conducted therein constitutes a fire hazard or for any violation of the applicable fire regulations or code of the city or other statutes of the state pertaining to fire prevention or safety. Any license so revoked by the city council shall not be reissued to the same licensee until at least one year has lapsed from the time of revocation. Any license revoked under the provisions of this division by the city council shall be revoked after a hearing before the council at a time and place to be set by the council for such hearing. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given to the licensee at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. 
(Code 1974, § 5-135) 
Secs. 10-128-10-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POOL AND BILLIARD ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-151. - License. 
(a)  No person shall conduct, maintain or operate any place open to the public for playing pool or billiards without first obtaining a license therefor. The annual fee for such license shall be as established by the city council. No person shall be granted such a license unless he is over 18 years of age. 
(b)  No such license shall be granted except upon approval of the police chief, the fire chief and the health officer. Such approvals shall be given upon a showing of compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1974, §§ 5-16-5-19) 
Sec. 10-152. - Hours of operation. 
    All billiard rooms and pool rooms within the city shall be closed not later than 12:00 midnight of each day and shall remain closed until 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Code 1974, § 5-20) 
Sec. 10-153. - Admittance of persons under 18 years of age. 
    No person who is less than 18 years of age may remain or loiter in or about any pool or billiard room unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, nor shall the person licensed under this article permit any such minor to remain or loiter therein. 
(Code 1974, § 5-21) 
Sec. 10-154. - Visibility of premises. 
    No person licensed under this article shall permit on the licensed premises any obstruction of the public view by the use of drawn shades or blinds or screens, either permanent or movable. 
(Code 1974, § 5-22) 
Secs. 10-155-10-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REBOUND TUMBLING AND SIMILAR DEVICES 

Sec. 10-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Moon-walk pad means a device of one-piece nylon webbing construction surrounding an interior pad which affords a full jumping area of not less than 30 feet by 30 feet, with an inside pad height of not less than 40 inches, and an overall outside height of not less than 15 feet. 
    Rebound tumbling center means a place where rebound tumbling equipment is provided and maintained for public use, located either inside or outside of a building. 
    Rebound tumbling equipment means a fabric bed or surface designed to provide resilience by virtue of its own elasticity or that provided by an elastic or spring suspension system or both, within a stable and tested frame and intended to be used for jumping, bouncing or acrobatic tumbling. 
(Code 1974, § 5-98) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-182. - License. 
    Every person exhibiting, showing or operating a rebound tumbling center or moon-walk pad, and charging a fee for such exhibition, showing or operation, shall procure a license therefor. The fee for such license shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, §§ 5-99, 5-100) 
Sec. 10-183. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  The operator of a rebound tumbling center or moon-walk pad shall procure and at all times maintain in full force and effect a policy of liability insurance for such rebound tumbling center or moon-walk pad insuring him against liability arising from personal injury with limits of not less than: 
(1)  Three hundred thousand dollars for any one occurrence. 
(2)  One hundred thousand dollars for any one person, per occurrence. 
(b)  The operator shall file a true copy of his insurance policy with the city clerk with the application for a license required by this article. 
(Code 1974, § 5-101) 
Sec. 10-184. - Annual inspection. 
    The city engineer shall inspect annually every rebound tumbling center and moon-walk pad. 
(Code 1974, § 5-115) 
Sec. 10-185. - Condition of equipment. 
    Rebound tumbling equipment and moon-walk pads shall be maintained in a state of good repair. Rebound tumbling equipment which has broken springs or broken webbing shall not be used. 
(Code 1974, § 5-102) 
Sec. 10-186. - Restrictions on use of equipment. 
    Each licensee under this article shall enforce and all customers using rebound tumbling equipment or moon-walk pads shall observe and obey the following provisions, which shall be printed in clear, easily read letters not less than one inch in size, and posted in one or more conspicuous and well-lighted locations on the premises: 
(1)  Not more than one person shall use any rebound tumbling device at any one time. 
(2)  No flips, twists or similar difficult routines shall be attempted unless under the immediate supervision of a qualified instructor, or until qualified as demonstrated by an officially acceptable certificate or as determined by the operator. In case of dispute with a patron, the operator's ruling shall be final. 
(3)  No equipment shall be used in street shoes or in bare feet. 
(4)  All patrons shall strictly and promptly comply with requests or requirements of the operator. 
(5)  No equipment shall be used while the person using the equipment is under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or when not in a condition to safely use the equipment, as determined by the operator. 
(6)  No person shall jump from apparatus to apparatus or to any point outside the frame of the apparatus. 
(7)  No actions shall be allowed which will or may seriously distract or interfere with a performer. 
(8)  No children under six years of age shall be permitted to use a rebound tumbling device unless accompanied by a responsible person. 
(9)  No smoking, eating or drinking while using the equipment shall be allowed. 
(Code 1974, § 5-103) 
Sec. 10-187. - Supervision of use. 
(a)  A rebound tumbling center, whenever open for use, shall be under the direct supervision of as many supervisors as are necessary to comply with the provisions of section 10-186. A moon-walk pad shall be under the direct supervision of at least one responsible person whenever open for use. 
(b)  The supervisor shall be observing all equipment units whenever they are in use. 
(c)  Each unit shall be numbered or otherwise clearly designated. 
(d)  A suitable loudspeaker system shall be maintained to enforce rules except where there are less than eight units. 
(e)  There shall be at least one supervisor on active supervising duty for each 12 units or fractional part thereof which are in use. 
(Code 1974, § 5-104) 
Sec. 10-188. - Qualifications of supervisors. 
    A rebound tumbling or moon-walk pad supervisor shall be: 
(1)  Eighteen years of age or over. 
(2)  Of good moral character. 
(3)  Trained and experienced in the supervision and control of personnel, both skilled and unskilled, in the art of rebound tumbling. 
(4)  Physically and otherwise fully fit to manage the facility. 
(Code 1974, § 5-105) 
Sec. 10-189. - Handling and reporting of accidents. 
    The operator of a rebound tumbling center or moon-walk pad shall: 
(1)  Direct to competent care for handling and disposition all accidents and injuries. 
(2)  Unless the city health officer agrees to accept a verbal report, report in writing to the city health officer all accidents which cause unconsciousness, broken or sprained extremities or bones, removal, breaking or loosening of teeth, hemorrhaging or lacerations which may require suturing and eye injuries. 
(3)  Maintain on the premises records of all medical aid or care administered. 
(4)  Keep, in place readily available at all times to himself and his employees, the telephone number of available emergency service. 
(Code 1974, § 5-106) 
Sec. 10-190. - Telephone. 
    The operator of a rebound tumbling center or moon-walk pad shall maintain on the premises a telephone which shall be available for emergency use at all times during which the rebound tumbling center or moon-walk pad is in operation. 
(Code 1974, § 5-107) 
Sec. 10-191. - First aid equipment. 
    The operator of a rebound tumbling center or moon-walk pad shall at all times maintain on the premises, and replenish as necessary, an adequate first aid kit of at least 16 units, as recommended by the American Red Cross First Aid Manual. 
(Code 1974, § 5-108) 
Sec. 10-192. - Sanitation and cleanliness of premises. 
    The operator of a rebound tumbling center or moon-walk pad shall keep the premises and all facilities in a clean condition. He shall provide, as needed to prevent litter, waste containers and appropriate signs. 
(Code 1974, § 5-109) 
Sec. 10-193. - Drinking and toilet facilities. 
    The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall provide on the premises drinking facilities which shall consist of either a sanitary drinking fountain or paper cups available in a suitable, sanitary dispenser. Toilet facilities shall be provided as required by this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 5-110) 
Sec. 10-194. - Layout of equipment. 
(a)  Rebound tumbling equipment shall be located on a level surface in such a way as to be within view of the operator or attendant at all times. 
(b)  The spacing of equipment units shall conform to the following minimum dimensions as measured from the inside edge of the frame of each device: 
(1)  Three feet between the sides of the units. 
(2)  Four feet between the ends of the units. 
(3)  Five feet from the ends of the nearest fence, building or other similar structure. 
(4)  Three feet from the sides or corners to the nearest fence, building or other similar structure. 
(c)  The area surrounding the rebound tumbling equipment shall be surfaced to prevent dust from creating a nuisance and shall have a reasonably level surface of pea gravel or equivalent type of material for safety and dust control. 
(Code 1974, § 5-111) 
Sec. 10-195. - Construction of pits. 
(a)  Pits for rebound tumbling centers shall be so constructed that they will not interfere with the operation of the equipment and of a depth not less than three feet and not more than four feet at the centers. 
(b)  The pits shall be so framed that the rebound tumbling equipment is held in a level position and is supported on a solid, stable surface. Lumber used as framing for pits shall not be less than two inches in thickness and shall be securely connected. 
(Code 1974, § 5-112) 
Sec. 10-196. - Broken springs. 
    Precautionary measures shall be taken to prevent broken springs on rebound tumbling equipment from disengaging from the assembly. 
(Code 1974, § 5-113) 
Sec. 10-197. - Padding. 
    The frames of rebound tumbling equipment shall be completely padded to provide reasonable safety. Pads two inches thick filled with cotton liners shall be deemed to meet this requirement. 
(Code 1974, § 5-114) 
Secs. 10-198-10-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - THEATERS AND SHOWS 

Sec. 10-221. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not extend to any exhibition by the pupils of any private or public school, or to any musical entertainment given by the members and for the benefit of any resident musical society, or to any exhibition of painting, engraving, sculpture or fine arts executed by a citizen of the city, or to any concert or musical entertainment, fair, festival or lecture for the benefit of any church or benevolent object, or to any entertainment by any civic, fraternal, government, religious, charitable or benevolent organization, or to any game, or to any exhibition, race, contest or military exhibition given or managed by any association, club or company that is not conducted for profit. 
(Code 1974, § 5-53) 
Sec. 10-222. - License. 
(a)  No person shall conduct a circus or show without obtaining a license therefor, which shall be known as a show license. 
(b)  No person shall conduct any exhibition, not otherwise licensed under this article, for which an admission fee is charged, without first obtaining a license therefor, to be known as an exhibition license. 
(c)  No person shall conduct a moving picture show, vaudeville, opera house, theater or other place for the giving of plays and other theatrical exhibitions, where an admission fee is charged, without first obtaining a license therefor, to be known as a theater license. 
(d)  The fees for licenses required by this section shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, §§ 5-47, 5-48) 
Sec. 10-223. - Bond; liability insurance. 
    The city council may, before authorizing the issuance of any license under this article, require the applicant for such license to deposit with the city clerk a cash bond or, in the discretion of the city council, a surety bond with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the city council, conditioned that no damage will be done to the streets, sewers, trees or adjoining property, and that no dirt, paper, litter or other debris will be permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any private property by such person, and containing such other conditions as the city council may require, and the city council may require that the licensee procure public liability insurance, in such sums as the city council deems adequate for the protection of the public. 
(Code 1974, § 5-52) 
Sec. 10-224. - Display of theater admission prices. 
    The prices for admission to any theater shall be framed and hung at some conspicuous place at the entrance to the theater. 
(Code 1974, § 5-49) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 54; animals generally in parks, § 70-103; injuring or interfering with animals or birds, § 70-105; animal pound fees, app. A, § A-11. 
State Law reference- Animal control ordinances authorized, MCL 287.290. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Restrictions on animals and birds not commonly kept as pets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal or bird within 300 feet of any dwelling, street, alley or public place or permit any animal or bird owned by him or in his possession or control to run at large in any street, alley or public place, or upon the premises of another, without express permission of the owner or occupant thereof, except such animals as are commonly kept or housed as household pets. 
(Code 1974, § 6-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Disturbing birds or bird nests. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure, molest or disturb in any way any birds or any nest, eggs, young or brood of any birds; except that this provision shall not apply to any birds declared by any law or this Code to be pests. 
(Code 1974, § 6-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Disposal of sick, injured or dead animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw or place any dead or fatally sick or injured animal, or part thereof, on any public or private place, or into or on the banks of any stream, lake, pond, sewer or other body of water. 
(Code 1974, § 6-4) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 74. 
Secs. 14-4-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-31. - Pound established. 
    The city council shall provide a pound in which shall be impounded all dogs that may be found running at large, harbored or owned contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1974, § 6-28) 
Sec. 14-32. - Supervision of pound. 
    A dog warden to be appointed by the chief of police shall be in charge of the city dog pound. 
(Code 1974, § 6-29) 
Secs. 14-33-14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 14-51. - Duty of police and other officers to impound certain animals. 
    It shall be the duty of every police officer, and every other person who may be appointed by the chief of police for that purpose, to promptly seize, take up and place in the pound all dogs or any other animal or fowl that may be found running at large, harbored or owned contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1974, § 6-9) 
Sec. 14-52. - Redemption of impounded animals; fees. 
(a)  No domestic pet or any other animal shall be released from the city pound to the owner or other authorized person until such owner or person shall pay to the city clerk or the animal control officer, for remittance to the city treasurer, the sum established by the city council for the care, custody and feeding of such animal while in custody, and until such person has procured and produced a proper license for the animal. 
(b)  If an animal is voluntarily surrendered to the pound for care or placement, the owner shall pay to the city a fee as established by the city council. 
(c)  If an animal is presented for, or subjected to, a euthanasia procedure by the pound, the owner shall pay to the city a fee as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 6-10) 
Sec. 14-53. - Release of animal upon oath of owner denying violation. 
    If the owner or person entitled to claim any dog or any other animal or fowl which has been seized shall deny, under oath, that such dog or any other animal or fowl was running at large or was unlawfully owned, possessed or harbored within the city at the time the animal or fowl was seized under the provisions of this chapter, then such dog or any other animal or fowl shall be released without the payment of the required sum; but in such case it shall thereupon be the duty of the officer having a knowledge of the facts to forthwith make complaint to a court of competent jurisdiction, charging the person keeping or harboring such dog or any other animal or fowl with the violation of this chapter for which such dog or any other animal or fowl was impounded. 
(Code 1974, § 6-11) 
Sec. 14-54. - Disposition or adoption of unclaimed dogs and cats. 
(a)  All dogs or cats not claimed or adopted and released within five days after being impounded shall be destroyed, or, if the animal is worthy and valuable, the dog or cat shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder, at the hour of noon next succeeding such five days. However, any impounded dog or cat having been exposed to rabies or any dog or cat that has attacked a person shall be kept until such time and under such conditions as shall be required by the chief of police, and it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the chief of police when there is any good reason to believe there is such a dog or cat in his possession. 
(b)  Dogs or cats may be adopted from the pound by paying the required impound fee, obtaining the required license for the dog or cat and neutering the dog or cat. 
(Code 1974, §§ 6-38, 6-56) 
Sec. 14-55. - Disposal of carcasses. 
    The carcasses of all dogs and cats that have been killed pursuant to this division shall be disposed of in such manner as shall be designated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1974, § 6-39) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 74. 
Sec. 14-56. - Record of impounded dogs and cats. 
    The police department shall maintain a complete record of all dogs and cats impounded under the provisions of this chapter and the disposition of such dogs and cats. 
(Code 1974, § 6-57) 
Secs. 14-57-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS AND RELATED OFFENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes related to animals, MCL 750.49 et seq. 

Sec. 14-81. - Cruelty to animals. 
    It shall be unlawful to overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, overwork, torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, cruelly beat, mutilate or cruelly kill, or cause or procure to be so overdriven, overloaded, driven when overloaded, overworked, tortured, tormented, deprived of necessary sustenance, cruelly beaten, mutilated or cruelly killed, any animal or bird, and no person having the charge or custody of any animal or bird, either as owner or otherwise, shall inflict unnecessary cruelty upon the animal or bird, or willfully fail to provide the animal or bird with proper food, drink, shelter or protection from the weather. The cropping of a dog's ears shall be considered to be mutilation or cruelty to an animal within the meaning of this section, unless such cropping is performed by a registered veterinary surgeon while the dog is under an anesthetic. 
(Code 1974, § 6-8) 
Sec. 14-82. - Coloring birds, rabbits or game. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to artificially color, spray or paint any rabbit, bird, game or fowl, or sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispose of any such colored rabbit, bird, game or fowl. 
(Code 1974, § 6-3) 
State Law reference- Sale of artificially colored animals prohibited, MCL 752.91. 
Sec. 14-83. - Poisoning animals or fowl. 
    It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit poisoned meat, or any poison or harmful substances, in any street, alley or public place, or on any private premises within the city, for the purpose of destroying any animal or fowl. 
(Code 1974, § 6-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.437. 
Sec. 14-84. - Feeding animals unwholesome food or unclean water. 
    It shall be unlawful to feed any animal unwholesome or unsuitable food, or unclean water which is likely to cause or produce disease in the animal. 
(Code 1974, § 6-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.467. 
Sec. 14-85. - Sanitation of premises where animals or fowl are kept. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person keeping or harboring any animal or bird, or any person having possession, care, custody or control of any animal or bird, to keep, permit or allow the excretions, manure and/or offal therefrom to be or remain upon any public or private property not owned, rented or otherwise occupied by such person, unless consented to by such owner, tenant or occupant. 
(b)  Every person lawfully keeping or harboring any animal or bird, or any person having the possession, care, custody or control of any animal or bird, shall keep or cause to be kept all excretions, manure and/or offal therefrom which shall be deposited or accumulated from such animal or bird securely and closely confined to or buried upon his premises in such manner as will prevent it from being scattered onto either public or private property not owned, rented or otherwise occupied by such person, and shall so cover and care for it as to prevent any malodorous or offensive conditions to exist and to prevent any nuisance to arise therefrom. 
(c)  Violations of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(35), 6-7) 
Secs. 14-86-14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Dog Law of 1919, MCL 287.261 et seq. 

Sec. 14-111. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, maintain, keep or harbor any dog within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(b)  Application. Application for a dog license shall be made to the city clerk and shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog, and the name and address of the applicant and the last known previous owner. The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(c)  Fee. The fee for a license required by this section shall be as established by the city council. The license must be obtained and/or renewed by January 1, each year. 
(d)  Issuance of license and tag; design of tag. The city clerk shall issue to each applicant for a dog license, a license, together with a metal tag, which tag shall contain the number of the license dully stamped or engraved thereon, the year when issued, and date of expiration, together with the words "Trenton, Michigan, Animal License." 
(e)  Expiration. Any license issued prior to July 1, 2013, with an expiration date of July 1, 2013, must be renewed on or before that date and such renewal shall have as its expiration date December 31, 2014. 
(Code 1974, §§ 6-23-6-26, 6-27(a)-(c); Ord. No. 771, § 1, 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 14-112. - "Harboring" or "keeping" defined. 
    Any person allowing any dog habitually to remain and be lodged or fed within his house, store, building, enclosure or premises shall be considered as harboring or keeping the dog within the meaning of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 6-22) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-113. - Liability of owner; evidence of negligence. 
    Every owner and every person possessing or harboring a dog in the city shall be liable for damages for any and all injuries to persons or property that may be caused by such dog on any public highway or other public place, to be determined and collected in appropriate legal proceedings therefor, in which proceedings any failure or refusal by such owner to comply with the requirements of this article shall constitute prima facie evidence. 
(Code 1974, § 6-30) 
Sec. 14-114. - Running at large. 
    No person owning, possessing or harboring any dog shall permit the dog to run at large. A dog shall be deemed to be running at large under the provisions of this section when it is not under leash, securely tied or securely confined within an enclosure. Violations of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(3), 6-31) 
Sec. 14-115. - Noisy dogs. 
    No person shall harbor or keep any dog which, by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, shall cause annoyance to the neighborhood and people passing on the streets. Violations of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(4), 6-32) 
Cross reference- Noise control, § 38-161 et seq. 
Sec. 14-116. - Keeping vicious dogs, biting dogs, or dogs bitten by rabid animal. 
    No person shall harbor or keep a vicious dog or a dog that has been bitten by any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies or which shall have bitten any person. 
(Code 1974, § 6-33) 
Sec. 14-117. - Procedure when dog has bitten person or is suspected of being rabid. 
    Every person owning, keeping or harboring any dog that has been attacked or bitten by any other dog or animal known to be afflicted with or having symptoms of rabies, or which has bitten any person, or which has or is suspected to have contracted rabies, shall immediately notify the chief of police or his designee, and upon the demand of such officer shall immediately produce and surrender such dog for observation at the dog pound for a period of ten days; however, in the discretion of such officers, such dog may be quarantined for a like period of time on the premises of the owner or person who is keeping or harboring such dog. If at the end of such ten-day period such dog has not developed rabies, it shall be released from the dog pound or the quarantine. If the dog has developed rabies within such period of time, it shall be destroyed. 
(Code 1974, § 6-34) 
Sec. 14-118. - Dogs impounded second time for biting to be destroyed. 
    Whenever a dog is brought to the pound or is quarantined a second time for having bitten a person, such dog shall be destroyed, after having been held a sufficient time to meet the requirements of the chief of police for investigation. 
(Code 1974, § 6-35) 
Sec. 14-119. - Allowing quarantined dog to be off of quarantine premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or allow any dog that has been quarantined to be on the streets of the city or away from the quarantined premises. 
(Code 1974, § 6-36) 
Sec. 14-120 - Tethering of dogs. 
(a)  Tethering means the practice of securing a dog to a stationary object by means of a metal chain or coated steel cable for keeping a dog restrained in its movement. Tethering does not mean walking a dog on a leash, or for temporary grooming, or other professional service. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to: 
(1)  Continuously tether a dog for more than three hours per day; 
(2)  Tether a dog on a tether made of anything but a coated steel cable more than ten feet in length; 
(3)  Use a tether or any assembly or attachments thereto to tether a dog that shall weigh more than ten percent of the animal's body weight, or due to weight, inhibit the free movement of the animal within the area tethered; 
(4)  Tether a dog on anything except a buckle-type collar or harness, or tethering on a choke chain or around the dog's neck, or tethered to training collars such as choke or pinch-style collars, or in such a manner as to cause injury, strangulation, or entanglement of the dog on fences, trees, or other man made or natural obstacles; 
(5)  Tether a dog without access to shade when sunlight is likely to cause overheating, or appropriate shelter to provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness when the atmospheric temperature falls below 40 degrees Fahrenheit, or to tether a dog without securing its food and water supply so that it cannot be tipped over by the tether; 
(6)  Tether a dog in an open area where it can be teased by persons or an open area that does not provide the dog protection from attack by other animals; 
(7)  Tether a dog in an area composed entirely of bare earth subject to becoming wet and muddy in the event of precipitation, and without any dry surface area or cover for protection; 
(8)  Tether a dog less than four months of age; 
(9)  Tether more than one dog to a single tether; 
(10)  Tether a dog to a stationary object which would allow a dog to come within five feet of any property line; or 
(11)  Tether a dog without a swivel attached and/or equipped on both ends. 
(c)  The animal control officer, or his/her designee, may in his/her discretion temporarily order a more restrictive tethering requirement if circumstances require and it is not detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the dog. 
(d)  Penalty. A person found responsible for violating section 14-120 shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction in the amount of $100.00 per day. Any person found liable for violating this section three or more times in a one year time span shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 768, § 1, 2-19-2013) 
Secs. 14-121-14-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CATS 

Sec. 14-141. - Registration. 
(a)  Required. No later than January 1 in any year, any person residing in the city owning or possessing a cat shall register the cat with the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Proof of rabies inoculation. The city clerk shall not accept the registration of any cat unless the owner or owner's agent shall present a certificate to the effect that the animal has been inoculated against rabies. 
(c)  Fee. The fee for registration of a cat pursuant to this section shall be as established by the council. 
(d)  Issuance of tag. The city clerk shall, upon presentation of a proper certificate of inoculation and upon an application signed by the owner or agent of the owner of the cat, containing the name, kind, color, sex, age and description of any distinguishing feature or marking of the cat, issue to the owner a license, in the form of a tag or other suitable device. 
(Code 1974, §§ 6-50-6-53; Ord. No. 772, § 1, 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 14-142. - Liability of owner; evidence of negligence. 
    Every owner and every person possessing or harboring a cat in the city shall be liable for damages for any and all injuries to persons or property that may be caused by such cat on any public highway or other public place, to be determined and collected in appropriate legal proceedings thereof, in which proceedings any failure or refusal by such owner to comply with the requirements of this article shall constitute prima facie evidence of negligence. 
(Code 1974, § 6-55) 
Sec. 14-143. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having the possession, care, custody or control thereof, to permit any cat to run at large upon the public streets, walks, parks or other public places within the city. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(5), 6-54) 
Sec. 14-144. - Procedure when cat has bitten person or is suspected of being rabid. 
(a)  Report. If any person is bitten by a cat, it shall be the duty of that person or the owner or custodian of the cat having knowledge of such incident to report such incident to the police department within 12 hours thereafter. If the owner or custodian of any cat has any reason to believe or suspect that such cat has become infected with rabies, it shall be the duty of that person to report this to the police department within 12 hours thereafter. 
(b)  Quarantine. If any report required by subsection (a) of this section is made, the animal control officer shall take such cat into his possession. The cat shall be held in quarantine until a laboratory analysis by a licensed veterinarian is made to determine whether the cat is infected. The chief of police shall promulgate and adopt such rules as deemed necessary for the procedure in all cases and for the disposition of any cat delivered into custody. 
(Code 1974, §§ 6-58, 6-59) 
Secs. 14-145-14-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DOG AND CAT KENNELS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Dog kennels, MCL 287.270, 287.270b. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-171. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Kennel means any place where dogs or cats are sold, bred, raised or harbored for the purpose of resale, boarding, training or teaching for commercial purposes, as a hobby or other personal purpose; provided, however, this article shall not apply to kennels harboring no more than three dogs and no more than three cats. 
(Code 1974, § 6-100) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-172. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1974, § 6-107) 
Sec. 14-173. - Zoning requirements. 
    No kennel shall be established or maintained in any area zoned for residential use pursuant to chapter 110. 
(Code 1974, § 6-103) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 110. 
Sec. 14-174. - Condition and operation. 
    Kennels shall be kept free of dirt, filth, odors and disease, and shall be maintained in general sanitary conditions as near as practicable and shall be operated so as not to be harmful to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Upon written complaint filed with the city, the animal control officer shall make inspections to determine the conditions of such kennel and shall report such conditions to the city. 
(Code 1974, § 6-105) 
Secs. 14-175-14-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-191. - Required; expiration; prerequisites for issuance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a dog or cat kennel commercially or as a hobby within the city unless such person shall have first obtained from the city clerk a license therefor as provided in this division. All such licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. A license shall be issued to qualified individuals or entities by the city clerk upon presentation of a certificate of immunization that each dog and each cat has been inoculated against rabies for the current year, the registration of each animal's current license, and a certificate signed by the animal control officer stating that the regulations set out in section 14-174 have been fulfilled. 
(Code 1974, § 6-101) 
Sec. 14-192. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Litters. All persons owning, possessing, harboring or keeping in their premises more than three dogs or more than three cats which are three months of age or older shall be presumed to have established a kennel, except that the owner or keeper of a female dog or cat which has given birth to puppies or kittens shall not be required to obtain a kennel license for the litter for the first three months measured from the date of the birth of the litter. Birthing females must remain on-site with the litter, except in cases of illness or death. 
(b)  Existing kennels on residential property. 
(1)  Any person who lawfully owns or keeps more than three licensed dogs or more than three licensed cats on residentially zoned property, prior to January 20, 1992, may retain the licensed animals without obtaining a kennel license provided that he obtains a special pre-existing kennel permit from the city clerk exempting specific dogs or cats by license number. No additional such animals may be acquired. The special pre-existing kennel permit shall be valid for a term of one year from the date of issuance, and shall be annually renewable; however, no renewal shall be issued without a current inspection of the animals and the premises by the city's animal control officer. 
(2)  If for any reason a dog or cat exempted under this subsection is lost, stolen, or given away or dies, and there still remain on the premises more than three dogs or more than three cats, no additional or replacement animals of the same category may be acquired. 
(3)  If for any reason a dog or cat exempted under this subsection is lost, stolen, sold, or given away or dies and there still remain on the premises three or less dogs or three or less cats, there shall be an immediate revocation of the special permit; and no additional or replacement animals of the same category may be acquired without full compliance with this article. 
(4)  The special pre-existing kennel permit shall be issued if, after an inspection, it is determined by the animal control officer that: 
a.  The animals in the owner's or keeper's possession are not creating a nuisance; 
b.  There is adequate waste disposal; and 
c.  There exists no hazard to public safety, health and welfare. 
(c)  Veterinary clinics. Any licensed medical clinic specializing in the treatment of animals which does not commercially board dogs or cats that are not under medical treatment or medical observation shall be exempt from the kennel license requirements provided in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 6-104) 
Sec. 14-193. - Fee. 
    The fee for a kennel license required by this article shall be as established by the city council. No kennel license fee shall be assessed on account of any dog or cat less than three months of age. 
(Code 1974, § 6-102) 
Sec. 14-194. - Revocation. 
    Any license issued under this article may be revoked by the city whenever it is determined by the animal control officer that any licensee is operating and maintaining a kennel in violation of any of the terms and provisions of this article. A licensee shall have ten calendar days to appeal such revocation to the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 6-106) 
Secs. 14-195-14-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CARRIER PIGEONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Racing and carrier pigeons, MCL 433.351 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Carrier pigeons means and includes homing and racing pigeons which have the name of the owner stamped upon the wing or tail, or are banded upon the leg with the name or initials of the owner or with an identification or registration number stamped on the band. 
    Loft means any structure in which carrier pigeons are housed. 
    Racing pigeons means and includes any pigeon registered with any national pigeon racing organization. 
(Code 1974, § 6-71) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-222. - Authority to make additional regulations. 
    The engineering and building department may adopt such reasonable regulations as may be deemed necessary for compliance with this article. Such rules and regulations, when adopted, shall be placed on record in the office of the city clerk and copies thereof shall be furnished on request. 
(Code 1974, § 6-84) 
Sec. 14-223. - Location of lofts. 
    Any pigeon loft established, constructed or operated within the city shall not be located nearer than 20 feet to any residential structure or property line, or nearer than 200 feet to any school, church or place of public assembly. 
(Code 1974, § 6-79) 
Sec. 14-224. - Pigeons creating nuisance or perching on other property. 
    The owners and operators of pigeon lofts shall not allow the pigeons to perch or linger on the buildings or property of others and shall not operate a pigeon loft so as to create a nuisance or allow the pigeons to become a nuisance to the buildings or properties of other persons in the vicinity. 
(Code 1974, § 6-81) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 38-221 et seq. 
Sec. 14-225. - Disposal of loft scrapings and manure. 
    All pigeon loft scrapings and pigeon manure shall be placed in covered receptacles until final disposition. 
(Code 1974, § 6-82) 
Sec. 14-226. - Manner of calling pigeons. 
    The owner and operator of any pigeon loft shall summon and call the pigeons contained therein solely by inaudible means such as by use of flags or a silent whistle. 
(Code 1974, § 6-83) 
Secs. 14-227-14-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOFT PERMIT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Carrier pigeon permits, MCL 433.352. 

Sec. 14-241. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to construct or operate a pigeon loft or to keep pigeons within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 6-72) 
Sec. 14-242. - Application. 
    An application for a permit required by this division shall be filed by the owner of the property on which the proposed pigeon loft is to be kept, with the operator or keeper of the loft joining and signing the application. The permit application shall be on a form provided by the city clerk and shall be accompanied by the required permit fee and a drawing showing the size and location of the loft, which shall be submitted to the engineering and building department for approval. The permit application shall further be accompanied by a typewritten schedule of the number of pigeons to be kept in the proposed loft together with the leg band identification number or name or initials stamped on each pigeon. 
(Code 1974, § 6-73) 
Sec. 14-243. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for a permit required by this division shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 6-74) 
Sec. 14-244. - Issuance or denial. 
    If the requirements of this article are complied with, the city clerk shall issue the permit required by this division. If the city clerk deems that such requirements have not been complied with, the permit shall be refused until the applicant complies with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 6-75) 
Sec. 14-245. - Expiration; renewal. 
    Each permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of its issuance and shall be renewable upon application to the city clerk for renewal periods of one year. Each such application shall be accompanied by the fee established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 6-76) 
Sec. 14-246. - Limitation on number of pigeons. 
    Each owner, operator or keeper of carrier pigeons to whom the city clerk has issued a loft permit shall keep no more than 40 pigeons. 
(Code 1974, § 6-77) 
Sec. 14-247. - Submission of revised information. 
    Each person holding a permit under this division shall be required to provide the city clerk with a revised schedule of additions to the number of pigeons kept in accordance with this article together with the identification for each pigeon in such form as is required for an original loft permit. 
(Code 1974, § 6-78) 
Sec. 14-248. - Commercial use of lofts prohibited. 
    The holders of permits under this division may use pigeon lofts for the breeding, keeping, training and flying of the carrier pigeons kept therein but shall not use such lofts for the breeding, keeping or raising of pigeons for commercial or market purposes. 
(Code 1974, § 6-80) 
Sec. 14-249. - Inspection of lofts; suspension or revocation. 
    All pigeon lofts shall be subject to inspection by the building and engineering department, and if not maintained in a clean, sanitary and orderly manner and in a condition comparable to neighboring buildings shall be subject to discontinuance at the order of the department or the city clerk, subject to review. The owner shall be allowed upon request to show cause to the department or the city clerk why such permit should not be suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1974, § 6-85) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Engineering and building department, § 2-111 et seq.; community development, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; franchises and right-of-way licenses and permits, ch. 50; scattering construction waste, § 74-144; leaving construction debris on sidewalk, § 82-6; permit for wrecking buildings, app. A, § A-75; permit for moving buildings, app. A, § A-76. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Electrician licenses. 
    No person shall do any act for which a license is required by the Electrical Administrative Act (MCL 338.881 et seq.) without such license. Application and examination for such licenses shall be by state examiner through the bureau of construction codes, department of commerce and industry affairs of the state, pursuant to such act. 
(Code 1974, § 9-110) 
Sec. 18-2. - Water supply cross connection control. 
(a)  Adoption of state rules. The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the state department of environmental quality, being R325.11401 to R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(b)  Systems affected. This section will affect all public water system services branches that could present a hazard, including those that have been in existence for a good many years as well as new or proposed branches. 
(c)  Requirements. This section requires the installation of a city-approved backflow prevention device on all commercial and industrial water service branches connected to the city's public water system, unless the user can establish without a doubt that his operation presents neither an actual nor a potential health hazard as outlined by the state department of environmental quality. The installation of a backflow prevention device at the service does not relieve the user of the responsibility of providing a safe and adequate supply of potable water for the in-plant consumer. 
(d)  Inspections. It shall be the duty of the engineering and building department to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connection with the public water supply is deemed possible. 
(e)  Fees. The city reserves the right to establish fees for services rendered by the city engineering and building department such as inspections, reinspections, surveys, plan examinations, and testing of devices. Fees are to be set by council action. 
(f)  Right of entry. The representative of the engineering and building department shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by city's water supply system for the purpose of inspecting the premises for possible cross connections. On request, the owners, lessees or occupants of the property shall furnish any pertinent information regarding the piping systems of the property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(g)  Authority to discontinue water service. The city engineering and building department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service, after reasonable notice, to any property wherever precautionary measures are deemed necessary to protect the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until violations are corrected. 
(h)  Enforcement. When violations are found and corrections are needed, the time allowed for compliance shall be contingent upon the degree of hazard involved. Also, a plumbing permit and an inspection are required by the city engineering and building department. 
(i)  In-plant water. The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state and city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as "WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING." 
(j)  Violations. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section, or any written order of the engineering and building department for the city in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 for each violation. 
(Code 1974, § 9-23.1) 
Cross reference- Water system, § 98-31 et seq. 
Secs. 18-3-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State construction code, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

Sec. 18-31. - Enforcement. 
    The city assumes responsibility for enforcement of the state construction code. Such code shall be enforced by the engineering and building department. 
(Code 1974, §§ 9-16(a), 9-20(a), 9-22(a), 9-23(a), 9-24(a)) 
State Law reference- Local enforcement of state construction code, MCL 125.1508b. 
Sec. 18-32. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    The fees for permits and inspections required by the state construction code shall be as established by the city council. 
Sec. 18-33. - Violations. 
    Except as specified in section 23(1) and (2) of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1523(1), (2)), violations of the state construction code are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $200.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 9-16(b), 9-20(d), 9-22(d), 9-23(d), 9-24(d), 9-100) 
Sec. 18-34. - Permits and bond. 
    Each applicant for a permit for the performance of demolition work on a structure located within the city shall, at the time of application, post a performance bond with the city in an amount equal to the estimated cost of performing the demolition project, which bond shall be forfeited to the city, in the event the project is not commenced within 90 days of application, not completed within the time period set forth in the application, or is interrupted for a period in excess of 90 days, following commencement. 
(Ord. No. 721, § 1, 6-15-2009) 
Secs. 18-35-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CONTRACTORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Business licenses and permits, § 22-31 et seq.; building contractors and related businesses, app. A, § A-42. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Residential, commercial and industrial building contractor means any person engaged in the construction, alteration or demolition of residential, commercial or industrial structures, or a combination of residential, commercial and industrial structures, who for a fixed sum, price, fee percentage, valuable consideration or compensation, other than wages, undertakes or offers to undertake with another the erection, construction, replacement, repair, alteration or any addition to, subtraction from improvement, movement of, wrecking of or demolition of a residential, commercial or industrial structure or combination of residential, commercial and industrial structures, and who is skilled in the planning and superintending of residential, commercial and industrial construction or a combination of residential, commercial and industrial construction, and has a practical knowledge of same, and who is familiar with the state laws and the ordinances of the city governing residential, commercial and industrial construction. 
    Subcontractor means any tradesman who takes a contract from a general contractor or other subcontractor, including, but not limited to, masonry, carpentry, lathing, plastering, cement work, tile work, roofing materials, painting and waterproofing. Mechanics hired by a licensed general contractor on an hourly basis shall not be considered subcontractors. 
(Code 1974, § 9-63) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-62. - Conflicts with state law. 
    Whenever any conflict exists between the provisions of this article and the provisions of any state law on the same subject matter, the applicable provision of the state law shall prevail. 
(Code 1974, § 9-64) 
Sec. 18-63. - Violations; employment of unlicensed persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article, or for any person to aid or abet any contractor in violation of the provisions of this article, or to connive at its violation, or to employ an unlicensed person or mechanic or to permit such employment for the purpose of doing or performing any of the acts required under the terms of this article to be done or performed by a person licensed under this article. 
(Code 1974, § 9-74) 
Secs. 18-64-18-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-81. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of residential, commercial or industrial building contractor or subcontractor without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 9-65) 
Sec. 18-82. - Exemptions. 
(a)  All registered architects and professional engineers may take out building permits in their name without securing a license under this division if they exercise complete supervision on construction of the building. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed a restriction of the right of a property owner to build a residential structure on his own property for his own use or occupancy, provided that such right shall be limited to the construction of one residential structure in any 12-month period. 
(Code 1974, § 9-66) 
Sec. 18-83. - Application; evidence of qualifications. 
(a)  All applications for licenses required by this division shall be made to the city engineering and building department, which shall give approval or disapproval within ten days. 
(b)  The city engineer may require the applicant to submit reasonable evidence of his ability to perform work under his contract, to read and interpret plans and specifications, and to understand his obligations to the public, and be familiar with the provisions of the building code adopted by the city, chapter 110, pertaining to zoning, and the housing laws of the state. 
(Code 1974, § 9-67) 
Sec. 18-84. - Fee. 
    Every applicant for a license or license renewal under this division shall at the time of applying for such license pay the annual fee established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 9-68) 
Sec. 18-85. - Liability insurance. 
    Before a license is issued under this division, the applicant shall file with the city engineer a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, insuring against claims for personal injury and property damage by members of the public resulting from negligent acts or omissions by the applicant or his agents or employees, all of which insurance shall cover public liability damage for amounts of $50,000.00 for each person and $100,000.00 for each accident, and $25,000.00 property damage per accident. No permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration or repair of buildings or equipment unless or until the necessary evidence of proper insurance has been filed. Every such certificate of insurance shall contain a provision that, before such insurance is cancelled, a notice shall be given by the insurer to the city engineer of the insurer's intention to cancel the policy not less than ten days after receipt of such notice. Failure of the applicant to comply with this provision will be considered sufficient reason to deny the license. 
(Code 1974, § 9-69) 
Sec. 18-86. - Expiration; renewal. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall expire on December 31 of each year. Permits may be renewed in the office of the city engineer during office hours on any day. 
(Code 1974, § 9-70) 
Sec. 18-87. - Denial, suspension or revocation. 
    The city engineer shall have the right to deny, suspend or revoke licenses issued pursuant to this division if it is considered to be in the best interest to safeguard life, health, property or the general public welfare. 
(Code 1974, § 9-71) 
Sec. 18-88. - Appeals. 
    When, upon action of the city engineer, issuance of a license required by this division is denied, or the license has been suspended or revoked, the contractor or subcontractor shall have the right to formally petition the city council for a hearing on the matter, and the city council may, at its option, set up a public hearing to determine the merits of the case and either affirm or disaffirm the action of the city engineer. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council shall not in any way be deprived of due process of law, nor shall his right be negated to appeal to the proper courts. 
(Code 1974, § 9-72) 
Sec. 18-89. - Records. 
    Upon issuance of any license required by this division, the name, business address and classification of the licensee shall be kept as a public record in the office of the city clerk, and shall be available for public inspection. 
(Code 1974, § 9-73) 
Sec. 18-90. - Unlawful use of license. 
    No person having procured a license under this division shall permit or allow the use of his name by any other person, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any construction, installation, alteration or repairs to any building or structure within the city. 
(Code 1974, § 9-75) 
Secs. 18-91-18-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FENCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 110. 

Sec. 18-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Barrier fence means a fence erected in a front yard, generally on a corner lot, that is designed and intended to prevent or discourage trespass across a lawn area, but does not enclose or encircle the lawn area. 
    Fence means any construction, barrier, or erection encircling either the whole or any portion of any given area. 
    Hedge means any bush or shrub, or any living green fence of any nature, encircling either the whole or any portion of any given area. 
    Landscape feature means a distinctive form placed in a front yard or exterior side yard solely for the purpose of visual esthetics or as a barrier to trespass, but which is not designed or intended to enclose or encircle a lawn area. 
    Partition fence means any fence or hedge which is, or will be, located along a side or rear property line. 
    Protective measures fence means a fence erected for the express purpose of protection of the enclosed area and its contents, in all areas other than residential areas. When such protective measures fence employs barbed wire along the uppermost edge, the minimum height for such fence, below the barbed wire extension, shall be eight feet. 
    Wall means the same as the word "fence" as defined in this section, and all definitions pertaining to a fence shall also pertain to a wall. 
(Code 1974, § 9-86) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-112. - Violations. 
    Unless stated otherwise in this article, violations of the following provisions are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00: 
18-113 
18-114 
18-115 
18-116 
18-119 
18-120 
(Code 1974, § 2-306(a)(13)) 
Sec. 18-113. - Permit for construction or repair. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed any fence or wall upon any property within the city without first obtaining a permit in the manner set forth in this section. 
(b)  Application. When the owner of property desires to build, repair or relocate a fence or wall, the owner or the owner's contractor shall first apply to the city. The applicant shall provide the following information on the permit: 
(1)  The owner's name and the address of the property on which the fence or wall is to be erected. 
(2)  The name, address and license of the contractor if applicable. 
(3)  A certified property survey prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor. 
(4)  A graphic portrayal on the property survey of the proposed location of the fence or wall on the property. 
(5)  A description of the size of the fence or wall and the kind of fence or wall the owner intends to erect on the property. 
(c)  Fee. Before a permit will be issued, a permit fee in the amount established by the city council shall be paid. 
(Code 1974, §§ 9-87, 9-88) 
Sec. 18-114. - Protective measures fences. 
    A permit granted by the engineering and building department shall be required of any person wishing to erect a protective measures fence. Such permit shall be granted only after demonstration of the need of such fence. The owner, or agent thereof, of a protective measures fence shall be granted permission to erect necessary and reasonable barriers along the uppermost edge of the protective measures fence that are deemed reasonable for the protection of property within the enclosed areas, in such manner as the engineering and building department shall approve. 
(Code 1974, § 9-96) 
Sec. 18-115. - Materials and design of partition fences. 
    A partition fence or wall constructed or reconstructed within the city shall comply with the following conditions and meet the following standards: 
(1)  Only chainlink, wood, vinyl-clad, PVC, or concrete materials or such other architecturally attractive materials, if approved by the city, shall be bonded or fastened to the posts. Ordinary cinderblock or smooth concrete block, farm fence or chicken wire fence materials are expressly prohibited. 
(2)  All structural parts of a masonry wall shall be securely bonded together with an approved bonding agent, and all structural parts of a fence shall be securely fastened together with fasteners of sufficient size, length and strength to meet design requirements. 
(3)  Wood fences shall consist of lasting and durable wood products customarily associated with outdoor fences. 
(4)  Masonry walls, including barrier walls, shall consist of or be composed of materials in compliance with the applicable requirements of section 110-682 or other such architecturally attractive materials if approved by the city. 
(5)  Except as otherwise permitted in this article, the use of any sharp object such as nails, spikes, broken glass or any other type of exposed, sharp, or pointed instrument designed and intended to discourage mounting or scaling, and which is attached to or imbedded in a fence or wall, is expressly prohibited. 
(6)  No part of any fence or wall shall be electrified in any way that is designed or intended to transmit an electric shock upon contact for the purpose of confinement or to repel trespass. 
(7)  Use of sharp or barbed wire materials may be permitted for security purposes only, and only as follows: 
a.  The wire shall be mounted on a fence or wall that encloses industrial or business property. 
b.  The wire shall be placed atop a wall or fence that is at least eight feet in height, measured from any point on the ground at the base of the wall or fence to the top of the wall or fence. 
c.  Straight wire shall be secured to arms that shall extend upward and inward from the top of the fence or wall, except the arms may extend upward and outward from the top of the fence or wall along a property line when the fence or wall is set back into the property a distance at least equal to the outward projection of the supporting arms at their maximum extension. Rolled or coiled wire shall be securely affixed to the top of the fence or wall. Where the outer diameter of a rolled or coiled wire shall extend beyond the exterior side of the fence or wall along a property line, the fence or wall shall be set back a distance at least equal to the maximum outward circumference of the roll or coil. 
(8)  Nothing in this article shall disallow the use of pointed or narrowly rounded tops on vertical wood members of a picket fence, or decorative points or similar architectural adornments atop a wrought iron fence. 
(9)  Landscape materials shall consist of live plant materials and/or architectural landscape materials customarily used in landscaping, such as but not limited to decorative rock, boulders, statuary, architectural lighting, reflection ponds, etc. 
(Code 1974, § 9-89) 
Sec. 18-116. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Fences shall be maintained so as to prevent them from sagging or leaning and shall be kept in a safe and attractive condition. Wood fences shall be chemically treated, painted or replaced as needed to maintain them in a safe and attractive manner, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(b)  Fences must be maintained so as not to endanger life or property. Any fence which, through lack of repair, type of construction, or otherwise, imperils life or property, shall be deemed a nuisance. The engineering and building department of the city shall notify the owner of the property upon which the fence is located of the existence of such a nuisance, and the nuisance must be abated within 30 days after receipt of such notice. 
(c)  Masonry walls, including barrier walls, shall be maintained in an attractive and safe manner, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(d)  All plant materials shall be live plantings only and shall be maintained in a living, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(e)  It shall be deemed the responsibility of the owner of the fence, the owner being the owner of the address for which the permit was issued, to maintain the fence in a proper and safe manner. In the case of hedges or any living green fence of any nature, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain and trim the fence properly and within the confines of his own lot line. 
(Code 1974, §§ 9-90, 9-97) 
Sec. 18-117. - Height restrictions. 
    A fence or wall designed and intended to partition, enclose or encircle property shall comply with the following restrictions by yard: 
(1)  Front yard. Fences in a front yard shall not exceed three feet in height, measured from the ground at the base of the structure to the top of the structure, outside the restricted clear corner vision requirements of this article, and shall not exceed two feet in height, measured from the ground at the base of the structure to the top of the structure, within the applicable restricted clear corner vision area. 
(2)  Exterior side yard. Fences in an exterior side yard shall not exceed a height greater than six feet, measured from the ground at the base of the structure to the top of the structure. 
(3)  Interior side yard. Fences in an interior side yard shall not exceed a height greater than six feet, measured from the ground at the base of the structure to the top of the structure. 
(4)  Rear yard. Fences in a rear yard shall not exceed a height greater than six feet, measured from the ground at the base of the structure to the top of the structure. 
(5)  Partition fences for privacy. Property owners desiring to build a fence, including a hedge fence or wall, for privacy along their rear or side yards in excess of the height restrictions set forth in this section must apply to the zoning board of appeals for special approval. 
(6)  Street corner clear vision restrictions. No fence, wall or hedge fence over two feet in height above the established sidewalk grade shall be permitted within 25 feet of any street intersection measured from the property line, so as to interfere with traffic visibility. 
(7)  Driveway clear vision restrictions. Except for split-rail or two-rail fences, no landscape feature, fence wall or hedge above the height of two feet shall be constructed or placed within a triangular area formed at the intersection of any driveway with any existing or proposed sidewalk, alley, street, or public way and by a straight line extending between such lines at a distance along each line of not less than six feet from their point of intersection. (See the diagram at the end of section 18-118.) 
(Code 1974, § 9-91) 
Sec. 18-118. - Restrictions on construction. 
(a)  Partition fences. Except as otherwise permitted in this article, no fence or wall designed and intended to partition, enclose or encircle residential property shall extend towards a street beyond the minimum required building setback lines of the district, and, except as permitted in section 18-117, no fence or wall designed or intended to partition, enclose or encircle residential property shall be erected on any property on, or parallel to, the front lot line, or within the restricted clear corner vision areas of this article. (See the diagram at the end of this section.) Partition fences and walls shall be restricted to the following locations by yard: 
(1)  Front yard. Shall not extend forward into the front yard beyond the wall of the principal building unless that wall sits behind the minimum required front yard setback line, in which case the fence or wall may extend forward beyond that wall into the front yard to the minimum required front yard setback line. (See the diagram at the end of this section.) 
(2)  Exterior side yard. Shall not extend outward into the exterior side yard beyond the wall of the principal building unless that wall sits behind the minimum required exterior side yard setback line, in which case the fence or wall may extend outward beyond that wall into the exterior side yard to the minimum required exterior side yard setback line. When the exterior side lot line of the property parallels the exterior side lot line of the property across the street and the rear lot lines of both properties abut the rear lot lines of the lots fronting the street on the opposite side of the block, a fence or wall may extend along the exterior side lot line to the rear lot line; except where the exterior side lot line intersects a driveway or an alley, the applicable clear corner vision restrictions of this article shall apply. (See the diagram at the end of this section.) 
(3)  Interior side yard. May extend along the interior side yard lot line from the front wall of the principal building to the rear lot line. 
(4)  Rear yard. May extend along the rear lot line from interior side lot line to interior side lot line, or, in the case of a corner lot, from the interior side lot line to the minimum required exterior side yard setback line, or to the exterior side yard property line if the conditions set forth in subsection (a)(2) of this section apply. 
(b)  Barrier fences. Nothing in this article shall prevent the erection of a barrier fence, hedge or wall designed to discourage trespass across any lawn area, including a lawn area within any minimum building setback requirement of the district, so long as the barrier fence observes the restrictions set forth in subsection (a) of this section and: 
(1)  Does not exceed three feet in height. 
(2)  Does not enclose or encircle the lawn area. 
(3)  Observes the clear corner setback restrictions of this article. 
A barrier fence, hedge or wall may be erected diagonal to, or perpendicular to, an intersecting front or exterior side yard property line, or along an interior side lot line, and may be part of a landscape feature. 
(c)  Landscape features. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the placement of a landscape feature in any front yard, but not within any public right-of-way, provided the applicable clear corner restrictions of this section are met. A landscape feature may consist of, but shall not be limited to, a landscaped earth berm which shall not exceed the height of a barrier fence, outdoor lighting fixtures, live landscape planting materials, and rocks or boulders. A split-rail or two-rail fence that is constructed solely for landscape effect, and which is not designed or intended to partition, enclose or encircle property, may also be permitted. 
(d)  Exterior appearance. Posts, when concealed by the exterior face of a wood fence, shall be placed towards the interior of the property so as to conceal them from view from the exterior side of the fence. All supporting members of any fence shall also be placed on the interior side of the fence so as to conceal them from view from the exterior side of the fence as well. Posts may be exposed to view on the exterior side of a fence only when they are of a finished architectural nature and are an integral part of the architectural appearance of a fence and not just for the purpose of supporting the fence. 
(e)  Construction requirements for residential fences and walls. The following conditions shall apply where applicable to all residential fences and walls: 
(1)  Vertical posts designed and intended to support a wire or wood fence or masonry panels shall extend into the ground to a depth of at least three feet six inches. 
(2)  Walls constructed of masonry materials shall, where required by code, have continuous foundations which shall extend into the ground to a depth of at least three feet six inches, shall be provided with a sloped masonry cap, and shall meet all the structural requirements for foundations and bearing walls as required in the building code. 
(3)  The structural design of a fence or wall shall comply with all requirements applicable to the type and kind of materials to be used in the fence or wall, as set forth and regulated in the building code. 


ALTERNATIVE RESIDENTIAL FENCE AND WALL LOCATIONS 
(Code 1974, § 9-92) 
Sec. 18-119. - Restrictions on fence construction. 
(a)  Front yard. No fence designed and intended to enclose or encircle property shall be erected on or along the front lot line. Hedge fences are excepted, provided they shall be maintained in a living, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance, and provided further that they shall not exceed 36 inches in height beyond the restricted clear corner vision requirements of this article, and shall not exceed 24 inches in height within the restricted clear corner vision area. 
(b)  Side yard. No fences shall be erected on the side yard line exceeding six feet in height. No fence, except a hedge fence not exceeding 36 inches in height above established grade, shall be erected or maintained nearer the front property line than the front line of the main dwelling thereon. 
(c)  Rear yard. No fences shall be erected on the rear lot line exceeding six feet in height. 
(d)  Partition fences for privacy. Property owners desiring to build a fence for privacy in their rear yard exceeding the height restriction as set forth in this section may do so upon special approval of the zoning board of appeals, provided such fence does not exceed the setback requirements in the building code and chapter 110. 
(e)  Corner lots. No fence over 36 inches in height above the established sidewalk grade shall be permitted within 25 feet of any street intersection, so as to interfere with traffic visibility. 
(Code 1974, § 9-94) 
Sec. 18-120. - Location of fences in residential areas generally. 
(a)  Partition fences. Except as otherwise permitted in this article, no partition fence designed and intended to enclose or encircle property shall extend towards a street beyond the established building line; and, except as permitted in section 18-119, no fence designed or intended to enclose or encircle property shall be erected in any residential area on, or parallel to, the front lot line, or within the restricted clear corner vision area of this article. 
(b)  Barrier fence. Nothing in this article shall prevent the erection of a barrier fence designed to discourage trespass across a lawn, so long as the barrier fence does not enclose or encircle the lawn area. A barrier fence may be erected diagonal to, or perpendicular to, an intersecting front or exterior side yard property line, but shall observe the restrictions set forth in subsection (a) of this section. No barrier fence shall exceed 36 inches in height, and such fences shall be subject to the clear corner vision restrictions of this article or, in the case of a corner lot, the clear corner vision restrictions of section 110-681. A barrier fence may be part of a landscape feature. 
(c)  Landscape features. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the placement of a landscape feature in any front yard, but not within any public right-of-way, provided the clear corner restrictions of this section are met. A landscape feature may consist of, but shall not limited to, a landscaped earth berm which shall not exceed the height of a barrier fence, outdoor lighting fixtures, live landscape planting materials, and rocks or boulders. A spilt-rail or two-rail fence that is constructed solely for landscape effect, and which is not designed or intended to enclose or encircle property, may also be permitted. 
(d)  Clear corner restriction at driveways. Except for spilt-rail or two-rail fences, no landscape feature, fence, or hedge above the height of 24 inches shall be constructed or placed within a triangular area formed at the intersection of any driveway with any existing or proposed sidewalk, alley, street, or public way, by a straight line extending between such right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of not less than six feet from their point of intersection. 
(Code 1974, § 9-95) 
Sec. 18-121. - Screening fences and walls for nonresidential uses. 
(a)  Motor vehicle parts yards. No used motor vehicle parts business shall be established or thereafter maintained on any property unless or until a screening fence, not less than eight feet in height, but higher if necessary, to totally screen the yard from view shall be erected around the periphery of the area of the property on which the storage yard is to be located. Any such screen fence shall be maintained at all times in a clean, safe and attractive manner by the owner or the occupant of the facility, and in accordance with all applicable provisions of this article and the building code. It shall be unlawful to display any motor vehicle parts or materials on or in front of the fence. No such screening fence shall be located closer than ten feet to any property line which abuts a public street. 
(b)  Other uses. Other uses permitted in nonresidential zoning districts as set forth and regulated in chapter 110 shall comply with the screen wall requirements of section 110-682. 
(Code 1974, § 9-93) 
Sec. 18-122. - Fencing of junkyards or coalyards. 
    All fences built or repaired around junkyards or coalyards shall be designed as retaining walls where such fences are used to hold or retain materials or things of any kind and shall be limited in height to six feet; provided, however, that such fences may be erected to a height not to exceed nine feet if the written consent of not less than 50 percent of the owners of property residing within 500 feet of the junkyard or coalyard has been obtained, or unless otherwise restricted as to height by this article; and provided further that a fence of greater height may be erected if ordered by a court having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 9-99) 
Secs. 18-123-18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-151. - International property maintenance code. 
(a)  Adoption. That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of City of Trenton, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the City of Trenton for regulating the design, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, demolition, removal, maintenance and use of all building and structures; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said maintenance code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with additions, assertions, deletions and changes prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Additions, insertions and changes. The International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised in the following respects: 
    Section 101.1 is amended by inserting "City of Trenton" for "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]." 
    Section 103.5 is amended by inserting "See Chapter 13 of the Trenton City Code, Fee Schedule" for [APPROPRIATE SCHEDULE]." 
    Section 304.14 is amended by inserting "April 1" for the reference to "[DATE]" and "November 30" for the second reference to "[DATE]" in line one. 
(Code 1974, § 17-1; Ord. No. 671, §§ 1,2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 3-7-2011) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Secs. 18-152-18-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STATE HOUSING LAWS 

Sec. 18-171. - Adoption. 
    The Michigan Building Code and Michigan Residential Code, 2009 Editions, are hereby adopted, incorporated by reference, and shall be applied and enforced by the City pursuant to 1999 PA 245, together with their rules, promulgated pursuant to 1999 PA 230. 
(Code 1974, § 17-4; Ord. No. 752, § 1, 3-21-2011) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 18-172. - Availability of copies. 
    The city clerk shall make available for public inspection and for distribution to the public printed copies of the statutes adopted in section 18-171 at the charge established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 17-5) 
Sec. 18-173. - Enforcement officer. 
    The city engineer is hereby designated as the officer to administer the provisions of the statutes adopted by reference in section 18-171. 
(Code 1974, § 17-6) 
Sec. 18-174. - Inspection fees. 
    Fees for inspections made pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 17-7) 
Secs. 18-175-18-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTION UPON TRANSFER 

Sec. 18-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use means a garage, shed, pool, gazebo, pigeon coop, doghouse, playhouse, or similar use. 
    Certificate of compliance means a certificate issued by the engineering and building department which certifies compliance with the provisions of the codes and ordinances of the city for all rental dwellings and rental units. A current certificate of compliance is a certificate which has been issued for a rental dwelling or a rental unit in the last three years. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the engineering and building department in accordance with the provisions of chapter 110, pertaining to zoning, for an approved use or occupancy. 
    Certificate of review means a certificate issued by the engineering and building department which certifies that a preliminary inspection by the department has been conducted and that the dwelling meets the minimum standards required to permit the transfer of a one- or two-family dwelling, as best as can be determined. A current certificate of review is a certificate which has been applied for not more than 30 days before a unit covered by this division is listed for sale, and received prior to the date of transfer. 
    Dwelling means a one- or two-family residential structure and accessory uses located in the city, or any individual family unit cooperatively owned but individually occupied pursuant to a trust, common tenancy or stock ownership in accordance with sections 99 through 109 of Public Act No. 327 of 1931 (MCL 450.99-450.104). A rental dwelling that has a current certificate of compliance issued to it is not included in this definition. 
    New dwelling means a one- or two-family dwelling unit which has never been occupied. 
    Transfer means the sale or conveyance of title to another for consideration, or the execution of a land contract, the exercise of an option to purchase a dwelling, or, in the case of a cooperative, the change of occupancy in conjunction with a transfer of an interest. A conveyance by lease, gift, devise, or lien foreclosure is not included in this definition. A transfer subject to the terms of a purchase agreement entered into prior to January 22, 1992, is not included in this definition. 
(Code 1974, § 17-200) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-192. - Certificate of review required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer a dwelling or for any person to act as a broker for the transfer of a dwelling which has not been issued a current certificate of review for such dwelling, except as otherwise permitted by this division. 
(Code 1974, § 17-201) 
Sec. 18-193. - Issuance of certificate of review; revocation. 
(a)  The engineering and building department shall issue a certificate of review only after it has conducted a preliminary inspection of the dwelling and finds that the dwelling meets the minimum requirements necessary to permit the transfer of the property. An inspection report shall be completed by the inspector after completing the inspection of the property. The report shall note all violations found in the dwelling. 
(b)  A new dwelling shall be issued a certificate of review upon final inspection and approval of the new construction work. 
(c)  The city engineer may revoke a certificate of review for a violation of any code, ordinance, rule or regulation of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 17-202) 
Sec. 18-194. - Disclaimer of liability. 
(a)  A certificate of review is not a warranty or guarantee that there are no defects in the dwelling and the city shall not be held responsible for hidden or latent defects, or those not noted in the inspection report. 
(b)  This inspection of the land use, exterior posture and interior accessories of the structure is limited to visual inspection only. The city does not guarantee or approve by inference any latent, structural, or mechanical defects therein, or such items that are not apparent by visual inspection. 
(c)  The city shall not assume any liability to any person by reason of the inspections required by this article or the code adopted in this article or the issuance of a certificate of review or a certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  This inspection is solely for the purpose of permitting the city to continually assess the condition of the city's housing stock, to monitor compliance with the building code, and to encourage owners to improve their properties. Purchasers must rely solely upon the representations and disclosures made by the seller, their own judgment and experience, and the advice of consultants and advisors of their own selection. Purchasers may not rely upon the city's inspection and reports to represent a full and comprehensive itemization of defects or assume that a certificate of review means that the structure is in full compliance with all local codes. 
(Code 1974, § 17-203) 
Sec. 18-195. - Dangerous conditions. 
    Should the engineering and building department, upon inspection, determine that there are conditions which constitute an imminent danger to health and safety, it may, in addition to revoking a certificate of approval, order the conditions to be remedied and may limit or prohibit occupancy. 
(Code 1974, § 17-204) 
Sec. 18-196. - Registration; fees. 
    Any person intending to transfer a dwelling must first register and make arrangements with the engineering and building department for an inspection of the dwelling, to occur prior to the date of transfer. The fee for the registration and inspection shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 17-205) 
Sec. 18-197. - Correction of violations by buyer; period of validity of inspection report; issuance of certificate of approval. 
(a)  The buyer may assume the responsibility of correcting violations, provided such corrections are completed within a six-month period, by executing a notarized affidavit to this effect and submitting the affidavit to the engineering and building department. 
(b)  If a property is inspected and the sale does not occur, the inspection report is valid for a six-month period. If the owner corrects all violations, a certificate of approval will be issued. 
(Code 1974, § 17-206) 
Sec. 18-198. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall fail to obtain a certificate of approval as required by this division, or who shall fail to correct any violations within the time required by this division, or who shall violate any of the terms of this division, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 17-207) 
Sec. 18-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 18-200. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing properties and structures. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-201. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of establishing a registration process for vacant properties is to provide requirements for responsible parties to implement the required vacant property maintenance plan for such properties which will protect public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and prevent neighborhood blight, ensure properties are secured, prevent deterioration, and protect property values and neighborhood integrity. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-202. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Abandoned means a property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale, or a property that has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by or transferred to the beneficiary of the deed of trust involved with the foreclosure, or a property transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
    Accessible property means real property that is accessible to the public, either, in general or through an open and unsecured door, window, gate, fence, wall, or other such openings. 
    Beneficiary means a lender participating in a real property transaction that holds a secured interest in the real property in question identified in a deed of trust. 
    Days means consecutive calendar days. 
    Deed of trust means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. This definition includes any subsequent deeds of trust. 
    Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include but are not limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past due utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is vacant. 
    Foreclosure means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt of the trustor (borrower) under deed of trust defaults. 
    Notice of default means a recorded instrument that reflects and provides notice that a default has taken place with respect to a deed of trust, and that a beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale. 
    Owner means any person, co-partnership, agent, operator, firm, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
    Property means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, located in the City of Trenton, including the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
    Securing means such measures as may be directed by the building official or his or her designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the repairing of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, the repair or boarding of doors, windows, or other openings. 
    Trustee means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity holding a Deed of Trust securing an interest in real property. 
    Trustor means any owner/borrower identified in a deed of trust, who transfers an interest in real property to a trustee as security for payment of debt by that owner/trustor. 
    Vacant means any building, structure or real property that is, or has been unoccupied, or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. 
    Yard means the open unoccupied spaces on the same lot with a main building extending along the entire length of front, side, and rear lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-203. - Eviction of personal property. 
    When an eviction by court order occurs, the owner shall place on the private area of the owner's property only and not on any public area adjacent to the owner's property, a movable container of sufficient size and type, which will allow access from its side for disposal of the personal property. Any personal property not relocated from the premises shall be placed and disposed of only in the movable container. The movable container shall be removed from the owner's property within 48 hours of its placement. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-204. - Registration of vacant property required. 
    Owners and/or owners' agents of real property are required to register all vacant property within 30 days of the vacancy or the effective date of this ordinance whichever is later. Registration pursuant to this section shall be renewed annually. Registration required by this division shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and contact number of the owner. 
(2)  Name, address and contact number of the local agent or representative for the property. 
(3)  Name, address and contact number of the management company assigned to the property for the security and maintenance of the property. 
(4)  Common address and tax parcel identification number of the property. 
(5)  The date on which the property became vacant. 
(6)  Affirmation of utility connections or disconnections. 
(7)  Signed maintenance plan agreement as required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-205. - Requirement to keep information current. 
    If at any time the information contained in the registration is no longer valid, the property owner shall file a new registration within ten days containing current information. There shall be no fee to update the current owner's information. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-206. - Vacant property maintenance plan. 
    It is declared a public nuisance for any owner to cause, permit, or maintain any property condition contrary to the provisions of this section. The owner or owner's agent must adhere to the vacant property maintenance plan as contained in this section and the time schedule requirements on the registration. 
(1)  The owner or owner's agent shall perform regular weekly inspections of the property to assure compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  The owner or owner's agent shall allow access to the department of engineering and building for the purpose of inspection and in case of emergency. 
(3)  Utilities must be properly disconnected or connected and in proper working order. 
(4)  All doors, windows and other openings shall be secured as required in section 18-207. 
(5)  Weeds shall be removed from landscape beds, the perimeter of buildings, along fence lines, and in parking lot joints and cracks. 
(6)  Grass height shall be maintained no higher than 12 inches and the trimmings removed from the property. 
(7)  Exterior properties shall be kept free of junk and debris, including, but not limited to, newspapers, flyers, circulars, furniture, appliances, containers, equipment, auto parts, garbage, clothing, inoperable vehicles, boats and campers, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is vacant. 
(8)  Building appurtenances must be securely attached so as not to cause a blighting condition, including, but not limited to, gutters, downspouts, shutters, railings, guards, steps, awnings, canopies, signs, light fixtures, and fire-escapes. 
(9)  Detached signs and lighting systems shall be structurally sound, and maintained so as not to cause a blighting condition, or removed. 
(10)  Property fencing and retaining walls shall be maintained structurally sound. Any fence or wall with broken or hanging components shall be repaired, straightened, or removed. 
(11)  Pools, spas, and ponds shall be drained and kept dry or kept in working order so that the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas must comply with the barrier requirements of the adopted International Property Maintenance Code. 
(12)  The property shall be free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with a color that matches the exterior of the structure. 
(13)  Perishables shall be removed from the interior of the structures. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-207. - Security requirement. 
    Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, closing and locking of windows, doors, and any other opening that may allow access to the interior of any structure on the property. Broken glass shall be secured by replacement, re-glazing, or boarding of the opening. The boarding of any opening shall be painted with a color that matches the exterior of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-208. - Additional authority. 
    The building official or his or her designee shall have the authority to require the owner to implement additional maintenance, security, or other measures not specified in the vacant property maintenance plan, as may be reasonably required to prevent further decline. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-209. - Fees. 
    The fees for registering and the renewal of registering a vacant property shall be the cost of administering the provisions of this division and in the amounts established by the city council. In addition, in the case where the owner has failed to register, there shall be assessed the added costs of the city's expenses in having to determine ownership which may include, but are not limited to, title searches. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-210. - Penalties. 
    Any owner of vacant property that fails to register, fails to report changes to registration information, or fails to renew a registration annually shall be responsible for a civil infraction and assessed a fine in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Any owner or owner's agent of vacant property subject to the registration requirements of this division, and causes, permits, or maintains a violation of this division as to that property, shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Sec. 18-211. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this division may appeal a determination made hereunder in a manner specified in the adopted International Property Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
Secs. 18-212-18-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SWIMMING POOLS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 110. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Permanent pool means any pool built into the ground, either partly or wholly, requiring permanent plumbing connection for drainage or filling. 
    Swimming pool means any structure or container either above or below grade, located either in part or wholly outside a permanent enclosed and roofed building, designed to hold water to a depth greater than 18 inches when filled to capacity, intended for immersion of the human body. 
    Temporary pool means any aboveground pool, with a maximum water depth greater than 18 inches, that can be assembled with hand tools by the homeowner or does not require a permanent underground drainage system. 
    Wading pool means any temporary pool with a maximum water depth of 18 inches or less. 
(Code 1974, § 30-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-222. - Findings. 
    It is hereby determined that outdoor swimming pools may endanger the public health and safety unless carefully regulated and supervised. 
(Code 1974, § 30-1) 
Sec. 18-223. - Exemptions. 
    Containers of a size which does not exceed 50 square feet in area and a capacity which does not exceed 75 cubic feet are specifically excluded from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 30-3) 
Sec. 18-224. - Enforcement. 
    The building inspector shall administer the requirements of this article so as to protect the health and safety of people exposed to swimming pools. 
(Code 1974, § 30-4) 
Sec. 18-225. - Notice of violation; correction of violations; authority to order removal of pool. 
(a)  Any swimming pool which is not maintained in accordance with the minimum standards established by this article shall be placed out of use by the owner after a notice by the building inspector itemizing the corrections needed. Upon failure to correct the items cited, the pool may be ordered removed in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Upon discontinuing the use of a pool, the owner shall forthwith remove all water from the pool and remove or fill the structure or excavation with earth, level to grade, or otherwise make the premises safe. 
(Code 1974, § 30-5) 
Secs. 18-226-18-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 18-241. - Permit required for construction or alteration. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or alter any permanent or temporary swimming pool without first having obtained a permit therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 30-16) 
Sec. 18-242. - Exemption for wading pools. 
    No permit shall be required for the construction, installation or alteration of a wading pool. 
(Code 1974, § 30-17) 
Sec. 18-243. - Application. 
    Before a permit is issued pursuant to this division, an application shall be approved by the building inspector. Each application shall be submitted with two sets of specification forms, two sets of construction plans and one pump curve/performance curve chart. 
(Code 1974, § 30-18) 
Sec. 18-244. - Fees. 
    The fees for permits required by this division shall be based on the estimated cost of construction and in the amounts established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 30-19) 
Sec. 18-245. - Inspections. 
    The pool contractor, or the owner if no contractor is involved, shall notify the building inspector upon completion of pool construction, installation or modification. The building inspector shall inspect all permanent or temporary pools after such notification to ensure that all provisions of this article are satisfied. When necessary, the building inspector or health department shall make additional inspections. 
(Code 1974, § 30-20) 
Sec. 18-246. - Stop work orders. 
    Construction work that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped upon notice from the building inspector. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, or shall be posted on the site. The notice shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(Code 1974, § 30-21) 
Sec. 18-247. - Appeals. 
    If the city engineer denies any permit required by this article for noncompliance with the provisions of this article, an appeal may be taken to the zoning board of appeals, which shall have the same powers of review and authority as set forth in chapter 110. 
(Code 1974, § 30-22) 
Secs. 18-248-18-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 18-271. - Conformance with approved application. 
    Pools shall be constructed, installed and altered in conformity with the application approved by the building inspector. Any deviation from the approved application shall require prior approval by the building official. 
(Code 1974, § 30-33) 
Sec. 18-272. - General quality of work; conformance with state construction code. 
    All work done pursuant to this article shall be done in an acceptable manner and shall comply with the state construction code. 
(Code 1974, § 30-34) 
Sec. 18-273. - Wires not to cross water. 
    Under no circumstances shall wires of any kind cross over the water of any permanent or temporary swimming pool. 
(Code 1974, § 30-35) 
Sec. 18-274. - Enclosures. 
    No swimming pool shall be constructed or maintained unless the swimming pool is entirely enclosed by a building, wall or fence. The minimum height of all parts of the fence or wall, including the gates around a temporary pool, shall be 48 inches measured on the outside of the fence or wall upward from the highest adjacent ground. Permanent type pools shall be enclosed with a fence six feet in height. Any gate shall be equipped with a lock and key. Access steps or ladders to temporary pools shall be enclosed with fences, and equipped with gates, locks and keys meeting the same standards as the enclosure; or, alternatively, access steps or ladder to temporary pools shall be capable of being locked in a non-usable position. The fence shall be designed and constructed so as to make the pool inaccessible to children by climbing or entering through the fence openings. Fence material shall contain openings not larger than two inches nominal size and fences shall not be constructed of material that provides ready footing for climbing. 
(Code 1974, § 30-36) 
Sec. 18-275. - Source of water; filling; fill spouts. 
    Every swimming pool shall be filled and maintained with potable water. If a hose is used to fill the pool or to add makeup water, an acceptable vacuum breaker shall be installed on the hose thread of the hose bib, sill cock or fixture. Fill spouts will be acceptable if located under a diving board or installed so as to prevent any hazard and provided there is a fixed air gap above the pool coping at least twice the diameter of the fill spout. 
(Code 1974, § 30-37) 
Sec. 18-276. - Drainage. 
    Facilities shall be provided for disposing of all pool drainage and wastewater to the community sanitary sewer system or in some other manner approved by the building inspector. There shall be an air gap between the pool discharge line and the sanitary sewer of at least twice the diameter of the discharge line. 
(Code 1974, § 30-38) 
Sec. 18-277. - Overflow water. 
    The pool and surrounding area shall be constructed and arranged in such a manner that no water shall return from the walkway or deck to the pool. Waste water shall not be allowed to create a nuisance or to overflow onto adjoining property. 
(Code 1974, § 30-39) 
Sec. 18-278. - Lights. 
    Pool area lights, if provided, shall be shielded so as to direct the light away from adjacent premises. 
(Code 1974, § 30-40) 
Sec. 18-279. - Water treatment installations. 
    Water treatment equipment shall be installed above grade, except that it may be installed in a properly drained residential basement, cellar or other approved structure. 
(Code 1974, § 30-41) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 98. 
Sec. 18-280. - Accessory buildings. 
    Any accessory building to a swimming pool shall comply with applicable requirements of chapter 110, pertaining to zoning, and the building code. 
(Code 1974, § 30-42) 
Sec. 18-281. - Suction cleaner. 
    There shall be a suction cleaner outlet connected to the pump suction piping between the pool and the hair and lint strainer, to permit use of a suction cleaner or other acceptable device for cleaning the entire pool. 
(Code 1974, § 30-43) 
Secs. 18-282-18-300. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Temporary Pools 

Sec. 18-301. - Clearance. 
(a)  The location and enclosure of any temporary pool shall be such that no hazard exists for pool users or the public. The minimum distance from the nearest part of the pool to the following points shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two feet horizontally to any property line from the extremities of the pool. 
(2)  Ten feet horizontally from a vertical line from any overhead electrical or telephone wire to the edge of the water. Diving boards, slides and similar structures must be ten feet horizontally from a vertical line from any overhead wires. 
(b)  It shall be left to the discretion of the property owner to maintain a safe distance between the pool and house or other buildings. 
(Code 1974, § 30-49) 
Sec. 18-302. - Ladder or steps. 
    Any temporary pool with maximum water depth of four feet or more shall have at least one acceptable ladder or set of steps permitting exit from the pool water. 
(Code 1974, § 30-50) 
Sec. 18-303. - Diving boards prohibited. 
    Temporary pools shall not be equipped with diving boards. 
(Code 1974, § 30-51) 
Sec. 18-304. - Filter. 
    Each temporary pool shall have a filter capable of maintaining clear water in the pool whenever the pool is in use. 
(Code 1974, § 30-52) 
Sec. 18-305. - Pumps. 
    Each temporary pool shall have a pump with sufficient capacity to circulate the pool volume each 12 hours or less. 
(Code 1974, § 30-53) 
Sec. 18-306. - Installation below ground. 
    No temporary pool shall be installed below grade unless structurally approved by the building inspector. 
(Code 1974, § 30-54) 
Secs. 18-307-18-320. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Permanent Pools 

Sec. 18-321. - Clearance. 
    The location and enclosure of any permanent pool shall be such that no hazard exists for pool users or the public. The minimum distance from the nearest part of the pool water to the following points shall be as follows: 
(1)  Six feet horizontally to any property line and four feet to any building wall. 
(2)  Ten feet horizontally from a vertical line from any overhead electrical or telephone wire to the edge of the water. Diving boards, slides, towers, platforms and similar structures must be ten feet horizontally from a vertical line from any overhead wires. 
(3)  Three feet horizontally to any sewer for a permanent pool. There shall be ten feet horizontally to a septic tank and tile field or other similar treatment facility, provided the water level in the pool is one foot or more above the ground surface elevation of the treatment facility. 
(Code 1974, § 30-60) 
Sec. 18-322. - Ladder or steps. 
    Every permanent pool shall have at least one acceptable ladder or set of steps permitting exit from the pool water. 
(Code 1974, § 30-61) 
Sec. 18-323. - Walkway or deck. 
    A walkway or deck of concrete or other approved impervious material shall be constructed around the perimeter of each permanent pool and shall be at least three feet wide if at grade, or at least 20 inches wide if part of a self-fencing structure. 
(Code 1974, § 30-62) 
Sec. 18-324. - Diving boards. 
    There shall be at least eight feet of clearance between the end of any diving board or platform and each side wall of any permanent pool. The end of the diving board or platform shall project over the water one foot from the deep end wall. Diving structures shall be securely anchored and shall have at least 13 feet of unobstructed headroom for at least eight feet horizontally over the water surface from all parts of the diving surface. No diving board or platform shall be installed except in accordance with the following limits: 
(1)  The minimum water depth at the deepest point in the pool shall be eight feet. 
(2)  The minimum distance from the diving wall to the deepest point in the pool shall be ten feet. 
(3)  The minimum distance from the deepest point in the pool to the point where the water is five feet deep shall be ten feet. 
(Code 1974, § 30-63) 
Sec. 18-325. - Depth markings. 
    For all permanent pools with a maximum depth exceeding five feet, there shall be at least one depth marking on the deck or wall of the pool above the water line indicating the greatest depth in feet. 
(Code 1974, § 30-64) 
Sec. 18-326. - Floatline. 
    When the maximum water depth in any permanent pool exceeds five feet, recessed floatline anchors shall be provided in the walls at the place where the water depth is five feet. A suitable floatline shall be installed when the pool is in use. 
(Code 1974, § 30-65) 
Sec. 18-327. - Slopes. 
    The slope of the bottom of any part of a permanent pool in which the water is less than five feet in depth shall not be more than one foot vertically in each eight feet horizontally. The top three feet of all side and end walls shall be vertical or shall have an outward batter not to exceed six feet vertically to one foot horizontally. 
(Code 1974, § 30-66) 
Sec. 18-328. - Piping. 
    Piping of permanent pools shall be sized to permit the rated flows for filtering and filter backwash without exceeding the maximum head at which the pump will provide such flows. The water velocity in the pool piping shall not exceed ten feet per second in pressure piping and five feet per second in suction piping at design flows. The water velocity in plastic piping shall not exceed five feet per second. 
(Code 1974, § 30-67) 
Sec. 18-329. - Main drains. 
    One or more outlets shall be placed at the deepest point in every permanent pool for circulating the pool water and for draining the pool. The effective area of the drain grating shall be at least four times the area of the outlet pipe. 
(Code 1974, § 30-68) 
Sec. 18-330. - Inlets. 
    There shall be a minimum of one filtered water inlet for each 60 feet of the perimeter of each permanent pool. Each of the minimum required water inlets shall be at least ten inches below the highest overflow line and at least ten feet from any other inlet or from any skimmer, unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. Inlets shall be located to impart a circulatory motion to the pool water. 
(Code 1974, § 30-69) 
Sec. 18-331. - Valves. 
    A full flow type valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the pump to permit the regulation of flow. 
(Code 1974, § 30-70) 
Sec. 18-332. - Skimmers. 
    All skimmers in permanent pools shall be recessed or flush with the walls of the pool. Unless a continuous overflow weir gutter is installed around the pool, one or more surface skimmers shall be provided. There shall be one skimmer for each 800 square feet of water surface or any fraction thereof, which shall operate continuously while the pool water is being circulated and which shall automatically adjust for vertical variations in the water level of three inches or more. 
(Code 1974, § 30-71) 
Sec. 18-333. - Pumps. 
    The pump in each permanent pool shall have sufficient capacity at a maximum anticipated hydraulic head to circulate the pool volume each 12 hours and to supply the required backwash rate to any one filter. Unless hydraulic analysis demonstrates otherwise, each pump shall supply the required filtration rate at a total head of at least 50 feet for any sand filter system and 60 feet for a diatomite filter system. The motor horsepower rating shall be determined for maximum total head conditions at a 12-hour pool volume turnover time. A pump connected to a pressure filter shall be equipped on its inlet side with a noncorrosive hair and lint strainer. The ratio of the open strainer area to the open area of the suction piping shall be at least four to one. 
(Code 1974, § 30-72) 
Sec. 18-334. - General requirements for filter systems. 
(a)  All filters in permanent pools shall be approved by the building inspector and shall be equal in performance to the sand and diatomite filters described in this division. Filters approved by the National Sanitation Foundation shall be acceptable. 
(b)  Each filtering system shall be provided with a sight glass or visible discharge. The influent shall be applied to the filter media surface in a manner which prevents direct turbulent discharge against the media. 
(c)  All pressure filters shall be equipped with an air release at the high point in the system. If an automatic device is installed for this purpose, there shall be a manual valve for testing its effectiveness. 
(d)  The shell containing the filter media or elements shall be constructed so as to provide satisfactory strength and freedom from corrosion, and shall be installed in a manner to prevent settling or upset. 
(e)  A pressure gauge of appropriate range shall be installed on the piping between the filters and the pool. 
(Code 1974, § 30-73) 
Sec. 18-335. - High rate sand filters. 
    All high rate sand filters shall be approved by and carry the seal of approval of the National Sanitation Foundation. High rate sand filters shall be sized so that the filtration rate does not exceed 20 gallons per minute per square foot. 
(Code 1974, § 30-74) 
Sec. 18-336. - Standard sand filters. 
(a)  The total effective filter area in square feet shall be at least equal to the volume of the pool in gallons divided by 2,160. Each pressure sand filter shall be provided with backwash water at a minimum rate of 12 gallons per minute per square foot of effective surface area. 
(b)  Filter sand shall be uniformly graded silica material, with effective particle diameters between 0.45 and 0.55 millimeter and with a uniformity coefficient less than 1.75. The sand shall be free of clay, organic matter and water-soluble material and no less than 20 inches in depth, with a 12-inch or greater freeboard. 
(c)  Graded gravel or crushed anthracite shall be used to support the filter media and shall be free of organic and water-soluble material. It shall be graded by size and separately leveled in layers. The total depth of the graded gravel shall not be less than 16 inches. 
(Code 1974, § 30-75) 
Sec. 18-337. - Diatomite filters. 
    Pressure diatomite filters shall be sized so that the filtration rate does not exceed two gallons per minute per square foot of effective filter area. A precoat funnel or other feeding device shall be provided at all such pressure filters. Vacuum diatomite filters shall be sized so that the filtration rate does not exceed 11/2 gallons per minute per square foot. 
(Code 1974, § 30-76) 
Secs. 18-338-18-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 18-361. - Permit required for maintenance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an outdoor swimming pool without first making application to the city engineer and obtaining a permit therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 30-87) 
Sec. 18-362. - Creation of hazard or nuisance. 
    Pools and pool equipment shall be operated and maintained in a manner which will not create health or safety hazards or any public nuisance. 
(Code 1974, § 30-88) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 38-221 et seq. 
Sec. 18-363. - Supervision required. 
    Swimming pools shall be so supervised that safety hazards are not created. 
(Code 1974, § 30-89) 
Sec. 18-364. - Gates, ladder or steps to be locked when pool not in use. 
    Ladder, access steps or ladder/step enclosures to temporary pools and the gates to all swimming pool enclosures shall be so locked to prohibit pool access when the pool is not in use. 
(Code 1974, § 30-90) 
Sec. 18-365. - Disinfection. 
    Proper germicidal levels shall be maintained at all times during pool usage to protect the health of users. A chlorine residual of 0.4 to 1.0 parts per million shall satisfy this requirement. Other disinfecting agents than chlorine may be used if approved by the building inspector. The hydrogen ion concentration (pH) of the pool water shall be maintained between 7.2 and 8.0. Testing devices capable of accurately measuring pH and chlorine residual or other disinfectant shall be available at each private swimming pool. 
(Code 1974, § 30-91) 
Sec. 18-366. - Rescue devices. 
    A rescue pole, hook or a similar device shall be available within every swimming pool enclosure. 
(Code 1974, § 30-92) 
Sec. 18-367. - Annual inspection. 
    In order to ensure protection of the public health as well as that of the owners of swimming pools, an annual inspection of all pools shall be made by the department of health and city engineer, beginning on June 1 of each year. The inspection shall include the testing of all equipment to determine that pumps are operating properly, that the electrical equipment is in a safe condition, that the circulating system and discharge lines are properly operating and that no health hazard exists. 
(Code 1974, § 30-94) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6; amusements and entertainment, ch. 10; display of merchandise or placement of signs in street or sidewalk, § 82-5; OS-1 office service district, § 110-331 et seq.; B-1 local business district, § 110-351 et seq.; B-2 planned community business district, § 110-371 et seq.; B-3 general business district, § 110-391 et seq.; CBD central business district, § 110-411 et seq.; I-1 light industrial district, § 110-431 et seq.; I-2 medium industrial district, § 110-451 et seq.; I-3 heavy industrial district, § 110-471 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES AND PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Building contractors, § 18-61 et seq. 

Sec. 22-31. - Required. 
    No person shall, directly or indirectly, operate, conduct, maintain or manage any business, trade, occupation or premises for which any license or permit is required by this Code without first procuring such license or permit in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 18-1) 
Sec. 22-32. - Granting of license or permit by state not to act as exemption from city license or permit. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct, maintenance or management of any business, trade, occupation or premises shall not exempt such person from the necessity of procuring a license or permit from the city, if such license or permit is required by this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 18-2) 
Sec. 22-33. - Compliance with Code required prior to issuance. 
    No license or permit shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this Code pertaining to the license or permit applied for. 
(Code 1974, § 18-3) 
Sec. 22-34. - Approval of issuing officer required prior to issuance. 
    No license or permit shall be granted, if the approval of any officer of the city is required, until such approval is made. The term "approval," for the purpose of this section, shall mean written approval by the designated officer upon the face of the application for a license or permit, subscribed by such officer with the date of the approval indicated thereon. 
(Code 1974, § 18-4) 
Sec. 22-35. - Payment of fees required prior to issuance. 
    No license or permit shall be issued until the required fees have been paid. 
(Code 1974, § 18-5) 
Sec. 22-36. - Exemptions from fees. 
    No license or permit fee shall be required from any person exempt from payment of the fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all other provisions of this Code. The city clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons licenses or permits which are clearly marked as to such exemption and the reason therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 18-6) 
Sec. 22-37. - Representation of being engaged in business prima facie evidence of liability for fee. 
    The fact that any person represents himself as being engaged in any business, trade or occupation for the transaction of which a license is required, or that such person exhibited a sign or advertisement indicating that he is engaged in such business, trade or occupation, shall be prima facie evidence of the liability of such person to pay the required license fee. 
(Code 1974, § 18-7) 
Sec. 22-38. - Businesses operated in conjunction with another business. 
    Whenever any license to operate or conduct any business, trade or occupation is required, the license fee to conduct or operate such business, trade or occupation, whether it be connected or operated in conjunction with any other business or not, shall be paid unless otherwise provided in this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 18-8) 
Sec. 22-39. - Separate fee to be paid for each premises. 
    Whenever any license is required to operate or conduct any business, trade or occupation, the required license fee shall be paid for each separate premises maintained by the licensee. 
(Code 1974, § 18-9) 
Sec. 22-40. - Applications for renewal to be considered as original applications. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Code 1974, § 18-10) 
Sec. 22-41. - Moral character. 
(a)  In this Code, the phrase "good moral character" shall be construed to mean the propensity of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(b)  A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used in and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that: 
(1)  At the current time he has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; and 
(2)  He is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he seeks a business license or business permit. 
(c)  The following criminal records shall not be used, examined, or requested by the city in a determination of good moral character when used as a requirement to obtain a business license or business permit: 
(1)  Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction. 
(2)  Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction. 
(3)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest, and open manner. 
(d)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 
State Law reference- Moral character, MCL 338.41 et seq. 
Sec. 22-42. - Display; availability for inspection. 
    No licensee or permittee shall fail to carry any license or permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this Code upon his person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or maintenance of any business for which the license or permit was granted; except that, whenever such business is operated, conducted or maintained at a fixed place or establishment, the license or permit shall be displayed at all times in some conspicuous place in the business premises, and the licensee or permittee shall produce the license or permit for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any city police officer. 
(Code 1974, § 18-11) 
Sec. 22-43. - Display of tags or insignia on vehicles and machines. 
    No licensee shall fail to conspicuously display on each vehicle or mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this Code such tags or insignia as may be furnished by the city clerk and required by this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 18-12) 
Sec. 22-44. - Display of invalid license or permit. 
    No person shall display any expired, suspended or revoked license or permit, or any license or permit for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1974, § 18-13) 
Sec. 22-45. - Transfer. 
    No license or permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall be transferable. 
(Code 1974, § 18-14) 
Sec. 22-46. - Provisions supplemental. 
    The provisions of this article, together with other relevant provisions of this Code, or the provisions hereafter authorized or required by state law, and any and all provisions thereof relative to licenses, permits, businesses, trades, occupations, premises or anything connected therewith, shall each be construed to be complementary and supplemental to each other so far as relevant, and unless otherwise prescribed or inconsistent with this article shall constitute a part of the regulations and conditions applicable generally to any particular license or permit in the same manner as though these provisions were fully written into each separate chapter of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 18-15) 
Sec. 22-47. - Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation. 
    The issuance of licenses or permits applied for under this Code may be denied by the city clerk, and licenses or permits issued may be revoked or suspended by the city clerk at any time, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the application for the license or permit. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the operation of a business. 
(3)  Any violation of this Code pertaining to the licensed business. 
(4)  Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public. 
(5)  Failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the requirements and provisions of this Code. 
(6)  Conducting a business under a name which suggests or represents, or tends to suggest or represent, that the business is a city-sponsored or a city-related activity. 
(Code 1974, § 18-16) 
Sec. 22-48. - Notice of suspension or revocation. 
    Written notice of suspension or revocation of a license or permit, stating the cause therefor, shall be delivered to the licensee or permittee personally or mailed to his address as shown in his application for the license or permit. 
(Code 1974, § 18-17) 
Sec. 22-49. - Hearing on denial, suspension or revocation. 
    Any person whose license or permit is revoked or suspended, or any person whose application for a license or permit is denied, shall have the right to a hearing before the city council, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within ten days following the delivery or mailing of the notice of revocation or suspension, or within ten days following the denial of the application for a license or permit. 
(Code 1974, § 18-18) 
Sec. 22-50. - Decision on denial, suspension or revocation. 
    The city council may reverse any determination to issue or to deny the issuance of a license or permit or any revocation or suspension of a license or permit, and the city council may grant or reinstate any license or permit. 
(Code 1974, § 18-19) 
Sec. 22-51. - Operation when license or permit suspended or revoked. 
    No person shall operate any business during any time when his license or permit therefor has been suspended, revoked or cancelled. 
(Code 1974, § 18-20) 
Sec. 22-52. - Auctions. 
(a)  No person shall conduct an auction of any real estate, goods, wares or merchandise of any description with the city without first procuring a permit from the city clerk, at least five days prior to the sale. 
(b)  A permit required pursuant to this section shall be granted by the clerk for a fee of $20.00, payable to the city upon making application. 
(c)  The permit application shall disclose the following information: 
(1)  A complete description of the property sought to be sold including an itemized inventory of any personalty. 
(2)  An address of the location and times at which the auction is to be held. 
(3)  The name of the auctioneer conducting the sale. 
(4)  The state license number of the auctioneer, and a copy of the license. 
(5)  A receipt indicating the payment of any and all taxes due and owning on the property. 
(d)  All auction sales shall be conducted by an auctioneer duly licensed by the State of Michigan. 
(e)  No auction shall be conducted or continued before 9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. 
(f)  Whenever any auction sale is one of used or secondhand goods, no new goods, wares merchandise or personal property shall be offered or included at such sale. 
(g)  Each auctioneer shall keep an accurate record of all goods and chattels sold, together with the name and address of the person from whom such goods and chattels were received, which shall be open to inspection by any police officer or the city clerk, at all reasonable times. 
(h)  All taxes, together with any penalties or interest which have become a lien on the property, shall have first been paid prior to being sold at auction. 
(i)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any sale conducted by any sheriff or court officer, or any person acting under the license, direction or authority of any court. 
(Ord. No. 765, § 1, 6-18-2012) 
Secs. 22-53-22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile service station shall be defined as in chapter 110 and shall have the same meaning as the term "oil and gasoline stations" as used in Public Act No. 279 of 1909, § 4, (MCL 117.4). 
(Code 1974, § 7-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-82. - Findings. 
    The city council, after studying the possible need for regulation of automobile service stations, hereby makes the following determination of necessity: 
(1)  The operation of automobile service stations may, if unregulated, constitute a hazard to pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(2)  In order to maintain the possible points of conflict for vehicular traffic at a reasonably safe minimum, the distance between automobile service stations should be regulated. 
(3)  The erection and operation of automobile service stations in too close proximity to churches, schools, hospitals and other such institutions where large numbers of pedestrians congregate, without regard to the public convenience, is detrimental to the general health, welfare and safety of the people of the city. 
(4)  The close proximity of automobile service stations to residential areas can cause noise, odor, lights, fumes, vibrations, and danger of fire and explosions which, if unregulated, can constitute a nuisance and a detriment to the general health, welfare and safety of the people of the city. 
(5)  The erection and operation of such automobile service stations without regulation and control endangers the public safety and retards the general welfare and the uncontrolled construction of automobile service stations tends to force, through economic pressure, the abandonment of existing automobile service stations, causing the development of blighted areas in the city. 
(6)  To prevent blight as mentioned in subsection (5) of this section, it is necessary that automobile service stations have an adequate area from which to generate business. 
(7)  In order to reduce the possible vehicular traffic hazard to pedestrians within the immediate area, the distance of automobile service stations from places of public assembly should be regulated. 
(Code 1974, § 7-2) 
Sec. 22-83. - Minimum number of pumps; storage capacity. 
    No automobile service station shall have less than four pumps or less than 16,000 gallons' storage capacity. 
(Code 1974, § 7-3) 
Sec. 22-84. - Distance between stations. 
    In order to maintain the possible points of conflict for vehicular traffic at a reasonably safe minimum, automobile service stations should be at least 750 feet apart. 
(Code 1974, § 7-4) 
Sec. 22-85. - Location near residential areas. 
    No automobile service station shall be located in such proximity to residential areas that its existence may cause noise, odor, lights, fumes, vibrations, or danger of fire and explosions or constitute a nuisance or a detriment to the general health, welfare and safety of the people in the residential area. 
(Code 1974, § 7-5) 
Sec. 22-86. - Distance from places of public assembly. 
    In order to reduce the possible vehicular traffic hazard to pedestrians within the immediate area, automobile service stations should not be closer than 500 feet to places of public assembly. 
(Code 1974, § 7-6) 
Secs. 22-87-22-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 22-111. - Permit required for construction. 
    No automobile service station shall be constructed or built in the city unless a permit therefor has been obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 7-17) 
Sec. 22-112. - Application procedure; required information. 
    Application for a permit required by this division shall be made to the engineering and building department in such form as shall be prescribed by the department and shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner, and, if the automobile service station is to be leased to another, the same information as to the lessee. 
(2)  A description and plot plan of the site upon which the automobile service station is to be built. 
(3)  The distance of the proposed automobile service station from churches, schools, hospitals and other institutions where large numbers of people congregate. 
(4)  The distance of the proposed automobile service station from existing automobile service stations within a radius of 750 feet in each direction. The distance shall be computed in a straight line from the closest existing pump to the closest proposed new automobile service station site. 
(5)  The zoning classification of the site upon which the proposed automobile service station is to be built. 
(6)  The distance of the proposed automobile service station from the closest residential area. 
(Code 1974, § 7-18) 
Sec. 22-113. - Application fee. 
    The application for a permit required by this division shall be accompanied with the application fee established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 7-19) 
Sec. 22-114. - Investigation of application; recommendations. 
(a)  The engineering and building department shall make an investigation regarding the application for a permit under this division and determine compliance with building and zoning ordinances. It shall also investigate the facts set forth in the application and report its findings in writing to the city council with a recommendation as to granting or denial of the permit and the reasons therefor. 
(b)  The police department, the fire department, the department of public works and the city engineer shall investigate the facts set forth in the application and shall report on the matters to be considered within their respective jurisdictions bearing upon the granting or denying of the permit and shall report their findings to the city council in writing with recommendations as to granting or denial of such permit and the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 7-20) 
Sec. 22-115. - Hearing on application. 
    The city council shall conduct a hearing on an application for a permit required by this division and shall give the applicant seven days' notice of the hearing. 
(Code 1974, § 7-21) 
Sec. 22-116. - Standards for issuance. 
    In granting or denying applications for automobile service station permits, the city council shall consider the following factors and standards: 
(1)  The size of the proposed automobile service station. 
(2)  The capacity of the proposed automobile service station, including the number of pumps, the size of the underground tanks and the required curb cuts. 
(3)  The existence of traffic control devices in the area of the proposed automobile service station, the amount of vehicular traffic, the amount of pedestrian traffic and the proximity to churches, schools, hospitals and other such institutions where large numbers of persons congregate. 
(4)  The proximity to other automobile service stations, the need for additional automobile service stations in the area and whether the construction of additional automobile service stations in the area will tend to force, through economic pressure, the abandonment of existing automobile service stations, thus causing the area to become blighted and run down. 
(5)  The proximity of the proposed automobile service stations to residential areas and any other relevant factors of a similar nature which may be brought to the attention of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 7-22) 
Sec. 22-117. - Issuance or denial. 
    An application for a permit required by this division shall be approved or rejected within 30 days after the hearing held pursuant to this division. If the city council shall reject any application or permit, it shall give its reasons in writing. 
(Code 1974, § 7-23) 
Secs. 22-118-22-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS 

Sec. 22-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Drive-in restaurant means any establishment where food, frozen desserts or beverages are sold to the consumer and where automobile parking space is provided and where such food, frozen desserts or beverages are intended to be consumed in the automobile parked upon the premises or anywhere on the premises either inside or outside of the building. 
(Code 1974, § 15-72) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-142. - License. 
(a)  Required; issuance. No person shall operate a drive-in restaurant without first obtaining a license therefor. Licenses shall be issued in accordance with article II of this chapter. 
(b)  Revocation. Violation of any provision of this Code pertaining to the operation of drive-in restaurants or the refusal to comply with any of the health regulations of the city, after notification by the city engineer, shall be grounds for revocation of a license issued pursuant to this section, after a hearing before the mayor and city council. The licensee shall be given at least 72 hours' notice of the hearing in writing. If personal service of the notice cannot be had on the licensee, the leaving of the notice on the licensed premises with one of the licensee's employees, or posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises, shall be considered sufficient notice of the hearing. 
(Code 1974, §§ 15-73, 15-75) 
Sec. 22-143. - Compliance with applicable regulations; inspections. 
    All drive-in restaurants shall be operated in compliance with all health regulations and provisions of this Code and the licensee shall permit the city engineer or designee to enter upon the premises at all times to make an inspection of the premises. 
(Code 1974, § 15-74) 
Sec. 22-144. - Surfacing and lighting of parking area. 
(a)  Within six months after opening for business, the parking area on the premises of every drive-in restaurant shall be surfaced with a permanent type of pavement. Such pavement shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt or bituminous material, and shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water within the parking area. 
(b)  Where the parking area of any drive-in restaurant is illuminated by electric lights, such illumination as may be provided shall be so arranged as to reflect away from any adjoining residential property. 
(Code 1974, § 15-76) 
Sec. 22-145. - Littering. 
    No person shall place, throw or deposit any waste material upon the outside premises or parking area of a drive-in restaurant or on any street, alley or adjoining property or in the vicinity of a drive-in restaurant, except in adequate receptacles provided for that purpose, nor shall any person licensed under this article permit such conduct. 
(Code 1974, § 15-77) 
Sec. 22-146. - Duty to keep premises free of waste. 
    It shall be the duty of the licensee, manager or person in charge of every drive-in restaurant to keep the premises on which the drive-in restaurant is located, together with the parking area and that portion of any alley adjoining the drive-in restaurant, free from their own rubbish, waste products and debris, including napkins, straws, paper cups and plates, and other waste material. 
(Code 1974, § 15-78) 
Sec. 22-147. - Waste containers required. 
    Each drive-in restaurant shall be provided with a sufficient number of containers of legal type and size in which to deposit all waste materials. 
(Code 1974, § 15-79) 
Sec. 22-148. - Disposal of waste; incinerators. 
    Every drive-in restaurant shall at least once every 24 hours dispose of paper cups, plates, napkins, garbage and other waste materials which tend to create a public nuisance on the premises. Any incinerator which may be installed shall be installed in accordance with this Code and rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 15-80) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 74. 
Sec. 22-149. - Conduct on premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager or person in charge of any drive-in restaurant to cause, create, allow or maintain any nuisance on its parking area whereby the peace, good order or sanitation of the community is disturbed, or persons owning or occupying property in the community are disturbed or annoyed. 
(b)  No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, blow any horn, or make or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or of the community is disturbed. 
(c)  The licensee shall maintain quiet and good order upon the premises of a drive-in restaurant and shall not permit disorderly or immoral conduct or loitering. The licensee shall not cause or create any noise or other nuisance on the parking area of a drive-in restaurant whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or of the community is disturbed. The licensee shall not permit the sounding of horns or other devices that produce loud and harsh noises, and to this end shall post a large sign so that it is plainly legible, notifying all patrons that horn blowing or sounding of other devices is not permitted on the premises to attract attention in order to obtain service. 
(Code 1974, § 15-81) 
Sec. 22-150. - Use of alcoholic beverages on premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any patron of a drive-in restaurant or any person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant, whether in or out of an automobile, to drink any wine, beer or intoxicating liquor except when served inside the building by a drive-in restaurant duly licensed to serve such beverages. 
(b)  The licensee shall cause to be posted suitable signs of sufficient size with legible letters on the outside of the licensed building informing the public that it is unlawful to consume intoxicants within or without cars while upon any outside portion of the premises. 
(c)  The licensee shall not allow intoxicating beverages to be consumed on the premises of a drive-in restaurant except as permitted in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 15-82) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Secs. 22-151-22-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTELS, MOTELS AND INNS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Family means one family unit, members of which are related by consanguinity or by marriage. 
    Hotel means a building or part thereof occupied as a more or less temporary abiding place of individuals where rooms are rented or leased singly for hire, and which has rooms wherein no legal provisions for cooking are made, and in which building there is a general kitchen and dining room for the accommodation of the occupants. 
    Lodginghouse means a building or part thereof, other than a hotel, where lodgings are provided for hire more or less transiently without provisions for meals. 
    Motor court means any establishment where individual cabins, courts, or similar structures or units are let or rented to transients for periods of less than one month. The term "motor court" shall include tourist cabins and motels. 
    Roominghouse means any building occupied as a home or family unit where a certain room or rooms, in excess of those used by members of the immediate family, are leased, rented and/or occupied by one or more persons who are not members of the family. The term "roominghouse" shall also include tourist homes, bed and breakfasts, and tourist accommodations other than motor courts. 
(Code 1974, § 18-191) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-172. - Authority to make additional regulations. 
    The engineering and building department, fire department and police department are hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, copies of which shall be available for distribution to all interested parties. 
(Code 1974, § 18-192) 
Sec. 22-173. - Health requirements. 
    Premises licensed pursuant to this article shall at all times be occupied, kept and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of the building and housing ordinances and regulations of the city and the housing law of the state. Where under the terms of any rental agreement it is the duty of any licensee to furnish linens, the licensee shall provide all beds with regulation sheets and pillowcases, which shall be laundered at least once each week; provided that each new guest or patron shall be furnished with clean sheets and pillowcases. Where towels are provided the towels shall be individual towels, furnished clean to each guest or patron, and laundered at least once a week, and no common towels shall be permitted. 
(Code 1974, § 18-193) 
Sec. 22-174. - Register of occupants. 
    Every holder of a license required by this article shall provide and maintain, by digital process or bound volume, the name and home address of any person, other than members of the family as listed in the application for the license, occupying the premises or any part thereof. The register shall also show the make and license number of any motor vehicle owned or used by each registrant. The register shall be maintained in the premises in plain view and in a convenient place near the main entrance and shall be submitted upon demand to any official or police officer of the city or to any police officer of the state. 
(Code 1974, § 18-194) 
Sec. 22-175. - Rental restrictions. 
(a)  No room or unit of premises licensed under the provisions of this article shall be rented or let for a period of less than 24 hours, nor shall any such room or unit be rented or let to more than one tenant for each 24-hour period. The right to occupy any such room or unit shall not be assigned, transferred or sublet. No licensee shall approve, suffer or permit the assignment, transfer or subletting of any such room or unit. 
(b)  No such room or unit shall be used for any unlawful act or purpose. No person shall occupy or use as a guest or a tenant or be permitted to occupy or use as a guest or tenant any motel or other accommodations for a period of more than one month in any calendar year. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any motel, hotel, inn or other similar business establishment offering overnight lodgings, or its agents, servants, employees or officers, to permit or allow any minor person 17 years of age or younger to rent, lease, occupy or acquire a room housed in any such establishment, unless such person registers with a parent, legal guardian or other adult who rents a room for a person 17 years of age or younger and allows that minor to occupy the room; nor shall any adult rent a room for the purpose of allowing the minor to conduct a party without first notifying the owner of the hotel, motel, inn or other establishment of his intended purpose and, further, providing the full addresses and phone numbers of the adults who will be chaperoning the party, as well as the full names, addresses and phone numbers of the individuals who will be responsible for any claims, losses or damages that may be incurred should there be damage or destruction to the premises. 
(Code 1974, § 18-195) 
Sec. 22-176. - Payment of rent; damaging premises; permitting occupancy by unregistered persons. 
    Occupants of premises licensed pursuant to this article shall not do or perform any act therein which will in any way damage the premises, nor shall they permit the occupancy of any room or portion of the premises let to them by persons other than those registered with the licensee, without the express knowledge and consent of the licensee. No person shall vacate any room or any premises or part thereof without having fully paid all items of rentals due for his occupancy thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 18-196) 
Secs. 22-177-22-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 22-201. - Required. 
    No person shall use, operate or occupy or cause to be used, operated or occupied any building, structure or premises within the city as a hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, motor court or any combination thereof, unless there is in his possession and posted on such building, structure or premises in a conspicuous place an unrevoked license of current issue as provided in this division. 
(Code 1974, § 18-197) 
Sec. 22-202. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a license required by this division shall be made annually in writing to the engineering and building department, upon a form provided for that purpose. The application shall include the applicant's name and address, his interests in the building and the location thereof; the name and address of the owner of record of the building and premises; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers thereof; a list of the rooms, suites or beds therein, indicating the size of such rooms, the number of beds in each room, sanitary facilities and the maximum number of persons to whom it is desired to rent the premises when rented at full occupancy; the names, ages and relationship of all persons occupying the building as members of the family, and a description of the accommodations available for such family occupancy; and such other information as may be required by the regulations authorized in section 22-172. 
(b)  A new application shall be made in the event of a sale or transfer of ownership. 
(Code 1974, § 18-198) 
Sec. 22-203. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a license required by this division in proper form, the engineering and building department shall refer the application to the county health department, the fire department and the police department, each of whom shall make an inspection and investigation, together with a written report and recommendation. The object of such investigation and inspection is to determine whether or not the building and premises are properly located, constructed and equipped for the purpose for which it is desired to license the premises, whether or not the applicant is a person of good moral character, and other facts and circumstances that may be required under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 18-200) 
Sec. 22-204. - Issuance. 
    Upon filing with the engineering and building department a proper application for a license required by this division together with the required fee, and upon the filing of written reports from the county health department, the fire department and the police department recommending the issuance of such license, the engineering and building department is hereby authorized to issue to the applicant in the name of the city a license subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 18-201) 
Sec. 22-205. - Fees. 
    Each application for a license or change in application under this division shall be accompanied by the fee established from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 18-199) 
Sec. 22-206. - Contents. 
    Each license issued under this division shall contain the name and address of the licensee, and a brief description of the premises for which the license was issued, including the type of accommodation, maximum number of rooms or units that may be rented, maximum number of persons permitted to occupy such premises at any one time and such other information as may be required by this article. 
(Code 1974, § 18-202) 
Sec. 22-207. - Expiration. 
    All licenses issued under this division shall expire on the last day of the year, unless sooner revoked or suspended. 
(Code 1974, § 18-204) 
Sec. 22-208. - Transfer. 
    No license issued under this division shall be transferred or assigned. 
(Code 1974, § 18-205) 
Sec. 22-209. - Display. 
    Each license issued pursuant to this division shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises for which it was issued, in accordance with the regulations of the police department. 
(Code 1974, § 18-203) 
Sec. 22-210. - Denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Any license required under this division may be refused by the engineering and building department, and any license issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked or suspended by the mayor or engineering and building department at any time, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for license, license renewal or license transfer. 
(2)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the operation of the licensee's business. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Any violation of any of the ordinances of the city. 
(5)  Any violation of any of the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(6)  Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public. 
(7)  Any failure or inability on the part of the applicant to meet and satisfy the requirements and provisions of this article. 
(b)  Written notice of refusal, revocation or suspension, stating the cause therefor, shall be delivered to the applicant or licensee personally, or mailed to the address stated in his application. 
(Code 1974, § 18-206) 
Sec. 22-211. - Appeals. 
    Any person whose license issued pursuant to this division is revoked or suspended and any person whose request for a license is refused shall have the right to a hearing before the city council, provided a written request therefor is filed with the engineering and building department within ten days following the delivery or mailing of notice of revocation or suspension or within ten days following such refusal. The city council shall have the right to affirm and sustain any refusal to issue a license, or any revocation or suspension of a license, and the city council may grant or reinstate any license. 
(Code 1974, § 18-207) 
Secs. 22-212-22-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MASSAGE PARLORS AND SCHOOLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Massage parlor means any building, room, place or establishment, other than a regular licensed hospital or dispensary, where nonmedical and nonsurgical manipulative exercises are practiced upon the human body, for other than cosmetic or beautifying purposes, with or without the use of mechanical or bathing devices, by anyone not a licensed physician or surgeon or of a similarly registered status. 
(Code 1974, § 18-173) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-242. - Enforcement; inspections. 
    Every massage parlor shall, at reasonable business hours, be open for inspection by the city's health officer or other designated official. The city engineer and his designees shall have general sanitary supervision of massage parlors, and the moral supervision of massage parlors shall be directed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1974, § 18-179) 
Sec. 22-243. - Registration of apprentices and students. 
(a)  Apprentices or students shall, upon entering the practices defined in this article, register with the city clerk and shall be subject to the city's rules and regulations, whereupon they shall be given a certificate of registration, which shall be displayed in or near the place where such student or apprentice is engaged. Each person so registering shall be at least 18 years of age and or good moral character and shall have an education equivalent to the completion of grammar school. 
(b)  No apprentice will receive registration from the city clerk unless he is receiving his training in a school licensed under this article or is employed in an establishment under the instruction of a licensed operator. 
(Code 1974, § 18-178) 
Sec. 22-244. - Operation; duties of licensees. 
    Licensees under this article shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  Service in massage parlors shall be limited to exercise, baths and massage. Medical treatment of any kind shall not be given to any patron without a prescription from a registered physician. The use of heat lamps and sunray lamps only will be permitted. 
(2)  No person who has any visible symptoms of a communicable disease, such as a rash, discharge or fever, or who is complaining of a sore throat, may be attended by any licensee or any person engaged in the practice of massage. 
(3)  Advertising that there is a nurse in attendance is prohibited unless there is a registered graduate or practical nurse constantly in attendance during the business hours of the massage parlor. 
(4)  Advertising that there is a doctor in attendance is prohibited unless there is a registered physician constantly in attendance during the business hours of the massage parlor. 
(5)  Licensees shall exercise every precaution for the safety of patrons. They shall watch for early signs of fatigue or weakness and immediately discontinue whatever form of service is being given upon the appearance of such signs. 
(6)  No massage parlor shall be conducted in direct connection with living quarters, unless especially approved by the health officer. 
(7)  The premises used for a massage parlor shall be well lighted and ventilated. They shall be kept clean, and the furniture and equipment shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. There shall be an adequate supply of running hot and cold water during business hours. Bathing devices shall be thoroughly cleaned before the use of each patron. 
(8)  All robes, towels, blankets and linens furnished for the use of one patron shall be thoroughly laundered before being offered to another. 
(9)  Uniforms or garments worn by an owner, instructor, operator or apprentice while attending patrons shall be of washable material and shall be kept in clean condition. The sleeves shall not reach below the elbow. 
(10)  The skin of the hands of those attending patrons shall be clean and in healthy condition, and the nails shall be kept short. The hands shall be washed thoroughly before giving the patron any attention. 
(11)  Licensees shall be restricted in the exercise of their license to the places set forth in their certificate; except that the giving of massages, baths and exercise in the patron's place of residence is permitted. 
(12)  Licensees shall notify the city clerk of any change of the name or address of their home or businesses. 
(Code 1974, § 18-180) 
Sec. 22-245. - Distribution and posting of rules and regulations. 
    The city clerk shall cause copies of the rules and regulations provided by this article to be available to all licensees and members of the public at the city's offices. Every licensee shall cause such rules and regulations to be placed in a public place in each establishment or shop regulated by this article. 
(Code 1974, § 18-181) 
Secs. 22-246-22-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 22-271. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall own or operate any massage parlor without first obtaining an annual license for such parlor. 
(b)  No person shall engage in the practice of massage therapy as defined in Public Act 2008, 471, in any massage parlor, unless that person is licensed by the State of Michigan, pursuant to Public Act 471, and no person or operator shall employ any person to engage in such practices unless such person is also so licensed. This section shall not prohibit an apprentice who is duly registered under this article, from engaging in such practices. 
(c)  Instructors in any school in which the practices defined in Public Act 471 are taught, shall also obtain a business license under this section. 
(d)  No owner or conductor of any such school shall, himself, unless a licensed instructor, engage in the teaching of such practices, or employ any person to teach in such school unless such person is a licensed instructor. 
(Code 1974, § 18-174; Ord. No. 718, § 1, 4-20-2009) 
Sec. 22-272. - Application; qualifications and examination of applicant; prerequisites for issuance. 
(a)  The applicant for a license under the provisions of this division shall file with the city clerk a written application therefor, under oath, on a form prescribed and supplied by the city, and shall submit satisfactory proof of the required age, educational qualifications and good moral character. 
(b)  Applicants for a license under this division shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  Operators or practitioners shall be at least 18 years of age and of good moral character, and have an education equivalent to the completion of grammar school and shall have not less than one year's practice, as an apprentice, under the supervision of a registered operator or instructor whose course of instruction is approved by the State of Michigan or other state whose program is recognized by Michigan or who shall have passed an examination arranged by the State of Michigan or other state whose examination is recognized by Michigan. 
(2)  The owner or conductor of any massage parlor shall be of good moral character or, if a corporation, its officers shall be of good moral character. The premises on which such establishment is located shall be sanitary and suitable for the conduct of such business. 
(3)  The owner or conductor of a school (and, if a corporation, its officers) for any of the practices defined in this article shall be of good moral character. The premises on which such school is to be conducted shall be sanitary and suitable for the purpose and meet the approval of the city's health officer as to sanitary condition. 
(4)  An instructor in a school for any of the practices defined in this article shall be a person of good moral character, shall be a graduate of a grammar school and shall have been a licensed operator or practitioner for a period of at least one year and pass an examination given in accordance with the rules and regulations of this state. 
(5)  Each applicant for a license under this article shall present a certificate from a registered physician, certifying that he is free from communicable disease. 
(c)  The examination conducted by the city engineer or his designee pursuant to this section shall be in accord with this article and any rules subsequently adopted. The examination may include practical demonstrations and oral or written tests consistent with the practical and theoretical requirements of the occupation. 
(d)  The city engineer shall, after the required examination, certify approval or disapproval of the applicant for a license under this division. If the applicant is disapproved, he shall state in writing the reasons therefor, and give a copy of such reasons for disapproval to the city clerk and the applicant. The city engineer's certificate of approval shall be delivered to the city clerk, along with the required license fee, prior to issuance of the license. 
(e)  A license shall be issued to the owner of a massage parlor only if the applicant agrees to conform to the rules and regulations set forth in this article and to employ, as operators or practitioners, only those persons who are licensed under this article. The license shall be granted only after an inspection has been made by a representative of the health office and the type, location and sanitary condition of the premises and equipment approved. 
(Code 1974, § 18-175) 
Sec. 22-273. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees for licenses required by this division shall be as established by the city council. All such fees paid shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(b)  The following shall require licensure by the city, but be subject to reduced licensure fees due to certification by, and participation in, nationally recognized, self-regulating organizations: 
(1)  Persons practicing massage who hold certificates from, and are in good standing with, one or more of the following nationally recognized body work organizations and at all times carry a policy of professional liability insurance with minimum coverage limits of $25,000.00: 
a.  American Massage Therapy Association; 
b.  International Myomassethics Federation; 
c.  Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals; and 
d.  Other such organizations with equivalent professional membership standards. 
(2)  Parlors operating under the direction and supervision of and employing only persons who meet the requirements set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 18-176) 
Sec. 22-274. - Display; denial or revocation. 
(a)  All license certificates issued under this division shall be displayed by the licensee at or near the place where such licensee is engaging in the practice or occupation for which he has obtained a license. 
(b)  The city clerk is hereby authorized to refuse to issue a license under this division, or to revoke the license, upon satisfactory proof that the applicant or licensee is not qualified as provided by the terms of this article, or is not a proper or suitable person to conduct or engage in the practices defined in this article, or if he has violated any of the rules of the health officer or has been convicted of a felony or of a violation of any of the laws of the state or city with reference to alcoholic beverages, drugs, sanitation or prostitution. 
(c)  Failure to conform with the rules and regulations and with the provisions of this article shall be considered sufficient cause for a request to the city clerk by the health officer for the revocation of the license. 
(Code 1974, § 18-177) 
Secs. 22-275-22-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Offering articles for sale; peddling and soliciting, § 70-108; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any person who goes about from place to place, selling or offering for sale goods, wares, merchandise and all kinds of property, traveling on foot or in vehicles, and selling from house to house or by crying his wares from the street. Such term shall include the terms "hawkers" and "hucksters." 
    Person means each and every individual, whether operating in an individual capacity or on behalf of an entity or organization, who engages in sales transactions with members of the public as a peddler or transient merchant. 
    Transient merchant means any person engaged temporarily in the retail sale of goods, wares or merchandise, in any place in the city, and who, for the purpose of conducting such business, occupies or uses any lot, building, room or structure of any kind. Such term shall include itinerant merchants, itinerant vendors and persons engaged in selling goods, wares and merchandise at retail in the city who are not on the tax rolls of the city. Any person who commences a business of selling goods, wares and merchandise at retail within the city after January 1 in any year who is not assessed on the tax roll for the year, or who occupies or uses the licensed premises for a period of less than 180 days without being on the tax rolls of the city, shall be deemed a transient merchant. 
(Code 1974, § 18-64) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-302. - Vehicles. 
(a)  Peddlers' movements shall be timed and executed so as to cause a minimum of interference with vehicular and pedestrian traffic. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to park, stand or stop a vehicle for the purpose of making any sale within 200 feet of any school property during school hours. 
(b)  A peddler's vehicle shall be equipped with a receptacle for disposing of wrappers, papers and envelopes, or other containers. 
(Code 1974, § 18-65) 
Sec. 22-303. - Cleanup of litter. 
    A peddler shall pick up any wrappers, papers or envelopes which remain after any sale or delivery of his products. 
(Code 1974, § 18-66) 
Sec. 22-304. - Business hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler or transient merchant to sell or offer for sale any merchandise on private property which is posted with signage indicating "No Trespassing", "No Canvassing", "No peddlers or Agents" or "No Advertisements" or similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises, is prohibited however, it shall be the duty of the owner, landlord or person in control of any premises remaining vacant for a period more than five days to post in a conspicuous position on the premises such signage as is indicated by the section. 
(Code 1974, § 18-67; Ord. No. 769, § 1, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 791, § 2, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 22-305. - Restrictions on areas of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any peddler or transient merchant to operate in a congested area when his operations might impede traffic or inconvenience the public. 
(b)  No peddler or transient merchant may sell or offer for sale any merchandise within the areas designated by the city council during special events designated by the city council, including the Mid-Summer Festival, the Memorial Day Parade, the Independence Day Fireworks or the Christmas Parade, without the prior approval of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 18-68) 
Sec. 22-306. - Seizure and impoundment of goods. 
(a)  If a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that a person is engaging in business as a peddler or transient merchant in violation of this article, the officer may immediately take into custody and impound all goods offered for sale by the peddler or transient merchant until the matter has been adjudicated by a court of proper jurisdiction. 
(b)  The peddler or transient merchant whose goods have been impounded may obtain his goods prior to adjudication of the matter by paying, either in cash or by security bond, the sum of $500.00 or an amount equal to the value of the impounded property, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1974, § 18-79) 
Secs. 22-307-22-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Veteran's license for peddler, MCL 4.1241 et seq. 

Sec. 22-331. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler or transient merchant in the city without first having obtained a license from the clerk. 
(Code 1974, § 18-69) 
Sec. 22-332. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Any person selling vegetables, eggs, fruits and farm products of any kind or description which have been raised or produced by him, or which are being sold from an area which has been specially designated by council resolution as a farm products sales area, and to which area such person has been granted access by the council after written request to the council for such access shall be exempt from the license requirements under this division. To be entitled to this exemption, a person must make an affidavit to such effect to the city clerk. Upon receipt of such an affidavit, the city clerk shall issue a certificate of exemption stating that its holder is exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Any person who is approved by the Mid-Summer Festival Committee and pays the required fee, for the duration of the Mid-Summer Festival only, and only within the Midsummer Festival area, shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1974, § 18-74) 
Sec. 22-333. - Application. 
    A person desiring a license as a peddler or transient merchant required by the provisions of this division shall file a sworn application, in duplicate, with the city clerk giving the following information and submittals: 
(1)  The applicant's name. 
(2)  The applicant's permanent home address. 
(3)  The applicant's local address. 
(4)  A general physical description of the applicant. 
(5)  A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold. 
(6)  The name and address of the applicant's employer and credentials establishing the exact relationship to the employer. 
(7)  The length of time the applicant expects to do business in the city. 
(8)  The place where the goods or property are proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, the place where the goods or property are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(10)  A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days prior to the filing of the application showing the applicant's head and shoulders in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(11)  The applicant's fingerprints. 
(12)  The names of at least two property owners in the county who will certify to the applicant's good character and business responsibility or, in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence of the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate character and business responsibility. 
(13)  The applicant's federal tax identification number. 
(14)  The applicant's state sales tax license number, when required by the state. 
(15)  Authorization to use the premises by the property owner on whose premises the applicant will conduct business and written assumption of responsibility for the conduct of the applicant and his employees or agents while on the premises, which shall be signed and notarized by the owner. 
(16)  A notarized affirmation by the applicant that the information contained in the application is true and accurate. 
(17)  Such other information as may be required by the city clerk to effectively administer the program. 
(Code 1974, § 18-70) 
Sec. 22-334. - Making false application. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false application or misrepresentation in an application prepared and submitted under this division. 
(Code 1974, § 18-78) 
Sec. 22-335. - Investigation; issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as the chief deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application the chief's disapproval and reasons for the disapproval and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and the business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application the chief's approval and return the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue the license. A minimum of three business days shall be allowed for the processing of any application. 
(Code 1974, § 18-71) 
Sec. 22-336. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for a license required by this division shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 18-72) 
Sec. 22-337. - Tag or license plate. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue to a person licensed pursuant to this division a tag or license plate which shall bear the license number and the words "Licensed Peddler, City of Trenton." The licensee shall display such a tag on any vehicle used in the conduct of his business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this division, in the case of a transient merchant, to fail to at all times display his license while conducting business or, in the case of a peddler, to refuse to exhibit his license, upon request, to any private citizen or police officer. 
(Code 1974, § 18-73) 
Sec. 22-338. - Special permit for nonprofit enterprises. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue special permits after city council approval, without the payment of any licensee fees or other charges therefor, to any person or organization for the conducting or operation of a nonprofit enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when he finds that the applicant operates without private profit, for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or religious purpose. 
(b)  The city council may set such restrictions on applicants as it may find necessary. 
(c)  An applicant for a special permit shall submit an application therefor to the city clerk, upon forms prescribed by the city clerk, and shall furnish such additional information as shall be required by the city clerk for a determination that the applicant comes within the provisions of this section. 
(d)  A person granted a special permit under the provisions of this section shall be exempt from the requirements of this article relative to application for a license but shall conform to all other applicable rules, regulations and provisions of this Code. 
(e)  Persons under 18 years of age shall not be eligible to solicit for any school or recognized charitable or religious benefit unless an adult is in charge and is responsible to supervise such persons in following the guidelines of the city council for such sales. 
(Code 1974, § 18-75) 
Sec. 22-339. - Denial or revocation. 
(a)  A license required by this division may be denied any applicant or revoked by the city clerk for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made when engaging in business as a peddler or transient merchant. 
(3)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement as to any product or service offered for sale by merchant. 
(4)  Any violation of this article or any other ordinance of the city. 
(5)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(6)  Conducting the business of peddling or commercial solicitation in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Whenever the city clerk shall deny or revoke any license, a notice specifying the cause of such denial or revocation shall be provided to the applicant or licensee at the address provided. 
(Code 1974, § 18-76) 
Sec. 22-340. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the city clerk in the imposition, denial, or revocation of a license under this division may, within ten days, file a written request with the city clerk for a hearing before the city council. The city council shall set a time and place for a hearing, and notice thereof shall be given to the appellant. Upon such hearing, the council shall review the clerk's action and determine whether the licensure action should be affirmed or reversed, and such determination shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1974, § 18-77) 
Secs. 22-341-22-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 705-21, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2018, repealed §§ 22-361-22-371, 22-391-22-403, 22-421-22-432, and 22-451-22-454, which pertained to taxicabs and derived from Code 1974, §§ 32-16, 32-18, 32-19, 32-24-32-31, 32-37-32-49 and 32-55-32-67. 

Secs. 22-361-22-470. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

Sec. 22-471. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    Agent or employee means a person who, for compensation or valuable consideration, is employed either directly or indirectly by a dealer. 
    Dealer means any person, corporation, partnership, or association, which, in whole or in part, engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public within this state. 
    Gold means elemental gold having an atomic weight of 196.967 and the chemical element symbol of Au, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
    Internet drop-off store means a person, corporation, or firm that contracts with other persons, corporations, or firms to offer its precious items for sale, purchase, consignment, or trade through means of an internet website and meets the conditions described in MCL 445.483(3). 
    Jewelry means an ornamental item made of a material that includes a precious gem. 
    Local governmental unit means a city, village, township, or county. 
    Local police agency means the police agency of the city, village, or township, or if none, the county sheriff of the county, in which the dealer conducts business. 
    Platinum means elemental platinum having an atomic weight of 195.09 and the chemical element symbol of Pt, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
    Precious gem means a diamond, alexandrite, ruby, sapphire, opal, amethyst, emerald, aquamarine, morganite, garnet, jadeite, topaz, tourmaline, turquoise, or pearl. 
    Precious item means jewelry, a precious gem, or an item containing gold, silver, or platinum. Precious item does not include the following: 
(1)  Coins, commemorative medals, and tokens struck by, or in behalf of, a government or private mint. 
(2)  Bullion bars and discs of the type traded by banks and commodity exchanges. 
(3)  Items at the time they are purchased directly from a dealer registered under this article, a manufacturer, or a wholesaler who purchased them directly from a manufacturer. 
(4)  Industrial machinery or equipment. 
(5)  An item being returned to or exchanged at the dealer where the item was purchased and that is accompanied by a valid sales receipt. 
(6)  An item which is received for alteration, redesign, or repair in a manner that does not substantially change its use and returned directly to the customer. 
(7)  An item which does not have a jeweler's identifying mark or a serial mark and which the dealer purchases for less than $5.00. 
(8)  Scrap metal which contains incidental traces of gold, silver, or platinum that are recoverable as a by-product. 
(9)  Jewelry which a customer trades for other jewelry having a greater value, and which difference in value is paid by the customer. 
    Silver means elemental silver having an atomic weight of 107.869 and the chemical element symbol of Ag, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 1, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 22-472. - Dealer; certificate of registration required; application; fee; disclosures; dealer, agent, or employee convicted of misdemeanor or felony; compliance with local ordinances; issuance and posting of certificate; notification of change in name or address. 
(a)  A dealer shall not conduct business in a local governmental unit in this state unless the dealer has obtained a valid certificate of registration from that local governmental unit or local police agency. 
(b)  This section does not require an internet drop-off store, as defined in MCL 445.483(3), or a person engaged in the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of precious items for himself or herself, to obtain a registration under this act. 
(c)  A dealer shall apply to the local police agency for a certificate of registration, and pay a fee not to exceed $50.00 to cover the reasonable cost of processing and issuing the certificate of registration, by disclosing the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and thumbprint of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address under which the applicant does business. 
(3)  The name, address, and thumbprint of all agents or employees of the dealer. With 24 hours after hiring a new employee, the dealer shall forward to the local police agency the name, address, and thumbprint of the new employee. 
(d)  A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer who is convicted of a misdemeanor under this article or under section 535 of the Michigan penal code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.535, shall not be permitted to operate as a dealer within this state for a period of one year after conviction. 
(e)  A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer who is convicted of a felony under this article or under section 535 of the Michigan penal code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.535, shall not be permitted to operate as a dealer for a period of five years after the conviction. 
(f)  This article shall not be construed to excuse a dealer from complying with the local zoning ordinance or any local ordinance regulating commercial activities. 
(g)  Upon receipt of the application described in subsection (c), the police department shall issue a certificate of registration in accordance with this section. 
(h)  Upon receipt of the certificate of registration from the police department, the dealer shall post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer's place of business. 
(i)  Not less than ten days before a dealer changes the name or address under which the dealer does business, the dealer shall notify the police department of the change. 
(j)  A certificate of registration shall expire two years from the date of registration, unless renewed prior thereto at no additional cost to the applicant. Renewals following the expiration date shall require re-registration and payment of fees set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 1, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 22-473. - Permanent record of each transaction; forms; copies, information required; numbering; confidentiality; retention period; size of form; definition. 
(a)  A dealer shall maintain a permanent record of each transaction, on record of transaction forms provided for in subsection (5), legibly written in ink in the English language. Each record of transaction form shall be filled out in quadruplicate by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer. One copy of the form shall go to the police department pursuant to subsection (c); one copy shall go to the customer; and one copy shall be retained by the dealer pursuant to subsection (e). At the time a dealer receives or purchases a precious item, the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer shall insure that the following information is recorded accurately on a record of transaction form: 
(1)  The dealer certificate of registration number. 
(2)  A general description of the precious item or precious items received or purchased, including the type of metal or precious gem. In the case of watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the number of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description. 
(3)  The date of the transaction. 
(4)  The name of the person conducting the transaction. 
(5)  The name, date of birth, driver's license number or state of Michigan personal identification card number, and street and house number of the customer, together with a legible imprint of the right thumb of the customer, or if that is not possible, of the left thumb or a finger of the customer. However, the thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on the record of transaction form retained by the dealer. The thumbprint or fingerprint shall be made available to the police department during the course of a police investigation involving a precious item or items described on the record of transaction. After a period of one year from the date of the record of transaction, if a police investigation involving a precious item or items described on the record of transaction has not occurred, the dealer and the police department holding a copy of the record of transaction shall destroy, and not keep a permanent record of, the record of transaction. A dealer who goes out of business or changes his or her business address to another jurisdiction either within or out of this state shall transmit the records of all transactions made by the dealer within one year before his or her closing or moving, to the local police agency. 
(6)  The price to be paid by the dealer for the precious item or previous items. 
(7)  The form of payment made to the customer; check, money order, bank draft, or cash. If the payment is by check, money order, or bank draft, the dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order, or bank draft. 
(8)  The customer's signature. 
(b)  The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number 1 and the calendar year. 
(c)  Within 48 hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item, the dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police department and, if the record of transaction form indicates that the customer resides outside the jurisdiction of the police department, shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police department. The record of transaction forms received by a police department shall not be open to inspection by the general public. The police department holding record of transaction forms shall be responsible for insuring the confidentiality of the record of transaction forms and insuring that the record of transaction forms are used only for the purpose for which they were received. 
(d)  The record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious item received shall be open to an inspection by the city or county prosecuting attorney, the police department, and the Michigan state police, at all times during the ordinary business hours of the dealer. As a condition of doing business, a dealer is considered to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection. The record of transaction forms of a dealer shall not be open to inspection by the general public. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, each record of a transaction shall be retained by the dealer for not less than one year after the transaction to which the record pertains. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 1, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 22-474. - Retaining previous item for nine calendar days; alteration. 
    A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer for nine calendar days after it was received, without any form of alteration other than that required to make an accurate appraisal of its value. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 1, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 22-475. - Prohibited conduct. 
    A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer shall not: 
(1)  Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person who is less than 18 years of age or any person known by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen property within the preceding five years, whether the person is acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another. 
(2)  Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person unless that person presents a valid driver's license or a valid state of Michigan personal identification card. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 1, 6-16-2008) 
Secs. 22-476-22-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PRODUCTION FILMING 

Sec. 22-481. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, m otion picture, television, radio and photographic production means all activity attendant to staging or shooting (video taping or filming or digital recording) commercial motion pictures, television shows, programs or commercials, and to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or use for a commercial purpose where the photographer sets up stationary equipment on public or private property or in the public right-of-way in any one location for longer than five consecutive minutes. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-482. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall use any public right-of-way, or any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of producing, broadcasting, taking or making any commercial motion picture, television, radio or photographic production as defined in section 22-481 unless he/she shall have first made application for and obtained, as prescribed in this article, a permit for each instance. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Current news productions, which includes reporters, photographers or camera persons in the employment of a newspaper, news service, broadcasting station or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting of news events; 
(2)  Productions which are conducted by the city's public, education and government access organizations, or by or at the direction of the city; 
(3)  Productions which are conducted within legally established commercial motion picture/television/radio/ photography studios; 
(4)  Video or multimedia broadcast or transmission of a live performance within a live entertainment venue on large-screen monitors; or 
(5)  Private events filmed or photographed for non-commercial purposes, such as private parties or weddings. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-483. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit to conduct motion picture, television, radio and photographic production activities under the provisions of this article shall make application on the appropriate form provided by the city administrator or his/her designee, or by furnishing the required information in person or by first class mail, facsimile, or the internet to the city administrator or his/her designee. The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, hold harmless agreements and insurance certificates required by this article before it will be processed. If the application satisfies the criteria of this chapter, the permit shall be issued within four working days of submittal or within five working days of submittal if the activity requires traffic control in excess of three minutes or within seven working days of submittal if activities require road closures, or include stunts or special effects. 
(b)  The applicant for a permit required by this article shall supply the following information on the application: 
(1)  The name, mailing address and phone number of the person making the application, along with the name and contact information for the location administrator. Where the person making the application is a partnership, corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all partners, officers and directors or members; 
(2)  The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed activity is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective permittee, he or she shall submit an affidavit from the owner indicating the owner's consent to the use of the site for the proposed activity; 
(3)  A statement of the kind, character, and type of proposed motion picture, television, radio and photographic production; 
(4)  The dates and hours during which the proposed motion picture, television, radio and photographic production is to be conducted; 
(5)  An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the motion picture, television, radio and photographic production for each day it is conducted; 
(6)  Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, as follows: 
a.  A processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for the staff time required to evaluate the application and establish conditions of approval. The processing fee shall be waived for charitable and nonprofit organizations which qualify under section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code. The processing fee is non-refundable; 
b.  A daily property use fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to compensate the city for the use of public property and its unavailability for ordinary and usual purposes resulting from the filming activity; 
c.  A monitoring fee to reimburse the city for staff time required to monitor the filming activity, and for reasonable costs for other city services or equipment approved for use during such activities, in an amount as determined at the time of the city's review of permit application. 
(7)  . The processing fee and the property use fee shall be waived for the following: 
a.  Productions conducted by a cable television company operating under a franchise granted by the city which are not conducted on public property, do not interfere with public right-of-ways, and which involve fewer than two motor vehicles; 
b.  Productions for wholly charitable or educational purposes and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly; and 
c.  Student filming-productions directed or produced by a person currently enrolled in courses related to the production. 
(c)  Each application for a permit required by this article shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective permittee's plans to provide for the following: 
(1)  The size or area of the property to be used, including a sketch of the filming site showing placement of work trucks, location of production vehicles; 
(2)  Sketch of the "base camp" if any, showing any off-street locations for crew parking, honeywagon, catering, and non-essential production vehicles; 
(3)  Traffic control plan of the exact filming location, listing roads or lanes to be closed, if any; 
(4)  Description of the duration of the proposed activity and daily hours of operation; 
(5)  Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal; 
(6)  Letter of notification and signatures from businesses/neighborhoods impacted by filming if required by the city administrator or his/her designee; and 
(7)  Insurance and bonding arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-484. - Investigation of application. 
    Upon receipt by the city administrator or his/her designee, copies of the application for a permit required by this article shall be forwarded to the police chief, fire chief, community development department, and to such other appropriate public officials as the city administrator or his/her designee deems necessary. Such officers, departments and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within four days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the city administrator or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-485. - Issuance requirements. 
(a)  In processing an application for a production filming permit required by this article the city shall, at a minimum, require the following: 
(1)  Security personnel. The permittee shall employ at his own expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the location of the filming activity and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of the filming activity. No permit shall be issued unless the police chief or his/her designee is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the permittee for the duration of the production filming. 
(2)  Notification. The permittee or his/her designee shall notify affected residents, occupants and businesses, in advance of filming, and as instructed by the city administrator or his/her designee, of the duration and location of filming activities, including information about planned special effects, road and lane closures, "no parking" requests, sidewalk usage and the time that any barricades will be placed on the street and/or sidewalk. 
(3)  Access. Production vehicles may not block parking lot access drives, fire hydrants, or be parked in fire lanes, and must allow a minimum of 20 feet of clearance between vehicles parked on either side of the road for emergency response vehicles to pass. 
(4)  Base camps. Base camps may not be located on a public street. Only the necessary production vehicles (i.e. grip and light trucks) may be parked on a public street, if necessary, at the filming location. Crew parking, honeywagon, catering, and other non-essential production vehicles shall be at a predetermined location. 
(5)  Insurance. As a condition of issuing a permit under this article, the permittee shall furnish insurance in an amount to be determined by the city administrator but in no event in an amount less than $1,000,000.00 to protect the city against claims of third persons for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and to indemnify the city for damage to the city property arising out of the permittee's activities. An additional minimum of $5,000,000.00 of such general liability insurance coverage shall be required in the event motor vehicles, aircraft, helicopters, explosives or pyrotechnics are used in the activity. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard general special endorsement form or the certificate of insurance (public liability) form provided by the city administrator or his/her designee. The applicant shall also submit verification that adequate worker's compensation insurance coverage is maintained. 
(6)  Bonding. Before the issuance of a permit, the permittee shall deposit a sum of money in cash, in an amount of $500.00 or in any higher amount determined by the city administrator or his/her designee to be reasonably required under the circumstances. The bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the permittee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this article and all applicable provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the city, its agents, officers, and employees and the city council against any and all loss, injury or damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the filming activity and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining the filming site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash, or other waste resultant from the filming activity. 
(7)  Fire protection. The permittee shall at his/her own expense take adequate steps as determined by the fire chief to ensure fire protection. 
(8)  Hold harmless agreement. The permittee shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of any permit. 
(9)  Other conditions. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the city administrator may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section and to, safety, welfare and property of attendants or of citizens of the city, including a limitation on the duration of the permit and the location of activities thereunder. 
(b)  In processing an application for a permit required by this article, the city administrator, or his/her designee, shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he/she finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring property or unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. Adequate advance notice of any street closure shall be given. 
(2)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant. 
(3)  The activity does not propose to include obscene matter or an obscene performance and will not involve conduct in violation of state, local, or federal laws, rules, or regulations, including 1984 PA 343, being MCL 752.361 to 752.374. 
(4)  At the determination of the city administrator or his/her designee as well as the city police, fire and community development departments, that the condition of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all property safety precautions will be taken as determined by the heads of the aforementioned departments or their designees. 
(5)  The permit shall not authorize the production of a film that in any manner requires the use of property owned by or under the control of the city in violation of 2008 PA 84, prohibiting the production of a film that includes obscene matter or an obscene performance or that requires that individually identifiable records be created and maintained for every performer provided in 18 USC 2557. The city reserves the right to review all proposed scripts for any production filming activities. 
(6)  The decision of the city administrator or his/her designee to issue, conditionally issue, or deny a permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five working days of the decision by requesting a hearing before the city council at the next available meeting. Where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a permit and where a permit is denied, notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail within five days of such action. In the case of a permit denial, the reasons therefore shall be stated in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-486. - Grounds for denial. 
    A filming permit, required by this article, may be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this article, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant to this article, or with any other applicable provision of state, local, or federal laws, rules, or regulations; and/or 
(2)  The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-487. - Contents, posting, transferability. 
    A production film permit required by this article shall specify the name and address of the permittee, the kind and location of the filming activity, the maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the permit and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the filming activity, and shall not be transferred to any other person or location. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-488. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The city administrator or his/her designee may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this article whenever the permittee, his employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth in this chapter, including the conditions imposed upon issuance of the permit, or with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes, or other law incorporated by reference in this chapter. 
(b)  A permit shall automatically be revoked if riotous, disorderly, obscene, or otherwise unlawful conduct occurs at a filming location or if an assemblage exceeds 125 percent of the estimated attendance, as indicated on the application for a permit. In such instances the premises may be closed by the police department and the assembly disbursed. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-489. - Cost of additional services. 
    If deemed necessary by the city administrator or his/her designee, additional police, code enforcement, fire, and other city services shall be provided for the purpose of protecting, assisting and regulating the proposed activity. The estimated cost of providing such additional services shall be paid in advance to the city by the applicant. Any additional city services will be provided/coordinated through the city administrator or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-490. - Clean-up and restoration. 
    The applicant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use, maintenance of the area, and the cleanup of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris within two hours of the completion of the activity or within such other time established in the permit to the city's satisfaction. The applicant shall be responsible for restoring any area damaged or disrupted before leaving the site. If the site is not repaired or restored to the city's satisfaction, the city administrator or his/her designee shall have the necessary restoration and/or repairs performed and the applicant shall reimburse the city for such work within ten days of completing filming. In the event the applicant fails to so reimburse the city, the city may secure its reimbursement from either a cash or surety bond which shall be posted with the city to ensure faithful performance of such restoration. Such faithful performance bond shall be filed at the time of the application in an amount of $500.00 or in any higher amount determined by the city administrator or his/her designee to be reasonably required under the circumstances. The amount of the bond shall in no way limit the applicant's liability or responsibility for the costs of repairs or restoration in the event these costs exceed the bond amount. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-491. - Administrative regulations. 
    The city administrator or his/her designee is hereby authorized to promulgate and enforce administrative regulations in the implementation and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 3-15-2010) 
Secs. 22-492-22-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 740, § 1, adopted August 15, 2011, in effect repealed the former Art. XI, § 22-506, and enacted a new Art. XI as set out herein. The former Art. XI pertained to dispensaries and derived from Ord. No. 741, adopted August 16, 2010. 

Sec. 22-501. - Definitions. 
    The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Trenton. 
    Caregiver facility means a facility where a "primary caregiver" who is legally registered by the Michigan Department of Community Health may lawfully assist up to five qualifying patients" who are also legally registered by the department with the acquisition of medical marijuana in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act of 2008. 
    Marijuana means that term as defined in section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106. 
    Medical use means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer or transportation of marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marijuana to treat or alleviate a registered "qualifying patients" debilitating medical condition. 
    Primary caregiver means a person who is operating a "medical marijuana dispensary" by supplying "medical marijuana" for up to five "qualifying patients," and who is registered with the state department of community health for such purpose. 
    Qualifying patient means a person who has obtained a valid registration card from the Michigan Department of Community Health allowing them to possess and purchase medical marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-502. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is determined necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the city to adopt this article regulating the location and operation of "medical marijuana caregivers" due to the following factors: 
(1)  Outside the purview of the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act the possession and use of marijuana (a schedule I drug) in the State of Michigan remains a misdemeanor offense. Possession with intent to deliver, delivery or manufacture of marijuana, remain felonies. 
(2)  Marijuana is classified federally as a "Schedule I Drug" under the Controlled Substances Act and is illegal to possess, manufacture, distribute or dispense. Schedule I drugs, which include heroin and LSD, have a high potential for abuse and serve no legitimate medical purpose in the United States. 
(3)  In May, 2001, the United States Supreme Court issued its decision in United States v. Oakland Buyers' Cooperative and Jeffery Jones holding that distribution of medical marijuana is illegal under the Federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Section 841 ("CSA"), and there is no medical necessity defense allowed under federal law. 
(4)  The location of and easy access to "medical marijuana caregivers" in close proximity to homes, apartments, schools, churches, licensed day care centers and public parks give an impression of legitimacy to such uses and have adverse effects upon children, established family relations, property values and public safety. 
(5)  The Michigan Medical Marijuana Act states that registered "primary caregivers" may receive compensation for assisting "qualified patients" in the medical use of marijuana, making them a likely commercial activity. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-503. - Locations. 
(a)  A caregiver dispensing marijuana to more than one patient shall not be located: 
(1)  Within 500 feet of any residential zoning district. 
(2)  Within 500 feet of the property line of any public or private school, college or university, any nursery school, day nursery, licensed day care center or any other building or location either rented or used in any way for the care or instruction of children under 18. 
(3)  Within 500 feet of the property line of any church, house of worship or other religious facility or institution. 
(4)  Within 500 feet of any public park, publically owned building or recreational area commonly used by minor children. 
(5)  Within 500 feet of another "caregiver." 
(b)  A "medical marijuana caregiver" with multiple patients shall be located only within an I-1 thru I-3 district. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-504. - Restrictions. 
(a)  A "medical marijuana caregiver" with multiple patients shall be permitted to administer care only in conformity with the following: 
(1)  The hours of operation shall be restricted to between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday thru Saturday. 
(2)  The facility in which care is administered shall be subject to inspection by law enforcement, city building officials and members of the Michigan Department of Community Health during the hours of operation. 
(3)  The caregiver shall obtain, and at all times maintain, a City of Trenton business license before providing services. 
(4)  A caregiver must segregate and independently secure each patient's medical marijuana in a locked container accessible only to that patient, and may not jointly, cultivate, store, share or co-mingle one patient's medical marijuana with that of another. 
(5)  A caregiver may not cultivate, store or provide medical marijuana to patients who are cultivating their own supply, or are receiving care from another caregiver. 
(6)  A caregiver must possess a valid registration card issued by the Michigan Department of Community Health. 
(7)  An individual caregiver may assist no more than five patients and may cultivate not more than 12 plants per patient. 
(8)  A caregiver shall obtain and display for inspection a valid sales tax license issued by the State of Michigan. 
(b)  A caregiver shall at all times comply with each and every provision of the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act of 2008 (MCL 333.26421). 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, conveyed or consumed on the premises of any caregiver. Nor shall any person be present on the premises of a caregiver while intoxicated and/or under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance. 
(d)  Persons under the age of 18 years of age are not permitted to be on the premises of any caregiver unless they possess a valid medical marijuana registry card issued by the State of Michigan or another state. 
(e)  A caregiver must maintain a list of its "qualifying patients by registration number." This list is subject to inspection during business hours by members of law enforcement and by members of the Michigan Department of Community Health. 
(f)  Any graffiti applied to property under control of a caregiver must be reported to the Trenton Police Department and then must be removed within five calendar days. 
(g)  All litter must be removed from the premises, including the parking lot, sidewalk and all areas visible to the public within 100 feet of the premises at least twice daily. 
(h)  Use or consumption in any manner of marijuana or any illegal controlled substance is not permitted on the premises of any caregiver. 
(i)  It shall be in violation of this ordinance for any caregiver to employ any person who is not at least 18 years of age in caregiving. No employee can have been convicted of a drug related felony. A caregiver is required to provide the local law enforcement agency within whose boundaries it is located, with a list of all its employees, including full name and date of birth, by January 15 th of each year, or any time a new employee is hired. 
(j)  It is the sole responsibility of each caregiver to dispense a safe product and to test their products and list the name, quantity and percentage of the main active ingredient (Delta 9 Tetrahydrocannabinol commonly, known as THC) on the labels of its products. Copies of laboratory testing results showing the percentage level of THC must be available on site for inspection by employees of the department of community health or law enforcement. When the product is dispensed it shall be packaged in child proof tamper resistant packaging that is sealed, and the contents will be clearly marked with its percentage of THC and weight. 
(k)  A ledger must be maintained of all transactions. This ledger shall contain the following information: type and source of medical marijuana dispensed; the "qualifying patients" marijuana registry ID number; and the date and time dispensed. 
(l)  A caregiver who displays or sells drug paraphernalia may only display and sell paraphernalia that is otherwise legal under city and state law. 
(m)  Every caregiver must comply with all local, county and state laws. 
(n)  Each caregiver shall be liable for all costs associated with the investigation, prosecution, incarceration, booking, medical treatment, storage and destruction of evidence, and any other unspecified costs for the failure to comply with the provisions of this article resulting in the arrest and prosecution of any employees, owners or patrons. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 8-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-505. - Criminal penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article and any of the articles stated within, shall upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and up to 93 days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 8-15-2011) 
ARTICLE XII. - RECREATIONAL MARIHUANA 

Sec. 22-512. - Locations. 
    Pursuant to Proposal #1 of 2018, the Michigan Legalization Initiative, the city elects to "opt-out" of the Act thereby prohibiting establishments, from cultivating, selling and distributing recreational marihuana as defined by the Act, and by-products thereof, which are hereby prohibited from locating within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 795, § 1, 2-4-2019) 
Chapter 26 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; franchises and right-of-way licenses and permits, ch. 50; special assessments, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions and other division of land, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; vegetation, ch. 102; waterways, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Economic Development Corporations Act, MCL 125.1601 et seq. 

Sec. 26-31. - Approval of incorporation. 
    There is hereby approved the incorporation of an economic development corporation for the city under and pursuant to the provisions of the Economic Development Corporations Act (MCL 125.1601 et seq.), and the articles of incorporation for the corporation are hereby approved. 
(Code 1974, § 2-236) 
State Law reference- Approval of articles of incorporation, MCL 125.1605. 
Secs. 26-32-26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-401 et seq. 
State Law reference- Downtown development authorities, MCL 125.1651 et seq. 

Sec. 26-61. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to create a public body corporation to act in the best interests of the city to halt property value deterioration, increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the city, eliminate the causes of that deterioration, and promote economic growth pursuant to Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 2-271) 
Sec. 26-62. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as given them in Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.) or shall be defined as provided in this section, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, and shall be in addition to the terms provided in such act: 
    Authority means the Trenton Downtown Development Authority. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district designated in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 2-272) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, MCL 125.1651. 
Sec. 26-63. - Established. 
    There is hereby created, pursuant to Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), the downtown development authority for the city. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under title of "Trenton Downtown Development Authority." The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state, and shall possess all powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided in this article and in such act. The enumeration of a power in this article or in such act shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Code 1974, § 2-273) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish downtown development authority, MCL 125.1652. 
Sec. 26-64. - Description of downtown district. 
    The boundaries of the downtown district in which the authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.) are hereby established as described in this section and shown on the downtown district map which accompanies the ordinance codified in this article and which, with all notations, references and other information shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this article as if fully described in this section. The area is defined as being the area bounded on the north by the center section of King Road from the railroad corridor of DT&I, D&TSL and Conrail (Railroad Corridor) to the Detroit River; on the east by the Detroit River; on the south by the north boundary of Elizabeth Park from the Detroit River to Slocum continuing westerly to the Railroad Corridor; and on the west by the Railroad Corridor from the center section of Slocum extended north to West Road, including all lots fronting the south side of West Road, west to Fort Street, Fort Street north to Harrison, center of Harrison east to the Railroad Corridor, and the Railroad Corridor north to King Road. 
(Code 1974, § 2-274) 
Editor's note- The downtown district map is not set out herein, but is available in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 26-65. - Composition; organization; meetings and rules of procedure. 
(a)  The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board consisting of the mayor and 11 members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and subject to the approval of city council. At least five of the members shall be business persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district. If the district has 100 or more persons residing within it, at least one member of the authority shall be a resident of the district. A member shall serve for a term of four years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the mayor for the unexpired term only, subject to the approval of the city council. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The chairperson of the board and officers shall be elected by the board. 
(b)  Pursuant to notice and after having been given an opportunity to be heard, a member of the board may be removed for cause by the city council. 
(c)  The board shall adopt rules consistent with Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.) governing its procedure and the holding of regular meetings, subject to the approval of the city council. Special meetings may be held if called in the manner provided in the rules of the board. 
(Code 1974, § 2-275) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.1564. 
Sec. 26-66. - Duties. 
    The downtown development authority shall be charged with the following duties, subject to the approval of the city council: 
(1)  Prepare an analysis of economic changes taking place in the downtown district. 
(2)  Study and analyze the impact of a maturing community upon the downtown district. 
(3)  Plan and propose the construction, renovation, repair, remodeling, rehabilitation, restoration, preservation, or reconstruction of a public facility, which may be necessary or appropriate to the execution of a plan which, in the opinion of the board, aids in the economic growth of the downtown district. 
(4)  Plan, propose and implement an improvement to a public facility within the development area to comply with the barrier-free design requirements of the state construction code promulgated under Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
(5)  Develop long range plans, in cooperation with the city planning commission, designed to prevent the deterioration of property values in the downtown district, and take such steps as may be necessary to persuade property owners to implement the plans to the fullest extent possible. 
(6)  Implement any plan of development in the downtown district necessary to achieve the purposes of this article, in accordance with the powers of the authority as granted by this article. 
(7)  Make and enter into contracts necessary or incidental to the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties. 
(8)  Acquire by purchase or otherwise on terms and conditions and in a manner the authority deems proper or own, convey, or otherwise dispose of, or lease as lessor or lessee, land and other property, real or personal, or rights or interests therein, which the authority determines is reasonably necessary to achieve the purposes of this article, and grant or acquire licenses, easements, and options with respect thereto. 
(9)  Improve land and construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, restore and preserve, equip, improve, maintain, repair and operate any building, including multiple-family dwellings and any necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto, within the downtown district for the use, in whole or in part, of any public or private person or corporation, or a combination thereof. 
(10)  Fix, charge, and collect fees, rents and charges for the use of any building or property under its control or any part thereof, or facility therein, and pledge the fees, rents and charges for the payment of revenue bonds issued by the authority. 
(11)  Lease any building or property under its control, or any part thereof. 
(12)  Acquire and construct public facilities. 
(13)  Accept grants and donations of property, labor, or other things of value from a public or private source. 
(Code 1974, § 2-276) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.1657. 
Sec. 26-67. - Financing. 
    The activities of the authority shall only be financed from one or more of the following sources: 
(1)  Donations to the authority for the performance of its functions. 
(2)  Proceeds of an ad valorem tax with approval of city council, pursuant to section 12 of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1662). 
(3)  Monies borrowed with approval of the city council, to be repaid as authorized by sections 13 and 13(a) of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1663, 125.1663a). 
(4)  Revenues from any property, building, or facility owned, leased, licensed or operated by the authority or under its control, subject to the limitations imposed upon the authority by the city council, trusts or other agreements. 
(5)  Proceeds of a tax increment financing plan, established pursuant to sections 14 through 16 of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1664-125.1667). 
(6)  Proceeds from a special assessment district created as provided by law and approved by the council. 
(7)  Monies obtained from other sources approved by the city council and otherwise authorized by law for use by the authority or the city to finance a development program. 
(Code 1974, § 2-277) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.1661. 
Sec. 26-68. - Development plans. 
    A development plan shall contain: 
(1)  The designation of boundaries of the development area in relation to highways, streets, and streams, or otherwise. 
(2)  The location and extent of existing streets and other public facilities within the development area, and shall designate the location, character, and extent of the categories of public and private land uses then existing and proposed for the development area, including residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, educational, and other uses, and shall include a legal description of the development area. 
(3)  A description of existing improvements in the development area to be demolished, repaired, or altered, a description of any repairs and alterations, and an estimate of the time required for completion. 
(4)  The location, extent, character and estimated cost of the improvements, including rehabilitation, contemplated for the development area, and an estimate of the time required for completion. 
(5)  The location of existing improvements in the development area. 
(6)  A statement of the construction or stages of construction planned, and the estimated time of completion of each stage. 
(7)  A description of any parts of the development area to be left as open space and the use contemplated for the space. 
(8)  A description of any portions of the development area which the authority desires to sell, donate, exchange, or lease to or from the city and the proposed terms. 
(9)  A description of any desired zoning changes and changes in streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities. 
(10)  An estimate of the cost of the development, a statement of the proposed method of financing the development and the ability of the authority to arrange the financing. 
(11)  Designation of the persons, natural or corporate, to whom all or a portion of the development is to be leased, sold, or conveyed in any manner and for whose benefit the project is being undertaken, if that information is available to the authority. 
(12)  The procedures for bidding for the leasing, purchasing, or conveying in any manner of all or a portion of the development upon its completion, if there is no express or implied agreement between the authority and persons, natural or corporate, that all or a portion of the development will be leased, sold or conveyed in any manner to those persons. 
(13)  Estimates of the number of persons residing in the development area. If occupied residences are designated for acquisition and clearance by the authority, a development plan shall include a survey of families and individuals to be displaced including their income and racial compositions, a statistical description of the housing supply in the community, including the number of private and public units in existence or under construction, the condition of those in existence, the number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units, the annual rate of turnover of the various types of housing and range of rents and sale prices, an estimate of the total demand for housing in the community, and the estimated capacity of private and public housing available to displaced families and individuals. 
(14)  A plan for establishing priority for the relocation of persons displaced by the development in any new housing in the development area. 
(15)  Provision for the costs of relocating persons displaced by the development and financial assistance and reimbursement of expenses, including litigation expenses and expenses incident to the transfer of title, in accordance with the standards and provisions of the Federal Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, being PL 91-646, 42 USC 4601 et seq. 
(16)  A plan for compliance with Public Act No. 227 of 1972 (MCL 213.321 et seq.). 
(17)  Other material which the authority, local public agency, or city council deems pertinent. 
(Code 1974, § 2-278) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.1667. 
Sec. 26-69. - Development area citizens council. 
(a)  If a proposed development area has residing within it 100 or more residents, a development area citizens council shall be established at least 90 days before the public hearing on the development or tax increment financing plan. The development area citizens council shall be established by the city council and shall consist of not less than nine members. The members of the development area citizens council shall be residents of the development area and shall be appointed by the city council. A member of a development area citizens council shall be at least 18 years of age. The development area citizens council shall be representative of the development area. 
(b)  The development area citizens council shall act as an advisory body to the authority and the city council in the adoption of the development or tax increment financing plans. 
(Code 1974, § 2-279) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.1671. 
Sec. 26-70. - Governing procedures. 
    The downtown development authority shall only have the power and duties prescribed by Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), and consistent with this article. Any questions of interpretation of the powers and duties and responsibilities of the authority shall be resolved first by reference to this article and then by reference to such act, as it is not inconsistent with this article. The authority shall provide the city council and planning board with all reports and studies regulating the formation and implementation of project development plans. 
(Code 1974, § 2-280) 
Sec. 26-71. - Termination. 
    Upon completion of its purposes, the authority may be dissolved by the city council. The property and the assets of the authority, after dissolution and satisfaction of its obligations, shall revert to the city. 
(Code 1974, § 2-281) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.1680. 
Secs. 26-72-26-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN #04-1[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 674, § 1, adopted Aug. 16, 2004, deleted the former Art. IV, §§ 26-101-26-11, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1974, §§ 2-321-2-331. 
Cross reference- Finance, § 2-161 et seq. 
State Law reference- Tax increment finance and development plans, MCL 125.1664 et seq. 

Sec. 26-101. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Downtown Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan #04-1 of the City of Trenton." 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 26-102. - Definitions. 
    Where used in this article, the terms set forth below shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Base year assessment roll means the base year assessment roll prepared by the city assessor in accordance with the ordinance approving the plan. 
    Captured assessed value means the amount in any one year by which the current assessed value as finally equalized of all taxable property in the respective development areas exceeds the initial assessed value. 
    Development area shall mean each of the areas as described in map/graphic 1 of the Project Plan and Boundary Description attached to Ordinance No. 674 and on file with the city clerk. 
    Development plan or plan means the development plan prepared by the authority for enactment in 2004, and on file with the city clerk. 
    Initial assessed value means the most recently assessed value as finally equalized of all the taxable property within the boundaries of the development areas at the time of adoption of this article [August 16, 2004]. 
    2004 plan means the Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan for the Trenton Downtown Development Area #04-1 for the city, as transmitted to the city council by the authority for public hearing, and confirmed by this article, copies of which plan are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Project funds means the DDA plan project funds established pursuant to this article. 
    Taxing jurisdiction shall mean each unit of government levying an ad valorem property tax on property in the development area. 
    Downtown development authority or DDA means the downtown development authority of the city. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-103. - Approval and adoption of plan. 
    The 2004 plan, is hereby approved and adopted. The plan shall terminate when all projects described herein and approved by city council, are completed and when all indebtedness incurred to finance the same are paid or December 31, 2022, whichever is earlier. A copy of the plan and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 26-104. - Boundaries of development area. 
    The boundaries of the development area shall be set forth on map/graphic 1 attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference, and as generally described as follows: 
City of Trenton, County of Wayne, State of Michigan: The area is defined as being the area bounded on the north by the center of King Road from the railroad corridor of D.T. & I., D. & T.S.L., and Conrail, (Railroad Corridor) to the Detroit River; the east by the Detroit River; the south by the north-boundary of Elizabeth Park from the Detroit River to Slocum continuing westerly to the Railroad Corridor; on the west the Railroad Corridor from the center section of Slocum extended north to West Road, including all lots fronting the south side of West Road, west to Fort Street, Fort Street north to Harrison, center of Harrison east to the Railroad Corridor and the Railroad Corridor north to King Road. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Editor's note- Map/graphic 1 is not set out herein, but is available in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 26-105. - Confirmation and maintenance of base year assessment roll. 
(a)  The base year assessment role previously prepared by the city assessor is hereby confirmed and maintained as the role applicable to the plan, including the 2004 plan; provided, however, that the base year assessment roll shall be adjusted to reflect changes in the boundaries of the development areas resulting from amendments thereof. The base year assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in the development areas on the effective date of the ordinance approving the plan and on the effective date of any ordinance approving the addition or property to the development area, and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in the development area. 
(b)  The city assessor shall transmit copies of the base year assessment roll to the city treasurer, county treasurer, the authority and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the base year assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with previous actions of this council and this article and the tax increment financing plans contained in the plan and the 2004 plan. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 26-106. - Preparation of annual assessment roll. 
    Each year within 15 days following the final equalization of property in the development areas, the city assessor shall prepare an updated assessment roll. the updated assessment roll shall show the information required in the initial base year assessment roll and, in addition, the captured assessed value for that year. Copies of the annual assessment roll shall be transmitted by the assessor to the same persons as the initial base year assessment roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 26-107. - Establishment of project funds; approval of depositary. 
    The city treasurer of the authority shall establish separate funds which shall be kept in a depositary bank account or accounts in a bank or banks approved by the city treasurer which funds shall correspond to Development Area #04-1. All moneys received by the authority pursuant to the 2004 plan shall be deposited in the respective project fund. All moneys in the project funds and earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with the plan, including the 2004 plan. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 26-108. - Payment of tax increments to authority. 
    The city treasurer and the county treasurer shall, as ad valorem taxes are collected on the property in the development area, pay that proportion of the taxes, except for penalties and collection fees, that the captured assessed value bears to the initial assessed value to the treasurer of the authority for deposit in the respective project funds. The payments shall be made on the date or dates on which the city treasurer and the county treasurer are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 26-109. - Use of moneys in project funds. 
    The moneys credited to the project funds and on hand therein, from time to time, shall be used annually in the following manner and following order of priority: 
(1)  First, to pay into the debt retirement fund or funds for all outstanding series of bonds issued pursuant to the plan including the 2004 plan thereto, if any, or any other series of bonds or other obligations pledging tax increment revenues of the authority as a source of debt service payments, an amount equal to the interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal whether by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund. 
(2)  Second, to establish a reserve account for payment of principal of and interest on bonds issued pursuant to the plan to the extent required by any resolution authorizing bonds. 
(3)  Third, to pay the administrative, auditing and operating costs of the authority and the city pertaining to the development areas, including planning and promotion to the extent provided in the annual budget of the authority. 
(4)  Fourth, to repay amounts advanced by the city for project costs or by any developer or contractor on behalf of the city, including costs for preliminary plans, and fees for other professional services. 
(5)  Fifth, to pay, to the extent determined desirable by the authority and approved by the city, the cost of completing the remaining public improvements as set forth in the plan to the extent those costs are not financed from other sources. 
(6)  Sixth, to pay the cost of any additional improvements to the plan that are determined necessary by the authority and approved by the city council in accordance with the act. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 26-110. - Annual report. 
    Within 90 days following the end of each fiscal year, the authority shall submit to the council, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a report on the status of the project funds. The report shall include the amount and source of revenue in the accounts, the amount and purpose of expenditures from the accounts, the amount of principal of and interest on any outstanding indebtedness, if any, the amount in any bond reserve account, the initial assessed value of the development area, the captured assessed value of the development area, the captured assessed value of the development area and the amount of captured assessed value retained by the authority, the tax increments received and the amount of any surplus from prior years, and any additional information requested by the city council or deemed appropriate by the authority. The secretary of the authority shall cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 26-111. - Refund of surplus tax increments. 
    Any secured surplus in the project funds not required for the completion of the plan as amended from time to time, and as shown by the annual report of the authority, shall be paid by the authority to the city treasurer or the county treasurer, as the case may be, and rebated by each to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 26-112. - Agreement(s) with taxing jurisdictions. 
    The mayor and city clerk are hereby authorized to execute an agreement with one or more taxing jurisdictions or with the city treasurer and county treasurer providing, in substance, that the city treasurer and county treasurer may discontinue or limit payment of taxes that would otherwise be transferred and paid over to the authority to the extent that further payments would result in refunds as described in section 2-330 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elections, ch. III. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Michigan Election Law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Applicability of state law and Charter. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, all of the applicable provisions of the Michigan Election Law sections 644a through 646b (MCL 168.644a-168.646b), the state odd-year election act, and the provisions of the Charter shall in all respects govern all city elections, except where the odd-year election act has usurped the provisions of the Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 11-7) 
Sec. 30-2. - Precincts established. 
    The city is hereby divided in seven election precincts, the boundaries of which shall be as follows: 
(1)  Precinct No. 1. This precinct shall embrace all that part of the city beginning at a point at the centerline of Sibley Road and its extensions and the easterly city limits; thence westerly along the centerline of Sibley Road to the centerline of Fort Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Fort Street to the centerline of West Road; thence easterly along the centerline of West Road to the easterly right-of-way line of the New York Central Railroad; thence southwesterly along the easterly right-of-way line of the New York Central Railroad to the centerline of Van Horn Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Van Horn Road and its extensions to the easterly city limits; thence northerly along the easterly city limits to the centerline of Sibley Road and its extensions, the point of beginning. 
(2)  Precinct No. 2. This precinct shall embrace all that part of the city beginning at a point at the centerline of King Road and the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain; thence southerly along the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain to the centerline of Harrison Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Harrison Avenue to the centerline of Fort Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Fort Street to the centerline of King Road; thence westerly along the centerline of King Road to the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain, the point of beginning. 
(3)  Precinct No. 3. This precinct shall embrace all that part of the city beginning at a point at the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain and the centerline of West Road; thence westerly along the centerline of West Road to the westerly city limits; thence northerly along the westerly city limits to the centerline of King Road; thence easterly along the centerline of King Road to the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain; thence southerly along the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain to the centerline of West Road, the point of beginning. 
(4)  Precinct No. 4. This precinct shall embrace all that part of the city beginning at a point at the centerline of West Road and the westerly city limits; thence easterly along the centerline of West Road to the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain; thence southerly along the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain to the northerly right-of-way line of the Detroit, Toledo and Ironton Railroad; thence westerly along the northerly right-of-way line of the Detroit, Toledo and Ironton Railroad to the westerly city limits; thence northerly along the westerly city limits to the centerline of West Road, the point of beginning. 
(5)  Precinct No. 5. This precinct shall embrace all that part of the city beginning at a point at the centerline of West Road and the easterly right-of-way line of the New York Central Railroad; thence southwesterly along said easterly right-of-way of the New York Central Railroad to the northerly right-of-way line of the Detroit, Toledo and Ironton Railroad; thence westerly along the northerly right-of-way line of the Detroit, Toledo and Ironton Railroad to the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain; thence northerly along the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain to the centerline of West Road; thence easterly along the centerline of West Road to the easterly right-of-way of the New York Central Railroad, the point of beginning. 
(6)  Precinct No. 6. This precinct shall embrace all that part of the city beginning at a point at the centerline of West Road and the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain; thence northerly along the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain to the centerline of Harrison Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Harrison Avenue to the centerline of Fort Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Fort Street to the centerline of West Road; thence westerly along the centerline of West Road to the centerline of the Frank and Poet Drain, the point of beginning. 
(7)  Precinct No. 7. This precinct shall embrace all that part of the city beginning at a point at the northerly right-of-way line of the Detroit, Toledo and Ironton Railroad and the westerly city limits; thence southerly along the westerly city limits to the centerline of Vreeland Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Vreeland Road and its extensions to the easterly city limits; thence northerly along the easterly city limits to the center of Van Horn Road and its extensions; thence westerly along the centerline of Van Horn Road to the easterly right-of-way line of the New York Central Railroad; thence northeasterly along the easterly right-of-way line of the New York Central Railroad to the northerly right-of-way line of the Detroit, Toledo and Ironton Railroad; thence westerly along the northerly right-of-way line of the Detroit, Toledo and Ironton Railroad to the westerly city limits, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1974, § 11-1; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 3-7-2011) 
Charter reference- Wards and precincts, § 3.3. 
State Law reference- Precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq. 
Sec. 30-3. - Transfer of voter's registration records. 
    The city clerk shall transfer all voter's registration card records in accordance with the division of election precincts as provided in section 30-2, shall make proper notations upon such cards in both the master and precinct files and shall notify each registered voter of such change, if any. 
(Code 1974, § 11-2) 
State Law reference- When corrected registration card required, MCL 168.499. 
Sec. 30-4. - Regular city elections. 
    At each regular city election, to be held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year, there shall be elected a mayor, city clerk, city treasurer and city assessor for a term of office of two years, three councilmen for a term of office of four years, and such additional number of councilmen as may be required to fill vacancies pursuant to provisions of section 5.6 of the Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3) 
State Law reference- Odd-year election, MCL 168.644a et seq. 
Sec. 30-5. - Nonpartisan primary elections. 
    Nonpartisan primary elections shall be held on the Tuesday following the second Monday in September of each odd-numbered year. 
(Code 1974, § 11-4) 
State Law reference- Authority to so provide, MCL 168.644b. 
Sec. 30-6. - Deadline for filing nominating petitions. 
    Nominating petitions to be filed at the regular city election shall be filed by 4:00 p.m. on the seventh Tuesday prior to the September primary election. 
(Code 1974, § 11-5) 
State Law reference- Authority to alter deadline for nominating petitions, MCL 168.644e; nominating petitions, MCL 168.644f. 
Sec. 30-7. - Manner of conducting elections. 
    All September primary and November regular city elections shall be conducted in the manner elections for state and county offices are conducted. 
(Code 1974, § 11-6) 
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; emergency medical services, § 42-151 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency Management Act, MCL 30.401 et seq. 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or human-made cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm, tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military action or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots, or civil disorders. 
    Emergency means any occasion or instance in which the governor determines state assistance is needed to supplement local efforts and capabilities to save lives, to protect property and the public health and safety, or to lessen or avert the threat of a catastrophe. 
    Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, for protection against and to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or by natural disaster. 
    Emergency management volunteer means any person who serves without compensation in the emergency management organization. 
(Code 1974, § 10-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 30.401. 
Sec. 34-32. - General powers of mayor. 
(a)  The mayor may declare a local state of emergency if circumstances within the city indicate that the occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property from a natural or human-made cause exists and, under a declaration of a local state of emergency, issue directives as to travel restrictions on county or local roads. This power shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except with the consent of the city council. The declaration of a local state of emergency shall be promptly filed with the state unless circumstances attendant upon the disaster prevent or impede its prompt filing. 
(b)  If a disaster or an emergency occurs in the city and is beyond the control of local public or private agencies, the mayor may request the governor to declare that a state of disaster or state of emergency exists in the city, utilizing the procedure set forth in section 14 of the Emergency Management Act (MCL 30.414). The mayor shall comply with the order of the state director of emergency management and cooperate with the state director of emergency management in matters of emergency management. 
(c)  The mayor shall designate a line of succession among the department heads to exercise the powers and duties of the emergency management coordinator in the event of the absence or inability to serve of the coordinator. 
(Code 1974, § 20-3) 
Sec. 34-33. - Power of mayor pro tem to act during absence or disability of mayor. 
    In case of the absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall perform the duties of the mayor and have the powers granted to the mayor under the provisions of this article, during the period of the absence or disability of the mayor. 
(Code 1974, § 10-4) 
State Law reference- Emergency management powers of mayor, MCL 30.410. 
Sec. 34-34. - General emergency management powers of city; mutual aid agreements. 
(a)  The city may: 
(1)  Direct and coordinate the development of emergency operations plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans established by the appropriate federal and state agencies. Each department or agency of the city specified in the emergency operations plan to provide an annex to the plan shall prepare and continuously update the annex providing for emergency management activities, including mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery, by the department or agency and those other emergency activities the department or agency is specified to coordinate. Emergency operations plans and programs developed under this subsection shall include provisions for the dissemination of public information and local broadcasters shall be consulted in developing such provisions. Emergency operations plans and programs developed under this subsection shall include local courts. 
(2)  Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, and obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for disaster purposes. 
(3)  Provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. 
(4)  Direct and coordinate local multi-agency response to emergencies within the city. 
(5)  Appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other disaster workers. 
(6)  Appoint a local emergency management advisory council. 
(7)  If a state of disaster or emergency is declared by the governor, assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the city relating to firefighting; engineering; rescue; health, medical, and related services; police; transportation; construction; and similar items or service for disaster relief purposes within or without the physical limits of the city as ordered by the governor or the state director of emergency management. 
(8)  In the event of a foreign attack upon this state, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of permanent and temporary workers, the utilization of volunteer workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution with or without compensation of supplies, materials, and facilities, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
(b)  For the purpose of providing assistance during a disaster or emergency, the city may enter into mutual aid or reciprocal aid agreements or compacts with counties, other municipalities, public agencies, federally recognized tribal nations, or private sector agencies, or all of these entities. A compact entered into pursuant to this subsection is limited to the exchange of personnel, equipment, and other resources in times of emergency, disaster, or other serious threats to public health and safety. The arrangements shall be consistent with the state emergency management plan. 
(c)  The emergency management coordinator may assist in the development or negotiation, or both, of a mutual aid or reciprocal aid agreement or compact made pursuant to section 4(3) of the Emergency Management Act (MCL 30.404(3)) and shall carry out the agreement or compact. 
(Code 1974, § 10-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 30.410. 
Sec. 34-35. - Emergency management coordinator. 
    The emergency management coordinator shall be the executive head of the emergency management department. The coordinator shall act for and at the direction of the mayor in the coordination of all matters pertaining to emergency management, disaster preparedness, and recovery assistance within the city. 
(Code 1974, § 10-5) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Emergency management coordinator, MCL 30.409. 
Sec. 34-36. - Department of emergency management; emergency management organization. 
    A department of emergency management is hereby created utilizing to the fullest extent personnel and facilities of existing city departments and agencies. The mayor shall be responsible for its organization, administration and operation. The emergency management organization shall consist of the following: 
(1)  A department of emergency management within the executive department of the city government. There shall be an executive head of the department of emergency management, appointed in the manner provided in the Charter for the appointment of the majority of administrative officials specifically enumerated in the Charter, who shall be known as the emergency management coordinator, and such assistants, clerical help, other employees and emergency management volunteers as are deemed necessary to the proper functioning of the organization. 
(2)  Five deputy coordinator with responsibility for financial services, law enforcement, fire control, engineering services, and health and medical services, appointed by the mayor. These shall, so far as possible, be additional duty assignments to existing personnel, and it is the intent of this article that emergency management and disaster assignments shall be as nearly consistent with normal duty assignment as possible. 
(3)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments and agencies suitable for or adaptable to emergency management and designated by the mayor to participate in the emergency management activity. 
(4)  Emergency management volunteers, including persons and private agencies or governmental units offering services to the organization. 
(Code 1974, § 10-2) 
State Law reference- Municipal emergency management agencies, MCL 30.409. 
Sec. 34-37. - Emergency management plan. 
    An emergency management plan shall be adopted by resolution of the city council upon the recommendation of the mayor. In the preparation of this plan, as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent possible. When approved, it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions and duties assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. All officers and employees of the city shall cooperate with and give active support to the mayor and emergency management coordinator in all emergency management operations and they shall comply with all orders of the mayor and emergency management coordinator issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1974, § 10-6) 
Sec. 34-38. - Emergency orders and regulations to supersede existing ordinances, orders and regulations. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1974, § 10-7) 
Sec. 34-39. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority so to do has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(Code 1974, § 10-8) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; community development, ch. 26; transportation of explosives, § 42-291 et seq.; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 54; manufactured homes, ch. 62; parks and recreation, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; vegetation, ch. 102; waterways, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Authority to make additional rules and regulations. 
    The city engineer shall have the power to formulate, promulgate, amend and repeal rules and regulations necessary and proper to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, subject to the approval of the city council, and may seek the advice of the environmental advisory board; however, no such rule or regulation and no such amendment or repeal shall enter into effect unless and until the provisions of this article have been satisfied. 
(Code 1974, § 12-65) 
Sec. 38-2. - Manner of promulgating rules and regulations. 
    All rules and regulations, and amendments and repeals thereof, under this article shall be promulgated by the city engineer after consulting the environmental advisory board, and shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this article, provided they are approved by the city council after prior publication of the proposed rule or regulation in a paper of general circulation in the city, specifying the text of the proposed rule or regulation, and provided further that no rule or regulation, or amendment or repeal thereof, shall enter into effect until the lapse of 60 days after public notice of its adoption in a paper of general circulation in the city, and of specific notice by registered mail to any individual who is directly and peculiarly affected thereby. 
(Code 1974, § 12-66) 
Secs. 38-3-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-401 et seq. 

Sec. 38-31. - Continued. 
    The environmental control board is hereby reconstituted as the environmental advisory board, which is continued and shall serve in an advisory capacity. 
(Code 1974, § 12-54) 
Sec. 38-32. - Composition; appointment of members. 
    The environmental advisory board shall consist of seven members, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 12-55) 
Sec. 38-33. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  Each member of the environmental advisory board shall have been a resident of the city at least two years prior to the date of his appointment, and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the city. 
(b)  At least two members of the environmental advisory board shall be persons having engineering degrees, unless the mayor finds after diligent effort that such persons are not available for such positions. In addition, the mayor shall make a diligent effort to appoint persons to the board having a variety of backgrounds and interests, so as to reflect a fair cross section of the populace of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 12-56) 
Sec. 38-34. - Term of office of members. 
    The term of the members of the environmental advisory board shall be three years. 
(Code 1974, § 12-58) 
Sec. 38-35. - Compensation of members. 
    Members of the environmental advisory board shall be compensated as provided in section 2-401. 
(Code 1974, § 12-57) 
Sec. 38-36. - Removal of members. 
    Members of the environmental advisory board may be removed by the city council pursuant to the provisions of sections 5.3 and 5.4 of the Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 12-59) 
Sec. 38-37. - Manner of filling vacancies. 
    Any vacancy in the environmental advisory board shall be filled by the mayor with the consent of the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1974, § 12-60) 
Sec. 38-38. - Chairperson. 
    The chairperson of the environmental advisory board shall be selected by the mayor, and shall serve for a term of one year, subject to reappointment for an indefinite number of terms. 
(Code 1974, § 12-61) 
Sec. 38-39. - Meetings. 
    The environmental advisory board shall act officially only at meetings upon adequate notice to all members. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public, except: 
(1)  To the extent necessary to maintain information confidential concerning trade secrets, where so requested by the individuals possessing such trade secrets. 
(2)  When the board is in executive session, in situations involving deliberation as to recommendations or decisions to be rendered by the board. 
(Code 1974, § 12-62) 
Sec. 38-40. - Majority action required; quorum. 
    Official action may be taken by the environmental advisory board only by a majority of those members present at any meeting at which a quorum is present. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1974, § 12-63) 
Sec. 38-41. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the environmental advisory board shall be as follows: 
(1)  Rendering assistance and advice to the city engineer and to the city council in connection with air, water, and noise pollution, and other forms of environmental protection. 
(2)  Upon the consent and approval of the city council, employing competent legal and engineering consultants to advise the board in connection with any of the powers and duties of the board. 
(3)  Upon referral from the city engineer, reviewing proposed development plans and providing comments as to potential environmental impact and concerns within 30 days, or such other time as may be extended by the engineer. 
(Code 1974, § 12-64) 
Secs. 38-42-38-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENVIRONMENTAL COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 38-71. - Authorized; procedure. 
(a)  The fire department shall have the power and authority to recover all costs and expenses incurred in conjunction with emergency incidents occurring within the city involving hazardous/toxic materials or hazardous/dangerous conditions. Such costs and expenses shall include, but not be limited to, abatement, disposal, cleanup, removal and remedial activities, including any related third-party costs and expenses necessary to ensure the safety of the city and its residents. Any such costs and expenses shall be the sole responsibility of the individual, owner and/or operator of the facility, property, vehicle, container, discarded material, solid waste or hazardous/toxic material causing or contributing to the emergency incident including pollution of the environment. All assessments against such responsible parties shall be paid to the city treasurer within 30 calendar days of the date of assessment, unless approval for other arrangements is granted by the city administration in cases of hardship, or unless an appeal is filed pursuant to section 38-72. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "hazardous/toxic materials" shall be defined to include those materials listed under 42 USC 9601(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 USC 9601 et seq. 
(c)  The fire marshal shall have the responsibility to investigate the emergency incident and determine its source and cause. The fire marshal shall also make an initial written recommendation to the chief of the fire department as to the circumstances surrounding the emergency incident and the type of hazardous/toxic materials or nature of hazardous/dangerous conditions involved therein, indicating the reasonable costs and expenses incurred in conjunction with the remedial activities as specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  The chief of the fire department shall review the recommendation of the fire marshal and determine whether the emergency incident involved the presence of hazardous/toxic materials or hazardous/dangerous conditions and what reasonable costs and expenses, if any, are to be assessed against each responsible individual, owner and/or operator. 
(e)  The findings and determinations of the chief of the fire department shall be in writing and shall itemize all reasonable costs and expenses incurred in conjunction with the remedial activities as specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 12-119) 
Sec. 38-72. - Appeals. 
(a)  In the case of any assessment by the chief of the fire department pursuant to section 38-71 to which any individual, owner or operator directly and adversely affected thereby takes exception, such person may appeal the findings and determinations of the chief of the fire department to the city council for a recision or modification of such action. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be in writing and taken within ten days of such action by filing the notice of appeal with the chief of the fire department and the council, specifying the grounds thereof, accompanied by such fee as may be established in such cases by rule or regulation. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department and fire marshal shall forthwith transmit to the council all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(d)  The council shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give public notice thereof, as well as special notice thereof to the individual, owner, or operator. 
(e)  An appeal taken pursuant to this section shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, until the council renders its decision, unless the city administrator certifies to the council, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause irreparable harm or prejudice to the individual, owner or operator who has appealed the assessment. 
(f)  The council shall, in writing and within a reasonable time after the hearing, affirm, modify or rescind the action of the chief of the fire department or fire marshal appealed from, and to that end, shall have all the powers of the chief of the fire department or fire marshal. 
(g)  The findings and determinations of the council shall constitute the final and binding decision under this section, and shall not be subject to further review. 
(Code 1974, § 12-120) 
Secs. 38-73-38-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 694, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2005, amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IV, §§ 38-101-38-109 and 38-131-38-139, pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1974, §§ 12-84-12-99. 
State Law reference- Soil erosion and sedimentation control, MCL 324.9101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-101. - Definitions. 
    The City of Trenton adopts as reference the definitions contained in Part 91 and the Rules, as amended from time to time, unless expressly given a different meaning by this article. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
    Accelerated soil erosion means the increased loss of the land surface that occurs as a result of human activities. 
    Adjacent property means any property, public or private, not contained within the application, whether or not owned by the applicant. 
    Applicant means any person or company that is making application for a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit. Applicant may be the property owner or a designated agent of the property owner on which an earth change will take place. Designated agent must have a written statement from landowner authorizing him/her to secure a permit in the landowner's name. 
    Cease and desist order means an order that stops only that work relative to a project which is causing a violation of Part 91, the Rules, or this article until said violation is corrected. 
    Certificate of completion means a signed written statement by the city engineer that specific construction has been inspected and found to comply (including permanent stabilization) with all soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and specifications. 
    City engineer means the City Engineer of the City of Trenton or their duly authorized representative. 
    Department means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Earth change means A human-made change in the natural cover or topography of land, including cut and fill activities, which may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state. Earth change does not include plowing and tilling of the soil for purpose of crop production. 
    Excavation or cut means any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Floodplain means that area which would be inundated by storm runoff or floodwater equivalent to that which would occur with a rainfall or flood of 100-year recurrence frequency. 
    Grading means any stripping, excavating, filling, balancing, stockpiling or combination thereof, and shall include the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
    Lake means the Great Lakes and all natural and artificial inland lakes or impoundments that have definite banks, a bed, visible evidence of a continued occurrence of water, and a surface area of water that is equal to, or greater than, 1 acre. "Lake" does not include sediment basins and basins constructed for the sole purpose of storm water retention, cooling water, or treating polluted water. 
    Landowner means the person who owns or holds a recorded easement on the property or who is engaged in construction in a public right-of-way in accordance with Sections 14, 14, 15, and 16 of Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1925, as amended, being MCL 247.183-247.186. 
    Nonerosive velocity means a rate of water movement that is not conducive to the development of accelerated soil erosion. 
    Part 91 means Part 91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act Number 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended from time to time, being MCL 324.9101 to 324.9123a. 
    Permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures means those control measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion and sedimentation and which are maintained after project completion. 
    Permittee : In all cases, the permittee will be the same as the landowner , as defined elsewhere in this section. 
    Person means a natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or association. 
    Rules means the rules promulgated pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, being MCL 24.201-24.328 for the administration of Part 91 as amended from time to time. 
    Runoff means water that runs off the land as a result of melting snow or rainfall which does not percolate into the ground or which is not absorbed by vegetative transpiration or other natural process. 
    Sediment means solid particulate matter, including both mineral and organic matter, that is in suspension in water, is being transported, or has been removed from its site of origin by the actions of wind, water, or gravity and has been deposited elsewhere. 
    Soil erosion means the wearing away of land by action of wind, water, gravity or a combination of wind, water, or gravity. 
    Soil erosion and sedimentation control (SESC) permit means a permit issued to authorize an earth change to be performed under this article. 
    Stabilization means The establishment of vegetation or the proper placement, grading, or covering the soil to ensure its resistance to soil erosion, sliding, or other earth movement. 
    Stop work order means an order that stops all work on a project until any and all violations of Part 91 as amended from time to time, the Rules and this article are corrected, except for remedial measures to correct the violation. 
    Stream means a river, creek, or other surface watercourse which may or may not be serving as a drain as defined in Act No. 40 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, being MCL 280.1 et seq., and which has definite banks, a bed, and visible evidence of the continued flow or continued occurrence of water, including the connecting waters of the Great Lakes. 
    Stripping means any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the vegetative surface cover including clearing and grubbing operations. 
    Temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures means interim control measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion and sedimentation and which are not maintained after project completion. 
    Waters of the state means the Great Lakes and their connecting waters, inland lakes and streams as defined in rules promulgated under Part 91 as amended from time to time, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994, PA 451, as amended, and wetlands regulated under Part 303, Wetlands Protection, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994, PA 451, as amended. 
    Wetland means land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, wetland vegetation or aquatic life, and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh and which is any of the following: 
(1)  Contiguous to the Great Lakes or Lake St. Clair, an inland lake or pond, or a river or a stream. 
(2)  Not contiguous to the Great Lakes, an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream; and more then five acres in size; except this subparagraph shall not be in effect, except for the purpose of inventorying, in counties less then 100,000 population until the department certifies to the commission it has substantially completed its inventory of wetlands in that county. 
(3)  Not contiguous to the Great Lakes, an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream; five acres or less in size if the department determines that protection of the area is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the state from pollution, impairment, or destruction and the department has so notified the owner; except this subparagraph may be utilized regardless of wetland size in a county in which subparagraph (ii) is of no effect. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-102. - Authority. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts by reference Part 91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act Number 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended, being MCL 324.9101-324.9123a.. 
(b)  The city hereby adopts by reference the latest rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality relative to Part 91, as amended from time to time, and all current rules. 
(c)  The city hereby adopts by reference the standards and specifications of the Wayne County Conservation District. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-103. - Municipal enforcing agency. 
    The City of Trenton Engineering Department is designated as the municipal enforcing agency (MEA) with regards to administering and implementing soil erosion and sedimentation control in compliance with this article Part 91, as amended from time to time, and all current rules, within the municipal limits of the City of Trenton. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-104. - Compliance with article required for site plan or plat approval. 
    No site plan, plot plan or plat shall be approved under this article unless said site plan, plot plan or plat shall be approved until a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit with approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plans have been issued for earth changes that require a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit consistent with the requirements of this article, Part 91, as amended from time to time, and all current rules. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-105. - Compliance with article required for occupancy. 
    No certificate of occupancy for any building will be issued unless the applicant for said certificate shall have obtained a certificate of completion indicating compliance with all soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and specifications and completion of all permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Secs. 38-106-38-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 38-131. - SESC permits and fees. 
(a)  SESC permit requirement. Except as exempted by sections of this article, no person shall undertake any earth change (earth changes that are one acre or greater or within 500 feet of the waters of the state) unless they have a valid soil erosion and sedimentation permit with approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plans issued by the municipal enforcing agency. 
(b)  Permit application. A separate soil erosion and sedimentation control application along with soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be required for each soil erosion and sedimentation permit. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans, specifications, cost estimates and timing schedules shall be submitted with each soil erosion and sedimentation control application for a soil erosion and sedimentation permit. The plans shall be prepared or approved and signed by a registered professional engineer, registered professional landscape architect, registered professional architect or other person who, in the opinion of the city engineer, has experience in soil erosion and sedimentation control methods and techniques. The municipal enforcing agency may waive the preparation or approval and signature by the registered professional engineer, registered professional landscape architect, or registered professional architect when the work entails little hazard to the adjacent property and does not include the construction of a fill upon which a structure may be erected. 
(c)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control application; soil erosion and sedimentation control plan requirements. The plans and specifications accompanying the soil erosion and sedimentation control permit application shall contain all necessary data and information as required by the municipal enforcing agency and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality State prescribed information. All soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall meet the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Part 91, Rule 323.1703 requirements. Guidelines for the minimum requirements shall be made available upon request from the municipal enforcing agency. 
(d)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control fees . It is the intent of the city that administration of this article be self-sustaining from fees imposed and to distribute such charges as equitably and fairly as possible, therefore, the council shall from time to time adopt such resolutions setting forth a schedule of fees, as recommended by the city engineer, to be paid as shall be necessary to administer this article. Plan review fees shall be due upon submittal of application for permit and shall cover the initial plan review and review of up to two revisions. All subsequent revisions will require submission of an additional review fee equal to one-half of the original review fee. Permit and inspection fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the soil erosion and sedimentation control permit. Should earth change activities begin prior to the issuance of a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit, the applicant is subject to pay double the normal review, permit and inspection fees, as determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-132. - Bond requirements. 
(a)  Performance bond . A certified check, certificate of deposit, an irrevocable letter of credit, or a cash escrow deposit in the amount of the estimated cost of all temporary soil erosion control measures, or in a minimum amount established periodically by the city council, whichever is larger, will be required by the city for any permit required under this article. The total cost shall be estimated by a registered professional engineer, registered professional landscape architect, registered architect, or other qualified person, and shall be subject to review by the municipal enforcing agency. The estimate is due upon application for a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit, and shall account for all of the work contemplated under said permit within the time limit specified on said permit. 
(b)  Maintenance bond. A certified check, certificate of deposit, an irrevocable letter of credit, or a cash escrow deposit in the amount of one-third of the total cost of the permanent soil erosion control measures or in a minimum amount established periodically by the city council, whichever is larger, will be required by the city for a period of not less than two years after the certificate of completion is issued by the municipal enforcing agency for any permit required under this article. 
(c)  Waiver of bond requirements. The bond requirements stated above may be waived at the direction of the city engineer when the proposed earth change is considered minor in nature. Minor projects would be those projects classified as such after reviewed by the municipal enforcing agency. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-133. - Extension of time. 
(a)  If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the time specified on the permit, the permittee may, at least ten days prior to the expiration of the permit, present in writing to the municipal enforcing agency, a request for an extension of time setting for the reasons for the requested extension. In the event such an extension is warranted, the municipal enforcing agency may grant additional time for the completion of the work, but no such extension shall the release the permittee from the requirement under the preceding sections of this article, Part 91, as amended, and all current rules. 
(b)  If the permittee does not extend the permit in the proper fashion and allows the permit to expire, all work will be ordered to stop by a stop work order until such a time that the permit is extended properly by the permittee. The permittee will still be bound to maintain all temporary and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures during the duration of the stop work order in conformance with this article, Part 91, as amended, and all current rules. 
(c)  The municipal enforcing agency may require a new soil erosion and sedimentation control permit to be applied for if in the opinion of the municipal enforcing agency that the conditions of the original soil erosion and sedimentation control permit are no longer valid due to substantial changes in the conditions of the permitted site. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-134. - Failure to complete work. 
    In the event of failure to complete the work or failure to comply with all of the requirements, conditions and terms of the soil erosion and sedimentation control permit and approved plans, this article, Part 91, as amended, and all current rules, the municipal enforcing agency may order such work as is necessary to eliminate any danger to persons, property or waters of the state and to leave the site in a safe condition and the municipal enforcing agency may authorize completion of all necessary temporary or permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. The permittee shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the city in causing any and all such work to be done. Any unused portion of the cash deposit or amount collected under the irrevocable letter of credit shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-135. - Denial of permit. 
    Soil erosion and sedimentation control permits will not be issued where: 
(1)  The proposed work would cause hazards to the public safety and welfare; or 
(2)  The work, as proposed by the applicant, will damage any public or private property or utilities or interfere with any existing drainage to any adjacent property or result in the deposit or placement, by any means, of debris or sediment on any public way or into any waters of the state or create an unreasonable hazard to persons or property; or 
(3)  The land area for which an earth change is proposed is subject to geological hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce settlement, slope instability or any other such hazard to persons or property; or 
(4)  The land area for which an earth change is proposed may lie within the floodplain of any stream or watercourse (not specifically designated and delineated by the city as an area subject to flood hazard), unless a hydrologic report, prepared by a registered professional engineer, is submitted for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-136. - Modifications of approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
    All modifications of the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plans must be submitted and approved by the municipal enforcing agency. All necessary sustaining reports shall be submitted with any proposal to modify the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. No earth change in connection with any proposed modification shall be permitted without the approval of the municipal enforcing agency. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-137. - Responsibility of permittee. 
    During earth change activities, the permittee shall be responsible for: 
(1)  The protection of the waters of the state from soil erosion and sedimentation as a result of an earth change. 
(2)  The prevention of damage to any public utilities or services within the limits of earth change and along any routes of travel of the equipment. 
(3)  The prevention of damage to adjacent property. No person shall excavate on land so close to the property line as to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or any public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage which might result. 
(4)  The permitted activity shall be completed in accordance with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and specifications, and in compliance with all requirements of this article, Part 91 Rules and the permit issued under this article. 
(5)  The prompt removal of all soil, miscellaneous debris or other materials applied, dumped or otherwise deposited on public streets, highways, sidewalks or other public thoroughfares during transit to and from the construction, where such spillage constitutes a public nuisance or hazard. 
(6)  Notification of the City of Trenton within one week after completing the permitted activity or one week prior to the expiration date of the permit issued under this article, whichever comes first. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-138. - General requirements. 
(a)  Any earth changes shall be conducted in such a manner which will effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation. 
(b)  All persons engaged in earth changes shall design, implement and maintain acceptable soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with this article, Part 91, as amended, and all current rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality which effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion. 
(c)  All earth changes shall be designed, constructed and completed in such a manner as to limit the exposed area of any disturbed land for the shortest possible period of time as determined by the municipal enforcing agency. 
(d)  Sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion shall be removed from runoff water before it leaves the site of the earth change. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent soil erosion control and sedimentation control measures designed and constructed for the conveyance of water around, through or from the earth change area shall be designed to limit the water flow to a non-erosive velocity. 
(f)  All temporary soil erosion control and sedimentation control measures shall be installed before or upon commencement of the permitted earth change activity and maintain the measures on a daily basis. Temporary soil erosion control measures shall be removed after earth change areas are stabilized and permanent soil erosion control measures are installed. 
(g)  Permanent soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels, ditches or any disturbed land area shall be completed within five calendar days after final grading or the final earth change has been completed. If it is not possible to permanently stabilize a disturbed area after an earth change has been completed or where significant earth change activity ceases, temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be maintained until permanent soil erosion control measures are in place and the earth change area is stabilized. 
(h)  Compliance with all of the provisions of this article, Part 91, as amended, and all current rules shall not relieve the applicant or permittee from complying with all other applicable ordinances of the City of Trenton or from obtaining all other required federal, state or City of Trenton permits. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-139. - Perpetual maintenance requirements. 
    Persons carrying out soil erosion and sedimentation control measures under this article, and all subsequent owners of property concerning which such measures have been taken, shall maintain all soil erosion and sedimentation control measures including, but not limited to retaining walls, structures, plantings and other protective devices. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-140. - Minimum design standards and specifications for erosion and sedimentation control. 
    A person shall install and maintain temporary and permanent control measures in accordance with the standards and specifications of all of the following: 
(1)  Product manufacturer; 
(2)  Wayne Conservation District; 
(3)  Michigan Department of Environmental Quality; 
(4)  Michigan Department of Transportation; 
(5)  Those formally adopted by the City of Trenton Engineering Department. 
If a conflict exists between standards and specifications referenced in this section, then the city engineer or their designee shall determine which specifications are appropriate for the project. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-141. - Exceptions and waivers. 
(a)  The requirement of a permit under this article is hereby waived in the following instances: 
(1)  A beach nourishment project permitted under Part 325, Great Lakes and Submerged Lands, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended being MCL 324.32501 et. seq. 
(2)  Normal road and driveway maintenance, such as grading or leveling, that does not increase the width or length of the road or driveway and that will not contribute sediment to the waters of the state. 
(3)  An earth change of a minor nature that is stabilized within 24 hours of the initial earth disturbance and that will not contribute sediment to the waters of the state. 
(4)  Installation of oil, gas, and mineral wells under permit from the supervisor of wells if the owner-operator is found by the supervisor of wells to be in compliance with the conditions of Part 91, as amended, and all current rules. 
(5)  An authorized public agency is exempt from obtaining a permit but shall notify the City of Trenton of each proposed earth change within the municipal limits of the City of Trenton. 
Although no permits are required under subsection (a)(1) through (5), of this section, the operations and earth changes exempted from obtaining permits must comply with this article, Part 91, as amended, and all current rules. 
(b)  Where it is alleged that there is error or misinterpretation in any order, requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by the city engineer, the municipal enforcing agency shall have the power to hear specific applications and may amend or change such order, based upon the requirements of this article, Part 91, as amended, and all current rules. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-142. - Inspection. 
(a)  The requirements of this article shall be enforced by the municipal enforcing agency. The municipal enforcing agency shall inspect the work and shall require adequate inspection of compaction by a soil engineer or by a soil testing agency, approved by the municipal enforcing agency, unless he determines that such inspection requirements may be waived due to the non-hazardous nature of the earth changes. 
(b)  Upon satisfactory execution of all approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and other requirements, the municipal enforcing agency shall issue a certificate of completion. If the municipal enforcing agency finds any existing conditions not as stated in any application, soil erosion and sedimentation control permit, or approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and specification, the municipal enforcing agency may refuse to approve further work until approval of a revised soil erosion and sedimentation control plan which will conform to the existing conditions. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-143. - Enforcement; right of entry for inspection. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the existence or pursuit of any other remedy, the City of Trenton may maintain an action in its own name in any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction against any person to restrain or prevent violations in this article. 
(b)  The municipal enforcing agency may enter at all reasonable times in or upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions and practices which may be a violation of this article or the latest rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality promulgated pursuant to Part 91, as amended, and all current rules. 
(c)  The municipal enforcing agency may seek to enforce a violation of this article by notifying the person who owns the land on which the violation is occurring, by certified mail. The notice shall contain a description of the violation and what must be done to remedy the violation and shall specify a time to comply with this article. 
(d)  Within five days after a notice of violation has been issued under this section, a person who owns land subject to this article shall implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-144. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be responsible with a municipal civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $2,500.00. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this article, Part 91, as amended, and all current rules or knowingly makes a false statement in an application for a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit or in a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is responsible for the payment of a civil fine of not more than $10,000.00 for each day of the violation. 
(c)  Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this article, Part 91, as amended, and all current rules after receiving notification under section 38-143(c) is responsible for the payment of a civil fine of not less than $2,500.00 or more than $25,000.00 for each day of violation. 
(d)  A default in payment of a civil fine or costs ordered under this section or an installment of the fine or costs may be remedied by any means authorized under the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, 1961 PA 236, as amended, being MCL 600.101 et seq. 
(e)  In addition to a fine assessed under this section, a person who violates Part 91, as amended, and all current rules, or this article is liable to the State of Michigan for damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources resulting from the violation. The court may order a person who violates this part to restore the area or areas affected by the violation to their condition as existing immediately prior to the violation. 
(f)  Lessees, contractors, or other individuals undertaking and earth change, as well as the landowner and on-site authorized agent, are liable for civil penalties prescribed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 38-145. - Enforcement authority. 
    The city engineer and his/her designees are hereby authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations or notices of municipal civil infractions pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 12-5-2005) 
Secs. 38-146-38-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE CONTROL[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Noisy dogs, § 14-115; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All terminology used in this article not defined in this section shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. 
    A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
    Commercial area means any area or property zoned OS-1 (office service district), B-1 (local business), B-2 (planned community business), B-3 (general business), CBD (central business district), WM (waterfront marina), or P-1 (vehicular parking) in chapter 110. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, excluding demolition, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    Day-night average sound level (L dn ) means the 24-hour energy average of the A-weighted sound pressure level, with the levels during the period from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day increased by ten dB(A) before averaging. 
    Decibel (dB) is a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
    Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
    Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
    Equivalent A-weighted sound level (L eq ) means the constant sound level that, in a given situation and time period, conveys the same sound energy as the actual time-varying A-weighted sound. 
    Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used. 
    Impulsive sound means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms. 
    Industrial area means any area or property zoned I-1 (light industrial), I-2 (medium industrial) or I-3 (heavy industrial) in chapter 110. 
    Motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce means any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to section 18 of the Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (PL 92-574), as amended, pertaining to motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce. 
    Motor vehicle has the meaning provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
    Motorboat means any vessel which operates on water and which is propelled by a motor, including, but not limited to, boats, barges, amphibious craft, water ski towing devices and hovercraft. 
    Motorcycle has the meaning provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
    Muffler and sound dissipative device mean a device for abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine. 
    Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
    Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled, airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley, or similar place, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Public space means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Pure tone means any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. For the purposes of this article, a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by five dB for center frequencies of 500 Hz and above and by eight dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz. 
    Real property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property divisions. 
    Residential area means any area or property zoned R-1 through R-3 (one-family residential), RM-1 (multiple-family residential-low rise), RM-2 (multiple-family residential-high rise), RT (two-family residential), or MH (mobile home park district) in chapter 110. 
    RMS sound pressure means the square root of the time average square of the sound pressure, denoted P rms . 
    Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces, that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
    Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or C, as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI SI.4-1971, or the latest approved revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and weighting network used to measure sound pressure levels, which satisfies the pertinent requirements in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI SI.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof) for a type II meter. 
    Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
    Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals (20 × 10 -6 N/M 2 ). The sound pressure level is denoted L p or SPL and is expressed in decibels. 
    Vibration means an oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or random nature described by displacement, velocity or acceleration with respect to a given reference point. 
    Weekday means any day Monday through Friday that is not a legal holiday. 
(Code 1974, § 12-112) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-162. - Findings; general policy. 
    Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare, safety and the quality of life, and whereas a substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated, and whereas the people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound that may jeopardize their health or welfare or safety or degrade the quality of life, therefore, it is the policy of the city to prevent excessive sound which may jeopardize the health and welfare or safety of its citizens or degrade the quality of life. 
(Code 1974, § 12-111(a)) 
Sec. 38-163. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the control of all sound originating within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 12-111(b)) 
Sec. 38-164. - Enforcement actions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, in lieu of issuing a notice of violation as provided for in subsection (c) of this section, the noise control officer responsible for enforcement of any provisions of this article may issue an order requiring abatement of any source of sound alleged to be in violation of this article within a reasonable time period and according to guidelines (to be approved by appropriate authority) which the noise control officer may prescribe. 
(b)  An abatement order shall not be issued when the noise control officer or other enforcement official has reason to believe that there will not be compliance with the abatement order. 
(c)  Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with an abatement order issued pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section, violation of any provision of this article shall be cause for a notice of violation to be issued by the noise control officer or other responsible enforcement agency official according to procedures which the noise control officer may prescribe. 
(d)  The noise control officer shall apply to the appropriate court for an injunction to halt any sound which exposes any person, except those excluded pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, to continuous sound levels in excess of those provided in section 38-193. 
(e)  No order pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be issued if the only persons exposed to sound levels in excess of those listed in section 38-193 are exposed as a result of: 
(1)  Trespass; 
(2)  Invitation upon private property by the person causing or permitting the sound; or 
(3)  Employment by the person or a contractor of the person causing or permitting the sound. 
(f)  Any person subject to an order issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall comply with such order until the sound is brought into compliance with the order, as determined by the noise control officer, or a judicial order has superseded the noise control officer's order. 
(g)  No provision of this article shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this article or from other law. 
(Code 1974, § 12-118(b)-(e)) 
Sec. 38-165. - Enforcement officers. 
(a)  Noise control officers. The noise control program established by this article shall be administered by the chief of police of the city and/or the city engineer and/or their designees, as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, referred to in this article as noise control officers. 
(b)  Powers. In order to implement and enforce this article and for the general purpose of sound and vibration abatement and control, the noise control officer shall have, in addition to any other authority vested in him, the following powers: 
(1)  Review of public and private projects. The noise control officer may review public and private projects for compliance with this article, if such projects are likely to cause sound in violation of this article. 
(2)  Inspections. 
a.  The noise control officer or his representatives, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter and inspect any private property or place, and inspect any report or records at any reasonable time when granted permission by the owner, or by some other person with apparent authority to act for the owner. When permission is refused or cannot be obtained, a search warrant may be obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction upon showing of probable cause to believe that a violation of this article may exist. Such inspection may include administration of any necessary tests. 
b.  The noise control officer may stop any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat operated on a public right-of-way, public space or public waterway reasonably suspected of violating any provision of this article, and issue a notice of violation or abatement order, which may require the motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat to be inspected or tested as the police may reasonably require. 
(c)  Duties. In order to implement and enforce this article effectively, the noise control officer shall: 
(1)  Standards, testing methods and procedures. Promulgate standards, testing methods and procedures. Standards, testing methods and procedures as published by ANSI shall be used by the noise control officer. 
(2)  Investigate and pursue violations. In consonance with subsection (b)(2) of this section and other provisions of this article, investigate and pursue possible violations of this article. 
(3)  Delegation of authority. Delegate functions, where appropriate under this article, to personnel within the engineering and police department and to other agencies or departments, subject to approval of the city council. 
(4)  Periodic reports. Evaluate and report, annually, on the effectiveness of the city noise control program and make recommendations for any legislative or budgetary changes necessary to improve the program. This report shall be made to the city environmental control board, which may amend it after consultation with the noise control officer and then submit it to the council for approval. 
(Code 1974, § 12-113) 
Sec. 38-166. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance. 
(b)  The following acts, and the causing thereof, are declared to be in violation of this article: 
(1)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound: 
a.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary. 
b.  In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance at 50 feet (15 meters) from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space, or in a boat on public waters. 
c.  In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person other than the operator of the device, when operated by any passenger on a common carrier. 
(2)  Loudspeakers and public address systems. Using or operating any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device: 
a.  Such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary; or 
b.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(3)  Animals and birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(4)  Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(5)  Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling or demolition work: 
a.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays or at any time on Sundays or holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, except for emergency work of public service utilities. 
b.  At any other time such that the sound level at or across a real property boundary exceeds an L eq of 90 dB(A) for the daily period of operation. 
This subsection shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools subject to subsection (b)(12) of this section. 
(6)  Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(7)  Explosives, firearms and similar devices. The use or firing of explosives, firearms or similar devices which creates impulsive sound so as to cause a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or on a public space or right-of-way. 
(8)  Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, or in a public space, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day. Maximum sound levels in a public space during the permitted period of operation shall conform to those set forth for residential land use in table 1 of section 38-168. Maximum sound levels for residential property during the permitted period of operation shall be governed by section 38-168(a). 
(9)  Stationary nonemergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than five minutes in any hourly period. 
(10)  Emergency signaling devices. The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary device except for emergency purposes or for testing as provided in this subsection. 
a.  Testing a stationary emergency signaling device shall occur at the same time of day each time such a test is performed, but not before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time; in no case shall such test time exceed 60 seconds. 
b.  Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. The time limit specified in subsection a of this subsection shall not apply to such complete system testing. 
(11)  Motorboats. Operating or permitting the operation of any motorboat in any lake, river, stream or other waterway in such a manner as to exceed a sound level of 90 dB(A) at the nearest shoreline. 
(12)  Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day so as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(c)  The following acts or the causing thereof are prohibited: 
(1)  The removal or rendering inoperative by any person, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, of any noise control device or element of design and/or muffler or sound dissipative device. 
(2)  The intentional removing or rendering inaccurate or inoperative of any sound monitoring instrument or device positioned in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1974, § 12-114) 
Sec. 38-167. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; or 
(2)  The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(Code 1974, § 12-115(a)) 
Sec. 38-168. - Sound levels by receiving land use. 
(a)  Maximum permissible sound levels. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use category in table 1 when measured at or within the property boundary of the receiving land use but not less than 25 feet from the source. 
TABLE 1. SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE 
Receiving Land Use Category Time Sound Level Limit 
(dB(A)) Residential area 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 60 
53 Business area At all times 63 Industrial area At all times 75  
(b)  Correction for character of sound. For any source of sound which emits a pure tone or impulsive sound, the maximum sound level limits set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be reduced by ten dB(A). 
(Code 1974, § 12-116) 
Secs. 38-169-38-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle noise, MCL 257.707a et seq.; local motor vehicle noise control ordinances to be identical to state act, MCL 257.707e(2). 

Sec. 38-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Combination vehicle means any combination of truck, truck tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or pole trailer used upon the highways or streets in the transportation of passengers or property. 
    Decibel means a unit of sound level on a logarithmic scale measured relative to the threshold of audible sound by the human ear, in compliance with American National Standards Institute Standard S1.1-1960. 
    Decibels on the A-weighted network and dB(A) mean decibels measured on the A-weighted network of a sound level meter, as specified in American National Standards Institute Standard S1.4-1971. 
    Exhaust system means the system composed of a combination of components which provides for enclosed flow of exhaust gas from engine parts to the atmosphere. 
    Fast meter response means the meter ballistics of meter dynamic characteristics as specified by American National Standard S1.4-1971. 
    Gross vehicle weight rating means the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a vehicle. 
    Maximum noise means the noise emitted from a vehicle during that manner of operation which causes the highest dB(A) level possible from that vehicle. 
    Muffler means a device for abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine. 
    Noise means any sound. 
    Total noise means noises radiating from a vehicle but does not include noises emitted from a horn, siren, bell or other similar device of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Code 1974, § 12-117) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.707a. 
Sec. 38-192. - Exhaust system. 
(a)  A motor vehicle, while being operated on a highway or street, shall be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order to prevent excessive or unusual noise and shall be equipped to prevent noise in excess of the limits established in this division. 
(b)  For purposes of this division, a motor vehicle does not include special mobile equipment as defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 12-117) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.707b. 
Sec. 38-193. - Specific noise limits. 
(a)  A motor vehicle shall not be operated or driven in the city if the motor vehicle produces total noise exceeding one of the following limits at a distance of 50 feet, except as provided in subsections (a)(2)c and (a)(3)c of this section: 
(1)  A motor vehicle with a gross weight or gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or more, or combination vehicle with gross weight or gross vehicle weight ratings of 8,500 pounds or more: 
a.  Ninety dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed is greater than 35 miles per hour. 
b.  Eighty-six dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed is not more than 35 miles per hour. 
c.  Eighty-eight dB(A) under stationary run-up test. 
(2)  A motorcycle or a moped: 
a.  Eighty-six dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed is greater than 35 miles per hour. 
b.  Eighty-two dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed is not more than 35 miles per hour. 
c.  Ninety-five dB(A) under stationary run-up test at 75 inches. 
(3)  A motor vehicle or a combination of vehicles towed by a motor vehicle not covered in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section: 
a.  Eighty-two dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed is greater than 35 miles per hour. 
b.  Seventy-six dB(A) if the maximum lawful speed is not more than 35 miles per hour. 
c.  Ninety-five dB(A) under stationary run-up test 20 inches from the end of the tailpipe. 
(b)  A dealer shall not sell or offer for sale for use upon a street or highway in this state a new motor vehicle manufactured after April 1, 1978, which produces a maximum noise exceeding the following limits: 
(1)  A motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or more: 83 dB(A). 
(2)  A motorcycle or a moped: 83 dB(A). 
(3)  A motor vehicle not covered in subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section: 80 dB(A). 
(c)  A person shall not operate a vehicle on a highway or street if the vehicle has a defect in the exhaust system which affects sound reduction, is not equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device, or is equipped with a cutout, bypass, amplifier, or a similar device. 
(d)  A person, either acting for himself or as the agent or employee of another, shall not sell, install, or replace a muffler or exhaust part that causes the motor vehicle to which the muffler or exhaust part is attached to exceed the noise limits established by this article or a rule promulgated under this article. 
(e)  A person shall not modify, repair, replace, or remove a part of an exhaust system causing the motor vehicle to which the system is attached to produce noise in excess of the levels established by this article, or operate a motor vehicle so altered. 
(f)  A dealer shall not sell a used or secondhand motor vehicle for use upon a street or highway which is not in compliance with this article. 
(g)  For purposes of this section, vehicles operated on other than a street or highway shall be treated as if they were being operated on a street or highway where the maximum lawful speed is not more than 35 miles per hour. 
(Code 1974, § 12-117) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.707c. 
Sec. 38-194. - Violations. 
(a)  A person who violates section 38-193(b), (d), or (f) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $100.00. 
(b)  A person who violates section 38-192 or section 38-193(a), (c), or (e) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  A person who, at the time of installation, knowingly installs a muffler or exhaust system which exceeds the decibel limits of this article shall be liable to the person who receives a citation for violation of section 38-192 for the amount of not less than $100.00, plus reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs. 
(d)  If it is shown that the noise level of a motor vehicle is in excess of the dB(A) levels established in this article, that evidence shall be prima facie evidence that the motor vehicle was producing excessive noise in violation of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 12-117) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.707d. 
Sec. 38-195. - Tests. 
    Test instrumentation and procedures used for implementation and enforcement of this article shall substantially conform with applicable standards and recommended practices established by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., and the American National Standards Institute, Inc., for the measurement of motor vehicle sound levels. Rules establishing these test procedures shall be as promulgated by the state department of highways and transportation. 
(Code 1974, § 12-117) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 257.707e. 
Secs. 38-196-38-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NUISANCES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Pigeons creating nuisance or perching on other property, § 14-224; creation of hazard or nuisance by swimming pools, § 18-362; fire hazards declared nuisance; abatement, § 42-2. 
State Law reference- Public nuisances, MCL 600.2801 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-221. - Definition. 
    Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public, interferes with or destroys or renders dangerous any street or highway, allows accumulation of junk or obnoxious matter on private property, or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is declared a nuisance by this Code or by the common and statutory law of the state. 
(Code 1974, § 19-99) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-222. - Deposits of offensive or unwholesome substances. 
    It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to throw, place, deposit or leave in any street, lane, alley, public place or square any animal or vegetable substance, dead animal, fish, shavings, dirt, rubbish, excrement, filth, unclean or nauseous water or liquor, hay, straw, soot, offal, garbage, swill or other article or substance whatever which may cause any offensive, unwholesome or nauseous smell, or endanger the health of the public. 
(Code 1974, § 19-101) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 74. 
Sec. 38-223. - Deposits of injurious substances. 
    It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to throw, place, deposit or leave in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place or square, or in any private place or premises, any glass, broken or unbroken, or any metal, stone, earthenware, tacks, cinders or other substances of a nature likely to cause injury to travelers or pedestrians, automobiles, bicycles or vehicles, or to injure any horse or other animal, or which might injure, cut or puncture any pneumatic tire. 
(Code 1974, § 19-102) 
Sec. 38-224. - Stagnant water; unwholesome or offensive excavations, cellars, sewers or other places. 
    If any land, excavation, cellar, sewer, place or premises within the city shall be damp, unwholesome, offensive or filthy, or be covered during any portion of the year with stagnant or impure water, or shall be in such condition as to produce offensive exhalations, the city council or health officer may require the land, excavation, cellar, sewer, place or premises to be drained, filled up, cleansed or purified by the owner or occupant or person in charge of such lot, premises or place. The existence of any condition specified in this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1974, § 19-103) 
Secs. 38-225-38-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABATEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisance abatement, MCL 600.2940. 

Sec. 38-241. - Notice to owner or occupant. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any officer of the city who shall determine that there exists a nuisance within the meaning of this Code shall cause a notice to be served on the owner or occupant of the premises on which the nuisance exists, requiring such person to abate such nuisance within the time specified in the notice. 
(b)  Service of the notice required by subsection (a) of this section shall be made: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to the owner or occupant personally or by leaving the notice at his residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)  By mailing the notice by first class mail to each owner or occupant at his last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner or person is unknown, by posting the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises for five days. 
(Code 1974, §§ 19-109, 19-110) 
Sec. 38-242. - Failure to abate; abatement by city. 
    If any person fails to abate a nuisance in accordance with the notice required by section 38-241, the city shall do so and the cost thereof shall be charged against the owner or occupant of the premises and payment thereof shall be enforced as a special assessment as provided in the Charter and this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 19-111) 
Secs. 38-243-38-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BLASTING, IMPULSIVE NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL FOR MINING 

Sec. 38-251. - Title, purpose and scope. 
(a)  This article shall be known and may be designated as the "City of Trenton Blasting, Impulsive Noise and Vibration Control for Mining article." 
(b)  In interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  It is not intended by this article to repeal, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this article. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon the use of premises than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 684, 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 38-252. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Blasting means the practice or occupation of rending heavy masses, especially of rock, by means of explosives, as in oil well drilling, quarrying. 
    Class A blasting means ongoing mining and excavating related blasting. 
    Decibel (dB) means a unit of measure, on a logarithmic scale to the base 10, of the ratio of the magnitude of a particular sound pressure to a standard reference pressure which, for purposes of this article, shall be 20 micronewtons per square meter (uN/m2). 
    Impulsive sound means either a single pressure peak of a single burst (multiple pressure peaks separated by intervals no greater than 1/10th of a second) for a total duration of no more than four seconds. 
    Ongoing mining and excavating related blasting means the blasting related operation has been in existence for six months or longer, or will be in operation for six months or longer, where explosives are used in the general course of operations. 
    Property-line-noise-source means any equipment or facility, or combination thereof, which operates within any land use. Such equipment or facility, or combination thereof, must be capable of emitting sound beyond the property line of the land on which operated. 
    Vibration means elastic oscillatory motion of the ground or structure located thereon of a transient or steady-state nature described by displacement, velocity, or acceleration of a particle or structure with respect to a given reference point. 
(Ord. No. 684, 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 38-253. - Permit. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to engage in any mining operations within the City of Trenton without having first secured a permit from the city. 
(b)  Application for permit. Applications for permits hereunder shall be made in writing to the city and shall be filed with the engineering and building department. Applications shall contain the name and address of the applicant, shall be signed by the applicant or his duly authorized officer or agent, shall contain a legal description of the property upon which the proposed operation is to be carried on, and a description of the proposed operation as to extent and nature. It shall set forth the name of the owner or owners of the land described therein, and if the applicant is not the owner, it shall have attached thereto the written consent of the owner or owners of such parcel of land for the proposed operation and authorizing the City of Trenton or their duly authorized representatives to obtain immediate entry onto the land, escorted by a representative of the owner, for the purpose of inspection. It shall also contain an agreement that the applicant, if granted a permit, will comply with all the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Permit fee; class A. A nonrefundable annual permit fee in the amount of $150.00 will be required at the time of application. 
(d)  Issuance, duration and expiration of permit. If approved by the city, subject to the regulations below and the provisions of state law, a permit shall be granted to the applicant. A class A permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months commencing with the issuance of the permit. Annual permit renewal may be approved by the city engineer if there have been no permit violations recorded within the previous year. 
(Ord. No. 684, 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 38-254. - Regulations. 
(a)  Impulsive noise regulations (blasting). No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulsive sound (airblast) from any property-line-noise-source to any receiving structure which exceeds the levels tabulated below for specific monitoring systems, when measured at any point within such receiving land, provided, however, that no measurement of sound levels shall be made less than 25 feet from the property-line-noise-source. 
0.1 Hz high-pass system 134 dB 2 Hz high-pass system 133 dB 5 or 6 Hz high-pass system 129 dB C-weighting slow-response system (events not exceeding two seconds duration) 105 dB (C)  
(b)  Vibration regulations. Vibration intensity shall not exceed a particle velocity of 0.5 inch per second for vibrations of semicontinuous nature when measurements are made on the ground next to the foundation or on the basement floor of any dwelling, church, school, or any other residential, commercial, or institutional structure. 
(c)  Vibration regulations; blasting. The intensity of ground motion produced by blasting operations either in construction or in operation of a business at a fixed location, when measured on the ground next to the foundation and not on a direct line between the structure and the point of the blast and at the same distance that the structure is from the point of the blast shall not exceed the following limits on particle velocity. 
Vibration frequencies less than 15 Hz: (a) 0.75 in./sec. for drywall construction (b) 0.50 in./sec. for plaster construction Vibration frequencies of 15 Hz to 40 Hz, peak particle velocity (PPV) limit shall be related to frequency (f) by: PPV = 0.05f (Examples: PPV limit @ 20 Hz - 1.0 in./sec.; @ Hz - 1.50 in./sec., etc.) Vibration frequencies 40 Hz and higher 2.00 in./sec.  
All particle velocity limits apply to the maximum of any one of the three components of motion, longitudinal (or radial), transverse, or vertical, and shall be interpreted as described in U.S. Bureau of Mines Report R. I. 8507 of Appendix B. 
(d)  General blasting regulations. Every permit holder shall be required to observe the following regulations in addition to any special condition or conditions imposed by the city council by any applicable provision of law. 
(e)  Class A permit regulations. The following regulations govern the issuance and use of a class A blasting permit. 
(1)  Blasting insurance required. Any person, firm, corporation or association holding a class A blasting permit must obtain public liability insurance, insuring himself and the City of Trenton in the amounts of $1,000,000.00/$2,000,000.00 aggregate for property damage and for personal injury. 
(2)  Blasting schedule; inspection. The person, firm, corporation or association holding a Class A blasting permit will provide the city with an estimated schedule of all blasting operations, and will also give the city written notice as to the time and occurrence of each blast prior thereto by at least two hours. The city shall have the right to have a staff representative on site at the time of each blasting upon notification to the person, firm, corporation, or association as to that effect. The person, firm, corporation, or association shall compensate the city at the rate of $50.00 per hour, or fraction thereof, for the services of the representative and this cost shall be borne by the permit holder, in addition to the cost of the permit fees. 
(3)  Use and handling of explosives. The use of explosives will only be undertaken by qualified personnel. No blasting operations shall be permitted within 100 feet of the property line of any dwelling, building, school, church, theatre, or other structure which the city engineer may deem hazardous. 
(4)  Seismograph readings. Seismograph readings will be provided by a firm selected by the permittee and approved by the city. Seismograph readings shall not exceed those as prescribed in subsection A of this article. The seismograph will be set up at locations to be determined by the permittee in consultation with the city, including one in the area of the closest Trenton residence. This, however, does not prevent the city from conducting it's own periodic seismographic measurements. In addition, the city shall have the option to select other sites as they feel is necessary to take an adequate reading as to any possible damage to adjacent structures. All costs incurred for the above requirements shall be borne by the person, firm, corporation or association. The Instrument shall be periodically certified and readings shall be consistent within the prescribed limits, and reported to the city monthly. Seismograph recordings will be made with an instrument yielding direct three-component measurement of particle velocity together with measurement of airblast on magnetic tape or film; it shall contain complete internal seismic calibration (i.e., recorder and seismeters) capability. 
(5)  Hours of blasting. Class A blasting permit holders will only be allowed to detonate a maximum of four blasts per week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding city holidays which fall during the Monday through Friday period. Blasts other than on Tuesday and Thursday of any week shall require advance notice to the city. In the event a delay in blasting until 4:00 p.m. is necessary due to unforeseen circumstances detrimental to safety, the city engineer may permit a blast to take place after 4:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 684, 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 38-255. - Administration. 
    The city shall authorize the city engineer and his duly authorized agents with the responsibility of enforcing this article. This authorized agent shall be directly under the control of the city engineer and shall, for the purpose of this article, have the powers of a police officer. The city administrator, as legal agent for the city, is hereby authorized to take such legal action in the courts, in the name of the City of Trenton, as he determines necessary to enforce the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 684, 3-21-2005) 
Sec. 38-256. - Variance. 
    Application may be made to the city for a variance from the specific terms of this article in a particular case where the imposition of said article would impose an undue hardship and its strict adherence would not substantially the health, welfare, and safety of the public. The city may, in lieu thereof, impose such other conditions as would be consistent with such case and with the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 684, 3-21-2005) 
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; emergency services and emergency management, ch. 34; setting fires in parks, § 70-116; burning garbage, § 74-36; placing material in containers that may cause fire, § 74-80; sewers, water mains and fire hydrants, § 86-191 et seq.; use of fire hydrants, § 98-35. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Violation of state law or regulations. 
    No person shall violate any act or law of the state or any rule or regulations adopted by any duly authorized state agency pertaining to fire, fire hazards or fire prevention. 
(Code 1974, § 14-1) 
State Law reference- State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq. 
Sec. 42-2. - Fire hazards declared nuisance; abatement. 
(a)  The existence of a fire hazard is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and such fire hazard may be abated, removed, corrected, and its continuance enjoined in the manner provided by law for the abatement of nuisances. 
(b)  Whenever the chief of the fire department shall deem a fire hazard to be imminently dangerous or menacing to human life so that the public safety requires its immediate abatement, removal, correction or discontinuance, he may bring, or cause to be brought, in the circuit court a suit for the purpose of abating, removing, correcting or discontinuing such fire hazard. 
(Code 1974, § 14-6) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 38-221 et seq. 
Sec. 42-3. - False fire alarms. 
    No person shall turn in, sound or cause to be communicated to the fire department a false alarm of fire. 
(Code 1974, § 14-2) 
State Law reference- False fire alarms, MCL 750.240. 
Sec. 42-4. - Obstructing or altering fire hydrants. 
(a)  No person shall place any building material or any other obstruction whatsoever, nor shall any person responsible for such material or obstruction permit it to remain, within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. 
(b)  With the exception of the fire and water departments, no person or organization, including a property owner's association, shall change, alter or in any way tamper with the color, design or operation of a fire hydrant located within the city, whether on public or private property. In the event a review by the city's fire department results in the identification of any alteration of any hydrant, the city may take restorative action, and the expense associated therewith shall become the responsibility of, and therefore billed to, the homeowner on whose property the hydrant is located or such other persons or organizations responsible for the alteration and reimbursement shall be made to the city within 30 days of receipt of the invoice. 
(c)  Any person on whose property such obstructions to a fire hydrant exists, shall have an affirmative duty to immediately remove or relocate the obstruction to afford ready access to the hydrant. 
(d)  Whenever the chief of the fire department shall deem such material to be an access obstruction which potentially endangers fire and rescue operations and requires immediate abatement, he may order the department to undertake such abatement at the owners expense, reimbursement for which shall be made within 30 days. 
(e)  Violations of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction with a minimum penalty of $50.00 per day per violation. 
(Code 1974, § 14-3; Ord. No. 717, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 42-5. - Use of fire hydrants. 
    No person, except members of the fire department, water department, engineering and building department, recreation department or department of public works, shall use any fireplug, except in the case of emergency, without first securing permission from the fire department for such use, and paying or agreeing to pay for the water used. In no case shall any wrench other than a regulation hydrant wrench be used on any fire hydrant. 
(Code 1974, § 14-4) 
Sec. 42-6. - Setting fire in hotel, roominghouse or other place of public abode. 
(a)  Any person who carelessly, recklessly or negligently sets fire to any hotel, roominghouse, lodginghouse or other place of public abode, or to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes or other furnishing therein so as to endanger life or property in any way, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  In each sleeping room of all hotels, roominghouses, lodginghouses and other places of public abode, a plainly written notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place as notice of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 14-5) 
Sec. 42-7. - Obedience to firefighters and fire investigators. 
    Any person who, while in the vicinity of the scene of a fire or a fire investigation, willfully disobeys any reasonable order or rule of a commanding officer, firefighter, fire marshal or fire investigator which is intended to protect persons, property, or evidence, or prevent interference at the scene of such fire or fire investigation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 14-7) 
State Law reference- Obstructing or resisting firefighters, MCL 750.241. 
Secs. 42-8-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Departments, § 2-91 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-31. - Annual report of fire chief. 
    A report of the chief of the fire department shall be made annually and transmitted to the mayor. The report shall contain all proceedings under this chapter, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the fire prevention code adopted by this chapter which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Code 1974, § 14-17) 
Sec. 42-32. - Appointment of inspectors. 
    The chief of the fire department may appoint such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(Code 1974, § 14-18) 
Sec. 42-33. - Interfering with or damaging property of department. 
    No person shall interfere with or damage any firefighting apparatus or equipment or anything pertaining to the city fire alarm system. 
(Code 1974, § 14-19) 
State Law reference- Destruction of fire department property, MCL 750.377b. 
Sec. 42-34. - Possession of duplicates of keys belonging to fire department. 
    No person shall make, or have in his possession, an impression or duplicate of any key belonging to the fire department without the express permission of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1974, § 14-20) 
Secs. 42-35-42-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Firefighters Training Council Act of 1966, MCL 29.361 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 42-61. - Declaration of vacancy. 
    The fire chief shall request authorization of the mayor to fill, as necessary, any vacancy in the fire department. Upon the mayor's approval, the city shall proceed to fill the vacancy in accordance with procedures prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1974, § 24-16) 
Sec. 42-62. - Appointments. 
(a)  Appointments for employment as officers in the fire department shall only be made after completely fulfilling the preliminary requirements and satisfactory completion of examinations to determine physical and mental fitness. Such examination shall be conducted as provided in this division, and appointments shall be made from a revolving list of qualified applicants after confirmation by the city administrator or mayor. 
(b)  Such list of applicants may be held in effect, and continuing appointments made therefrom, for a period of up to two years from the date of application, which may be periodically updated, or terminated earlier if found to be in the best interest of the city by approval of the mayor. 
(c)  In the absence or shortage of currently available applicants in the department's revolving file, the fire chief may contact local academies or cause public notice to be given for additional applicants, which notice shall be posted on the city's web-site and cable television or published in the local newspaper carrying official council proceedings, that applications for appointment and examination are being accepted by the city. Such applications shall be received and kept in a revolving file at the city's human resource office where it shall be periodically updated for eligibility. 
(Code 1974, § 24-17; Ord. No. 760, § 1, 2-6-12) 
Secs. 42-63-42-80. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Minimum Employment Standards 

Sec. 42-81. - Preliminary requirements. 
    The minimum requirements for fire service officer applicants shall, for the period of application and employment, be as follows: 
(1)  Be a citizen of the United States. 
(2)  Have attained the minimum age of 18 or as otherwise provided by law. 
(3)  Have obtained a high school diploma or have attained a passing score on the general education development test indicating a high school graduation level. 
(4)  Show proof of residency within six months following expiration of the initial probationary period of employment. 
(5)  Possess a valid Michigan motor vehicle operator's or chauffeur's license with a good driving record free of alcohol or drug related convictions, felony and misdemeanor convictions, and multiple civil infractions within the most recent ten-year period. 
(6)  Not have been convicted of a felony as determined by a police department search of local, state and national records. 
(7)  Possess good moral character as determined by a favorable comprehensive background investigation covering school and employment records, home environment and personal traits and integrity. Consideration will be given to any convictions under state, federal or local law, including traffic and conservation law, as an indicator of character. 
(8)  Meet physical requirements as set forth in NFPA 1582, Standard on Medical Requirements for Fire Fighters, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, 1997 edition. 
(9)  Meet minimum qualifications for the following categories: 
a.  Firefighter I, as set forth by the department of state police, firefighter training council. 
b.  Firefighter II, as set forth by the department of state police, firefighter training council. 
c.  Emergency Medical Technician Specialist (paramedic required at time of hire) as set forth by the state department of consumer and industry services. 
(Code 1974, § 24-18) 
Sec. 42-82. - Examinations. 
(a)  The examination process for the fire department will be in accordance with equal opportunity employment and related professional standards. 
(b)  Any written examinations shall be conducted by competent authority as designated by the city. 
(c)  The applicant for testing may be charged a fee equal to the actual costs of the examination, payable to the city in advance at the time of notification of the testing time and place. 
(d)  The city shall conduct, or cause to be conducted by persons with recognized experience, an impartial oral interview and a complete review of the applicant's background investigation. 
(e)  Upon the completion of the process described in this section, an employment list or roster for hiring shall be promulgated. 
(Code 1974, § 24-19) 
Sec. 42-83. - Appointment process and probationary period. 
    The fire chief shall make recommendations for appointment as outlined under section 42-62. All such appointees shall be prepared to report for duty within a reasonable period of time after proper notification to permit completion of psychological and physical evaluation and drug screening. Failure to report when required will result in the forfeiture of such appointment. Appointees shall be on probationary status with the department for a period of not less than one year after reporting for duty. If at any time during the probationary period it is found that the employee does not meet the necessary requirements as determined by periodic rating of his superiors, or is found in violation of any offense or regulation, the employee shall be immediately dismissed and replaced. 
(Code 1974, § 24-20) 
Secs. 42-84-42-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Continuing Employment Standards 

Sec. 42-101. - Conditions of employment. 
    All employees hired after September 15, 1975, shall be subject to the following continuing conditions of employment: 
(1)  An employee shall be required to maintain a standard of agility and fitness throughout his employment period. All employees shall be tested for fitness and agility at a minimum of once per year under the direction of the department head. The fitness and agility test shall be in accordance with acceptable medical standards and shall take into consideration such factors as an employee's height, weight and age. The employee shall maintain an acceptable score in order to pass the test. 
(2)  All employees shall be required to undergo and pass a medical examination at least once a year. The examination shall show that the employee is free from any physical or mental conditions which might adversely affect the required performance of his duties or which may endanger the employee's life or lives of others. All employees shall be required to have normal visual functions and visual acuity in each eye, correctable to 20/20. Employees must be physically sound, well developed physically, with height and weight in relation to each other, and to age as indicated by accepted medical standards, and in possession of their extremities. The employee shall be free from any chronic diseases, organic diseases, functional conditions or mental instability which may tend to impair his efficient performance of duty. This examination will be as prescribed by the city physician/facility, when requested by the department head. The examination will be at no cost to the employee. 
(3)  If an employee fails to retain or meet the requirements under subsections (1) and (2) of this section, such employee shall have a 30-calendar-day period from the date of the test or examination to meet such requirements. If found failing after reexamination, the employee shall then be subject to compliance as prescribed under the direction of the city physician/facility, which may or may not preclude active employment until such deficiency is corrected, or the employee may be placed on sick or medical leave for a period not to exceed six months or until such deficiency is corrected. If the impediment is not corrected at the expiration of the six-month period, the employee shall be placed on medical leave, or if qualified may request a disability pension, or may be terminated. 
(4)  If such an employee can produce, at his own expense, medical evidence by a licensed physician to the contrary, the employee's report, together with the city's report, shall be subject to an impartial decision by a third licensed physician selected by the two previous examiners. The expense shall be borne by the city, and that decision shall be binding. 
(Code 1974, § 24-21) 
Secs. 42-102-42-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCIPLINE OF MEMBERS 

Sec. 42-121. - Offenses for which disciplinary measures may be taken; types of disciplinary action. 
(a)  A member of the fire department found guilty of violating any of the following offenses shall be subject to reprimand, suspension, forfeiture of pay, dismissal or such other lawful punishment as the chief of the fire department may direct: 
(1)  Cowardice. 
(2)  Willful disobedience of rules of the department or general or special orders of the department. 
(3)  Being under the influence of liquor or drinking any kind of intoxicating liquor while on duty, unless ordered by competent authority, or entering a place where intoxicating drinks are sold or kept, except in the line of duty. 
(4)  Entering a disorderly house or place where illegal commercial gambling is carried on, not in the performance of fire duty. 
(5)  Conduct unbecoming an officer. 
(6)  Insubordination or disrespect to a superior officer. 
(7)  Neglect of or inattention to duty. 
(8)  General incompetency. 
(9)  Sleeping while on active post duty. 
(10)  Being absent from duty without permission. 
(11)  Leaving his post without proper relief or purpose. 
(12)  Using coarse, profane or insolent language to a superior officer, a member of the fire department or any citizen. 
(13)  Not properly patrolling or guarding a post. 
(14)  Making a false statement or report. 
(15)  Neglecting to wear a proper uniform while on duty or neglecting to appear clean and tidy in person and dress. 
(16)  Accepting bribes of money or other valuables. 
(17)  Accepting any fee, reward or gift of any kind from any person for services rendered or pretended to be rendered as a member of the fire department without consent of the chief of the fire department. 
(18)  Gossiping about a member of the fire department concerning his personal character or conduct, which is detrimental to such member. 
(19)  Publicly criticizing orders given by a superior officer. 
(20)  Communicating or giving information to any person concerning the business of the fire department, which is detrimental to the fire department. 
(21)  Neglecting to pay a just indebtedness incurred while in the service, within a reasonable time. 
(22)  Assigning salary due or to become due to any person without permission from the chief of the fire department. 
(23)  Refusing to give his name or badge number when requested. 
(24)  Neglecting to turn over all property taken from persons to the proper officer without unnecessary delay. 
(25)  Neglecting to report any member of the fire department known to be guilty of violation of any rule, regulation or order issued for the guidance of the fire department. 
(26)  Failure to report a known violation of law or of this Code or other ordinances of the city. 
(27)  Ignorance of rules or orders. 
(28)  Immorality. 
(29)  Conviction of an offense in any court having criminal jurisdiction. 
(b)  Whenever it shall be deemed necessary for the preservation of good order, efficiency and discipline, the chief of the fire department may suspend any one of his subordinates from duty for the reasons enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 14-26) 
Sec. 42-122. - Filing of report of charges. 
    When the chief of the fire department suspends a member of the fire department, he shall, without delay, file a written report of the charges with the city council and furnish the suspended member with a copy of the charges. 
(Code 1974, § 14-27) 
Sec. 42-123. - Statement by suspended member; request for hearing. 
    Any suspended member of the fire department shall make a written statement to the chief of the fire department within 24 hours of his suspension. If he wishes a hearing on the charges, he shall make a written request of the city council within 48 hours from the time of his suspension. 
(Code 1974, § 14-28) 
Sec. 42-124. - Suspended members to turn over property belonging to city. 
    In all cases of suspension of any member of the fire department, the suspended officer or member shall immediately surrender to the chief of the fire department all property in his possession belonging to the city. Pending the disposition of the case, such property shall be retained by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1974, § 14-29) 
Sec. 42-125. - Wearing uniform while suspended. 
    During a period of suspension, the suspended member of the fire department shall not wear his uniform. 
(Code 1974, § 14-30) 
Sec. 42-126. - Complaints initiated by members of department. 
    Except as otherwise provided in collective bargaining agreements, when any member of the fire department shall feel aggrieved or have a complaint against any member of the fire department, he shall have the right to file a written report of his complaint with the city council and the chief of the fire department and request a public hearing before the city council. The city council shall have the discretion to decide in committee to either grant or deny such hearing. 
(Code 1974, § 14-31) 
Secs. 42-127-42-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Emergency services and management, ch. 34. 

Sec. 42-151. - Service established; purpose. 
    There is hereby established an emergency service, to be known as emergency medical service, for the purpose of providing transportation to local hospitals for those persons injured or incurring sudden illness in the city requiring immediate hospital treatment. 
(Code 1974, § 14-37) 
Sec. 42-152. - Personnel; supervision. 
    The emergency medical service shall be operated by the personnel of the fire department under the direction of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1974, § 14-38) 
Sec. 42-153. - Rules and regulations. 
    The chief of the fire department is hereby authorized to establish such reasonable rules and regulations as are necessary to give prompt and efficient service to persons incurring illness who are injured within the city, which rules and regulations are to be consistent with the provisions of this division and the Charter, and other city and state regulations. 
(Code 1974, § 14-39) 
Sec. 42-154. - Calls for service; nonemergency service calls. 
(a)  At the time of any emergency injury or sudden illness occurring in the city, a citizen may call the fire department emergency number to obtain the emergency medical service vehicle. 
(b)  All nonemergency service calls shall be made to private ambulance services. The emergency medical service shall not be operated for transportation for people suffering from illness or injuries which do not constitute emergencies when sufficient time exists to arrange transportation with a private ambulance service, or other means, without any detrimental effects to the person involved. 
(Code 1974, § 14-40) 
Sec. 42-155. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for emergency medical services shall be as established by the city council. 
(b)  There will be no charge for emergency medical services to any team member participating as part of a recreational program sponsored by the city or the city school system. 
(Code 1974, § 14-41; Ord. No. 672, § 1, 6-7-2004) 
Sec. 42-156. - Transport of persons injured in traffic accidents. 
    The emergency medical service shall provide transportation of all injured persons in traffic accidents within the city. 
(Code 1974, § 14-42) 
Sec. 42-157. - Restrictions on transport. 
    Emergency medical service vehicles shall not transport patients outside of the city from one hospital to another within the city or transport patients from any hospital to anyplace within the city unless authorized by the fire chief. 
(Code 1974, § 14-44) 
Sec. 42-158. - Insurance coverage. 
    The city controller shall establish that the requisite insurance coverage is in effect to cover the operation of the emergency medical service. 
(Code 1974, § 14-45) 
Secs. 42-159, 42-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COST RECOVERY FOR HAZARDOUS/ TOXIC MATERIAL INCIDENTS 

Sec. 42-161. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division: 
    Dangerous goods. In Canadian transportation, hazardous materials are referred to as dangerous goods. 
    Emergency response means: 
(1)  The providing, sending and/or utilizing of public service, fire, police, rescue service, DPW or any other agent of the city at/to hazardous/toxic material incident or hazardous condition; and 
(2)  The providing, sending and/or utilizing or public service, fire, police, rescue service, DPW or any other agent of the city to any scene where a person and/or driver becomes helpless, endangered, or otherwise in need of assistance, by reason, in whole or in part, of a hazardous/toxic material incident and/or condition. 
    Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city, or by a private person, corporation, or other entity operating at the request of or the direction of the city, through the extraordinary use of public services, when making an emergency response to the incident, including the costs of providing fire fighting, rescue service, and police at the scene of the incident. These costs further include, but are not limited to, all salaries, wages, worker's compensation benefits, and fringe benefits of the city personnel responding to the incident; the cost of equipment operation; the cost of materials obtained directly by the city; and the cost of any contract labor or materials ordered to mitigate the hazard. 
    Extremely hazardous substances (EHS) means chemicals determined by the Environmental Protection Agency to be extremely hazardous to a community curing an emergency spill or release as a result of their toxicities and physical/chemical properties, as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR 355. 
    Hazardous chemicals means any chemical that would be a risk to employees if exposed in the workplace, as defined by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 29 CFR 1910. 
    Hazardous condition means any condition that poses an unreasonable risk to safety, health and property. 
    Hazardous materials means any substance or material in any form or quantity, which poses an unreasonable risk to safety and health and property when, transported in commerce as defined by U.S. Department of Transportation, 49 CFR 171. 
    Hazardous materials incident is defined as the release, or potential release, of a hazardous material form its container into the environment. 
    Hazardous substances means any substance designated under the Clean Water Act and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) as posing a threat to waterways and the environment when released, as defined by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR 302. When used within OSHA 1910.120 refers to every chemical regulated by EPA as a hazardous substance and by U.S. Department of Transportation as a hazardous material. 
    Hazardous wastes means discarded materials regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency because of public health and safety concerns. Regulatory authority is granted under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), as set forth by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR 260-281. 
    Incendiary-type fires is defined for fire reporting purposes as evidence that leads to reporting person to conclude that a fire was deliberately set. Evidence includes physical material and observations of fire effects and may include witnesses or admissions. A deliberately set fire may be lawful or unlawful depending upon other circumstances relevant under applicable law, including intent, ownership of property ignited, and the presence or absence of permission. 
(Ord. No. 693, § 1, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 42-162. - Cost recovery. 
    Cost recovery emergency response for hazardous/toxic material incidents, hazardous conditions, and incendiary-type fires of any duration. 
(1)  The city shall be entitled to recover all costs and damages incurred in conjunction with emergency incidents involving hazardous/toxic materials or hazardous conditions of extended duration. Such costs and damages shall include, but not be limited to, those associated with incident abatement, cleanup and mitigation, including any related third party costs, which were necessary to ensure the safety of the city and its populace. 
(2)  Such costs and damages shall be the joint and distinct responsibility of the owner(s) and/or operator(s) of the property, equipment, vehicle or container causing or contributing to any emergency incident or hazardous condition of extended duration. All such costs and damages shall be paid within 30 days of demand by the city unless otherwise approved by city council. 
(3)  The city shall have a lien for all unpaid costs and damages incurred as above-described and may enforce such lien in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens. 
(Ord. No. 693, § 1, 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 42-163. - Costs recovery for incendiary-type fires of any duration. 
(a)  The city shall be entitled to recover all costs and damages incurred in conjunction with any incendiary-type fire. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to, those associated with the fire extinguishment and investigation. 
(b)  Such costs and damages shall be the joint and several responsibility of the person(s) found responsible for setting the fire by a court of competent jurisdiction. All such costs and damages shall be paid within 30 days of demand by the city. 
(c)  The city shall have a lien for all unpaid costs and damages incurred as above-described and may enforce such lien in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens. 
(Ord. No. 693, § 1, 12-5-2005) 
Secs. 42-164-42-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - COST RECOVERY FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE TO MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 698, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2006, set out provisions intended for use as division 5. Inasmuch as Ord. No. 693, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2005, also enacted provisions designated as division 5 the provisions of Ord. No. 698 have been included as division 6. 

Sec. 42-171. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division: 
(a)  Emergency response shall mean the providing, sending and/or utilizing of public service, fire, police, rescue service, DPW or any other agent of the city to any scene where a person and/or driver becomes helpless, endangered, or otherwise in need of assistance. 
(b)  Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city; or by a private person, corporation, or other entity operating at the request of or the direction of the city; through the use of public services, when making an emergency response to the incident, including the costs of providing emergency transport at the scene of the incident. 
(c)  Level I response: A minor vehicle accident response which would require an engine to respond to the scene to assist and would require minimal involvement of fire department personnel. The response could include clearing of road hazards and would typically require 60 minutes of time or less on the scene. 
(d)  Level II response: This would involve a moderate vehicle accident response which would require an engine to respond to the scene to assist in the situation. It could involve the clean up of spills and debris removal and extrication and typically would require 60 minutes of time or less on the scene. 
(e)  Level III response: Vehicle accidents that require extended (over one hour) extrication, hazardous materials, or any other situation requiring fire department personnel for multiple engine/truck companies or rescue vehicle; victim entrapment with heavy rescue and/or extended extraction operations; could require removing or mitigating hazardous material incident, combating a working fire, and would require over one hour of time on the scene. 
(Ord. No. 698, § 1, 1-17-2006) 
Sec. 42-172. - Cost recovery. 
(a)  The city shall be entitled to recover from the owner, driver or named insured party, or combination thereof (responsible party), the expenses of an emergency response incurred when the city's fire department responds to a motor vehicle accident or any other incident involving a motor vehicle collision. 
(b)  Responsible parties are required to reimburse the City of Trenton for such costs in the following amounts: 
(1)  Actual costs up to the sum of $500.00 for a Level I response. 
(2)  Actual costs up to the sum of $750.00 for a Level II response. 
(3)  For Level III response: The billing submitted by the City of Trenton Fire Department in accordance with the City of Trenton Fire Department Equipment and Personnel Rate Schedule as established from time to time by resolution of council. 
(c)  All invoiced expenses of an emergency response shall be paid to the city treasurer within 30 calendar days of the date of the mailing to the responsible party, unless approval of alternative arrangements is granted by the fire chief in cases of hardship or unless an appeal is filed with the city. 
(d)  The city shall have a lien for all unpaid costs and damages incurred as above-described and may enforce such lien in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens. 
(e)  Failure to make payment of the cost recovery assessment by the responsible person(s) in a timely manner constitutes a municipal civil infraction. 
(f)  The city shall accept reimbursement from a responsible party's insurance carrier as payment in full of expenses of emergency response, in the case of bona fide residents of the city who appear as title owners of real property on the city's tax rolls but may balance bill non-residents for any non-covered portion. 
(Ord. No. 698, § 1, 1-17-2006; Ord. No 786, § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Secs. 42-173-42-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 675, § 10, adopted Dec. 20, 2004, repealed §§ 14-56 and 14-59-14-62 of the 1974 Trenton Code of Ordinances, which sections had been codified in this Code as §§ 42-181 and 42-184-42-188. Sections 1-3 of Ord. No. 675 enacted new provisions pertaining to similar subject matter and included at the editor's discretion as §§ 42-181, 42-184, and 42-185. 

Sec. 42-181. - International Fire Code adopted. 
    A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk of Trenton, Michigan, being marked and designated as the 2015 International Fire Code, including Appendix B (Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings), C (Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution), D (Fire Apparatus Access Roads), F (Hazard Ranking), G (Cryogenic Fluids), H Hazardous Materials Management Plan and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement Instructions), I (Fire Protection System Non-Compliant Conditions), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the fire code of the City of Trenton for regulating and governing the safeguarding of the life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code on file in the office of the City Clerk of City of Trenton, Michigan, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 42-183 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 675, § 1, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 710, § 1, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 750, § 1, 3-21-2011; Ord. No. 789, § 1, 6-19-2017) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 42-182. - Enforcement. 
    The fire prevention code adopted by this article shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department, the fire department fire inspector, and/or the fire chief's designee. 
(Code 1974, § 14-57; Ord. No. 789, § 2, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 42-183. - Amendments. 
    Whenever the following words or phrases are used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, they shall have the same meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Chief of the bureau of fire prevention and bureau of fire prevention mean the chief of the fire department and the fire inspector. 
    Corporation counsel means the city attorney. 
    Municipality means City of Trenton, Michigan. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 [Name of Jurisdiction] to City of Trenton, Michigan. 
Section 109.4 [Specify Offense] to Misdemeanor, [Amount] to $500.00. [Number of Days] to 93. 
Section 111.4 [Amount] to Not less than $100.00 per day, [Amount] to Not more than $500.00 per day. 
Sec. 42-183. Amendments. 
    Whenever the following words or phrases are used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, they shall have the same meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Chief of the bureau of fire prevention and bureau of fire prevention mean the chief of the fire department and the fire inspector. 
    Corporation counsel means the city attorney. 
    Municipality means the City of Trenton, Michigan. 
Delete sections 102, 103, 104, 105, 109, 112.1, 202, 302, 307, 508.5, 508.4.1, 610, 901.6.2, 903.2.10.3, 904.3.5, 907.2.12 907.4.4 907.7.1, 907.9.2 907.10.2.1, 907.12.1, 1005, 1201, 2201, 2206, 2803, 3301, 3308, 3401, 3405, 3801, Appendix D. Change Chapter 45 to Chapter 80. 
(Code 1974, § 14-58; Ord. No. 789, § 3, 6-19-2017) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-184. - Revised sections of fire code. 
    The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 (Name of Jurisdiction) Insert: City of Trenton Section 109.3 (Specify Offense) Insert: Misdemeanor (Specify Amount) Insert: $500 (Specify Number of Days) Insert: 93 Section 111.4 (Specify Amount) Insert: Not less than $100 per day (Specify Amount) Insert: Not more than $500 per day  
(Ord. No. 675, § 2, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 710, § 2, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 750, § 2, 3-21-2011) 
Sec. 42-185. - Added and amended sections of fire code. 
    The following Sections of the Code shall be added or amended to read as follows: 
Section 102 
102.6 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 45 and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the referenced standards the provisions which establish the higher standard for the promotion of the safety and welfare of the public and the protection of the public, or as otherwise determined by State of Michigan law, shall apply. 
Section 103 
103.1 General. The Trenton Fire Department shall be responsible for fire prevention inspection activities and code enforcement of buildings and occupancies as related to the risk of fire or explosion within the City of Trenton. The department of fire prevention is established within the jurisdiction under the direction of the code official. The function of the department shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code and codes and standards referenced in Chapter 45 of this code. 
Section 104 
104.11.4 Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department emergency equipment. A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire official in charge of said fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach to, climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, operate any emergency warning equipment, or to manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. 
104.11.5 Damage/injury to fire department equipment/personnel. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface, any fire department emergency vehicle or equipment at any time; or to injure, or attempt or conspire to injure, fire department personnel while performing departmental duties. 
Section 105 
105.1 General. Permits shall be in accordance with Section 105. Where reference is made to this section for permits elsewhere in this code and there are no provisions for issuing said permits by the department of fire prevention, the code official is authorized to waive the particular permit requirement. 
105.6 Required operational permits. The code official is authorized to issue operational permits for the operations set forth in Sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.46. Where there are no provisions for issuing said permits by the department of fire prevention, the code official is authorized to waive the particular permit requirement. 
105.6.13 Exhibits, crafts and trade shows. An operational permit is required to operate exhibits, crafts and trade shows. 
105.6.13.1 Permit fee. A minimum fee of $30.00 shall be applied to each exhibit, craft or trade show, except those operated by the City. 
105.6.15.1 Fireworks. An operational permit is required for the public display and retail display and sale of fireworks. Application for permits shall be made in writing at least 15 days in advance of the date of the public display, retail display or sale of fireworks. The sale, possession, and distribution of fire works for such display shall be lawful under the terms and conditions approved with the permit and for only that purpose. A permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable nor shall any such permit be extended beyond the time set forth therein unless approved by the fire official. The permit fee for public display and the retail display and sale of fireworks shall be $100.00, except as to the City. 
105.6.20 Hazardous materials. An operational permit is required to store, transport on site, dispense, use or handle hazardous materials in excess of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.21. 
105.6.20.1 Required amounts for reporting. Reportable quantities shall be considered the maximum amount of hazardous material on site at any given time. This amount is required to be reported to the fire department as indicated in Table 105.6.21. 
     TABLE 105.6.20 
     PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
     (Quantities equal to or greater than listed} 
MATERIAL AMOUNT AEROSOLS LEVEL 2 OR 3 500 LBS. ANHYDROUS AMMONIA ANY QUANTITY AMMONIUM NITRATE 1,000 LBS. CARCINOGENS ANY QUANTITY COMBINATION FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 120 GAL. COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS:  CLASS II 120 GAL.  CLASS III-A 330 GAL.  CLASS III-B 13,200 GAL. COMBUSTIBLE DUST 1 LB. PER 1,000 CU. FT. COMBUSTIBLE FIBER (Loose) 100 CU. FT. COMBUSTIBLE FIBER (Baled) 1,000 CU. FT. CORROSIVE GAS 810 CU. FT. CORROSIVE LIQUIDS 500 GAL. CORROSIVE SOLIDS 500 LBS. CRYOGENIC LIQUID (FLAMMABLE) 45 GAL. CRYOGENIC LIQUID (NONFLAMMABLE) 500 GAL. EXPLOSIVE & BLASTING AGENTS: (Not including Class "C" explosive) ANY QUANTITY FLAMMABLE GAS 750 CU. FT. LlQUIFIED NATURAL GAS 30 GAL. Water Capacity LlQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS 30 GAL. Water Capacity NON-FLAMMABLE GAS 100 GAL. Water Capacity FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS:  CLASS 1-A 30 GAL.  CLASS 1-B 60 GAL.  CLASS 1-C 90 GAL. FLAMMABLE SOLID 125 LBS. IRRITATING MATERIAL (Gas) 810 CU. FT. IRRITATING MATERIAL (Liquid) 500 GAL. IRRITATING MATERIAL (Solid) 500 LBS. NITROMETHANE (Unstable Materials) ANY QUANTITY ORGANIC PEROXIDES:  CLASS 1 5 LBS.  CLASS 2 50 LBS.  CLASS 3 125 LBS. OTHER HEALTH HAZARDS 5,000 LBS. 500 GAL. 810 CU. FT. OXIDIZING MATERIAL (Gas) 1,500 CU. FT. OXIDIZING MATERIAL (Liquid) 15 GAL. OXIDIZING MATERIAL:  CLASS 1 1,000 LBS.  CLASS 2 250 LBS.  CLASS 3 10 LBS.  CLASS 4 ANY QUANTITY POISON 500 LBS. POISON "A" ANY QUANTITY POISON "B" ANY QUANTITY POISON GAS ANY QUANTITY POWDER SMOKELESS 20 LBS. POWDER BLACK SPORTING 1 LB. PYROPHORIC 4 LBS. 50 CU. FT. RADIOACTIVE ANY QUANTITY SENSITIZERS 500 GAL. 810 CU. FT. SPONTANEOUSLY COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL 100 LBS. TOXIC MATERIAL 50 GAL. 500 LBS. 810 CU. FT. HIGHLY TOXIC MATERIAL ANY QUANTITY LIQUID 1 LB. 20 CU. FT. TIRES 2,500 CU. FT. UNSTABLE (REACTIVE) MATERIAL:  CLASS 1 125 LBS.; 750 CU. FT.  CLASS 2 50 LBS.; 250 CU. FT.  CLASS 3 5 LBS.; 50 CU. FT.  CLASS 4 ANY QUANTITY WATER REACTIVE MATERIAL:  CLASS 2 50 LBS.  CLASS 3 5 LBS.  
105.6.20.2 Permit Fees. The following fees shall be applied to the maximum quantity of each form of hazardous materials: 
Quantity & Form 0-1,000 lbs.; 0-100 cu. ft.; 0-330 gal. $100.00 1,001-20,000 lbs.; 101-6,000 cu. ft.; 331-990 gal. $250.00 20,001+ lbs.; 6,001+ cu. ft.; 991+gal. $500.00  
105.7.1.1 Installations. Before any fire suppression system or component is installed, enlarged, extended or modified, a permit shall be obtained from the code official. This shall include any device or relay connected to or controlled by the fire suppression system. All work must be performed by a qualified installer who is properly licensed and/or certified to perform such work as determined by the code official. Construction documents shall be reviewed by the code official prior to the issuance of the permit. Upon issuance of the permit, the permit must be posted at the job site in plain view. 
105.7.1.2 Permits Fees. Permit fees cover initial plan review and two inspections. Subsequent plan reviews and inspections of the same system are $30.00. 
Sprinkler Systems: 
Riser(s) & Sprinkler Heads Fee 1-10 heads $ 60.00 11-20 heads $ 80.00 21-50 heads $100.00 51-100 heads $140.00 101-200 heads $200.00 201-300 heads $260.00 301-400 heads $340.00 401-500 heads $400.00 500>heads  $440.00 *  
* Plus $0.50 per head over 500 
Standpipes: $40.00 per standpipe plus $5.00 per hose connection. 
Fire pump: $80.00 
Dry or wet chemical fire suppression systems: $80.00 per system. Each additional system in the same building reviewed at the same time is $40.00. Alterations, additions, or modifications to each existing system is $30.00. 
Total flooding agent extinguishing systems: $80.00 plus appropriate detection system fee. 
105.7.4.1 Installations. Before any fire alarm or detection system or component is installed, enlarged, extended or modified, a permit shall be obtained from the code official. This shall include auxiliary devices such as magnetic locks, electronic locks, or any device or relay connected to or controlled by the fire alarm or detection system. All work must be performed by a qualified installer who is properly licensed and/or certified to perform such work as determined by the code official. Construction documents shall be reviewed by the code official prior to the issuance of the permit. Upon issuance of the permit, the permit must be posted at the job site in plain view. 
105.7.4.3 Permits Fees. Permit fees cover initial plan review and two inspections. Subsequent plan reviews and inspections of the system are $30.00. 
Fire alarm and detection systems: 
Device Fee Control Panel $40.00 First initiating or auxiliary control device, (smoke detector, heat detector, control switch, etc.) $10.00 Each additional initiating or auxiliary control device $ 2.00 First audio/visual indicating or communications device (horn,speaker, bell, strobe, firefighter phone, etc.) $10.00 Each additional audio/visual indicating or communications device. $ 2.00  
Exception: One and two family residential alarm systems must meet the requirements of the Trenton Building Department. 
105.7.13.1 Permit issuance. A permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable nor shall any such permit be extended beyond the time set forth therein unless approved by the fire official. When work is started without a permit, the permit fee shall be doubled. 
Section 106 
106.5 Additional fees. The following fees may be charged for a reinspection and shall apply to each inspector performing the re-inspection: 
1.  $30.00 per reinspection during normal working hours. 
2.  $45.00 per hour per reinspection during nonworking hours with a minimum assessment of 3 hours. 
106.6 Cancellation fees. Handling cost for permits canceled after being issued is 35% of the permit fee or $10.00, whichever is greater. 
Section 109 
109.3 Violation Penalties. 
Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 93 days, or both such fine and imprisonment; except for the code sections listed below shall be guilty of a municipal civil infractions punishable by not more than Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. The enforcing agency shall be the Trenton Fire Department. 
Civil infraction offenses: 
Chapter 3, except Section 305.4 
Chapter 4, except Section 401 
Chapter 5, except Sections 507 and 508 
Chapter 6 
Chapter 7 
Chapter 8 
Chapter 9, exception Section 901 
Chapter 10 
Chapter 11 
Chapter 12 
Chapter 13 
Chapter 14 
Chapter 15 
Chapter 16 
Chapter 17 
Chapter 18 
Chapter 19 
Chapter 20 
Chapter 21 
Chapter 22 
Chapter 23 
Chapter 24 
Chapter 26 
Section 112 
112.1 Hazardous materials-fire department responsibility. The Trenton Fire Department shall be responsible for gathering and organizing information, identifying risks, and enforcing codes, standards, and laws relating to the production, storage and use of hazardous materials within the City of Trenton and the notification to fire fighting personnel of related hazards. The method and frequency shall be determined by the fire official or his duly authorized representative. 
112.2 Cost recovery-hazardous materials. The fire department may recover all costs for use of equipment, personnel, and supplies associated with incidents involving hazardous materials resulting from accidents, fires, spills, leaks, or release of product. Such costs shall include but are not limited to those associated with incident abatement, mitigation, and clean up; extinguishment; and stand-by including any related third party costs. Such costs shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator or agent of the building, property, equipment, vehicle, or container causing or contributing to a hazardous condition, fire, or dangerous situation. 
112.3 Cost recovery-fires. The fire department may recover all costs for use of equipment, personnel, and supplies associated with fire extinguishment when it is determined that such fire extinguishment was necessitated by a person's intentional disregard for the safety of persons or property, violation of law, or recklessness. 
112.4 Hazardous conditions. If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, hazardous conditions, including but not limited to, obstructions or encroachments inhibiting access to or egress from a space or building, are not removed, the code official shall proceed to remove or have removed the same. The expense incurred shall be a debt to the City from the responsible person and shall be collected as any other debt to the City. 
112.5 False alarms. It shall be unlawful for any person to summon, in any way, the fire department unless a valid reason for their response is present. (See also the Trenton Code False Fire Alarm Ordinance.) (Sec. 14-20) 
112.6 Nonstandard Equipment. Equipment and devices which are not in compliance with recognized standards for design and construction may be approved upon presentation of satisfactory evidence that they are designed and constructed for safe operation. 
Section 202 
CODE OFFICIAL. The fire chief, fire marshal, code enforcement officer, or other designated authority charged by the applicable governing body with the duties of administration and enforcement of the code, or duly authorized representative. The term "fire official" may be used interchangeably with "code official" in this code. 
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department by method(s) approved or recommended by the code official. 
Section 302 
302.1 Definitions. 
Ground Fire. An outdoor fire for the purpose of viewing or warming, or utilized to cook food for human consumption, or for ceremonial purposes, which burns only seasoned dry firewood or commercially available charcoal briquettes intended to minimize the generation of air contaminants. 
Section 307 
307.4 Location. The location of open burning shall not be less than 50 feet (15 240mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet (15 240 mm) of any structure. 
Exceptions: 
1. Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet (4572) mm) from a structure or not less than the appliance manufacturer's recommended safe distance. 
2. The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet (7620 mm) where the pile size is 3.4 feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and 2 feet (610 mm) or less in height. 
307.4.3 Ground Fires. A ground fire shall be the minimum size for the intended purpose but not larger than 3 feet by 3 feet by 3 feet in dimension and shall be contained in a safe manner. 
307.6 Fire department training. Open burning is allowed for the purpose of training fire fighters for fire fighting practice, or for the purpose of training the public, including workers or employees, or for the purpose of demonstration by the fire official or other trained fire personnel, when such burning is done in accordance with accepted practice. 
508.5 Fire hydrant systems. Fire hydrant systems shall comply with Sections 508.5.1 through 508.5.6 and shall be in accordance with Appendix C and City of Trenton Development Standards. 
508.5.4.1 Removal of obstructions. If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments to a fire hydrant, or to other fire protection equipment, are not removed, the code official shall proceed to remove or have removed the same. The expense incurred shall be a debt to the City from the responsible person and shall be collected as any other debt to the City. 
Section 610 
610.1 Exhaust fans. Exhaust fans for commercial cooking hoods shall be installed so that the fans are operational at all times cooking is occurring. This may be accomplished by a temperature monitoring device installed in on, or near the hood to activate the exhaust fan(s) at a pre-determined temperature, or as otherwise approved by the code official. 
901.6.2 Records. Records of all system inspections, tests, and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of 1 year and made available to the code official upon request. A copy shall also be sent to the code official by the service company or individual performing such work. 
903.2.10.3 Buildings over 30 feet in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings with a floor level having an occupant load of 30 or more that is located 30 feet (9 1 44 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
904.3.5 Monitoring. Automatic fire extinguishing systems shall be monitored by a supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72 as approved by the code official. Where a building fire alarm system is installed, automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be monitored by the building fire alarm system in accordance with NFPA 72 and shall automatically annunciate their location at the building's fire alarm control panel and activate the building's appropriate fire protective signaling sequence. 
907.2.12 High-rise buildings. Buildings having floors used for human occupancy located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be provided with an automatic fire alarm system and an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.2.12.2. 
907.4.4 Signs. Where fire alarm systems are monitored by a supervising station, an approved permanent sign that reads: THIS ALARM DOES NOT NOTIFY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT - TO REPORT A FIRE DIAL 911. Such sign shall be installed adjacent to each manual fire alarm box. 
Exception: Where the manufacturer has permanently provided this information on the manual fire alarm box and as approved by the code official. 
907.7.1 Annunciation. Where fire suppression systems exist in multi-tenant occupancies, i.e., strip malls, separate annunciation shall be required for each separately addressed tenant space unless otherwise approved by the code official. 
907.9.2 High-rise buildings. In buildings that have floors located more than 55 feet (16 764mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access that are occupied for human occupancy, a separate zone by floor shall be provided for all of the following types of alarm-initiating devices where provided: 
1.  Smoke detectors 
2.  Sprinkler water-flow devices. 
3.  Manual fire alarm boxes. 
4.  Other approved type of automatic fire detection devices or suppression systems as required by the code official. 
907.10.2.1 Temporal Code-3. Audible alarm notification appliances shall sound in temporal Code-3 pattern as approved by the code official. 
907.10.2.2 Audible alarm appliance silencing. Where required by the code official, there shall be a means provided at the fire alarm control panel to silence audible alarm devices without resetting the panel. Where audible alarm devices are provided there shall be a means provided at the fire alarm control panel to silence the audible alarm devices without disabling the visual alarm devices or resetting the panel. 
907.12.1 Remote annunciation: Where required by the code official, a means of remote annunciation such as a light or other visible indicator shall be installed and marked with an approved description of the detector location in order to indicate the presence and location of detectors in accordance with NFPA 72. 
Section 1005 
1005.3.2.5. Smokeproof enclosures. In buildings required to comply with the high-rise provisions of the International Building Code or the provisions for underground buildings in the International Building code, each of the exits of a building which serves stories where the floor surface is more than (55 feet 16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access or more than 30 Feet (9144 mm) below the level of exit discharge serving such floor levels shall be a smokeproof enclosure of pressurized stairway in accordance with the International Building Code. 
1005.3.6.1 Use in a means of egress. Exterior exit stairways shall not be used as an element of a required means of egress for occupancies in Group 1-2. For occupancies in other than Group 1-2, exterior exit stairways shall be permitted as an element or a required means of egress for buildings not exceeding five stories or (55 feet 16 764 mm) in height. 
Section 1201 
1201.1 Scope. Dry cleaning plants and their operations shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and NFPA 32, and the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, as amended or its equivalent 
Section 2201 
2201.1 Scope. Automotive service stations, marine service stations, fleet vehicle service stations and repair garages shall be in accordance with this chapter and the International Fuel Gas Code, International Building Code, and the International Mechanical Code, and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, or their equivalent. Such operations shall include both public accessible and private operations. 
Section 2206 
2206.1 General. Storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance with Chapter 34 and Section 2206, and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, or their equivalent. 
2206.7.8 Gravity and pressure dispensing. Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be dispensed by gravity from tanks, drums, barrels or similar containers. Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be dispensed by a device operating through pressure within a storage tank, drum or container. Approved pumps taking suction from the top of the container shall be utilized. 
Section 2803 
2803.2 Identification. Cartons shall be identified on at least one side with the classification level of the aerosol products contained within the carton as follows: 
LEVEL 1, 2, OR 3 AEROSOLS 
The side of the carton marked shall be clearly visible when stored in configurations of two or more cartons. 
Section 3301 
3301.1.1 Explosive material standard. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, NFPA 495 shall govern the manufacture, transportation, storage, sale, handling and use of explosive materials, and the Michigan Explosives Law 1970- PA 202, as amended, or its equivalent. 
3301.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited unless in compliance with the Michigan Fireworks Law 1931 PA 328, as amended, or its equivalent. 
3301.1.4 Rocketry. The storage, handling and use of model and high-power rockets shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 1122, NFPA 1125, and NFPA 1127, and the Michigan Model Rocket Law 1965 PA 333, as amended, or its equivalent. 
3301.2.4.2 Bond for public display: The permit holder shall furnish a bond in an amount approved by the city of Trenton for the payment of all potential damage caused either to the person or property due to the permitted display, and arising form any acts of the permit holder of the agent of the permit holder. 
Section 3308 
3308.1 General. The display of fireworks, including proximate audience displays and pyrotechnic special effects in motion picture, television, theatrical, and group entertainment productions, shall comply with this chapter and NFPA1123 or NFPA 1126. Approved public displays shall be handled by an approved competent operator, and the fireworks shall be arranged, located, discharged and fired in a manner that will not be a hazard to property or endanger any person. 
3308.11 Retail display and sale. A permit shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6 and regulated in accordance with this section. Fireworks displayed for retail sale shall not be made readily accessible to the public. A minimum of one pressurized-water portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 shall be located not more than 15 feet (4572mm) and not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from the hazard. "No Smoking" sign complying with Section 310 shall be conspicuously posted in areas where fireworks are stored or displayed for retail sale. No person under the age of 18 years shall sell, purchase or possess fireworks unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
Section 3401 
3401.3 Referenced documents. The applicable requirements of Chapter 27, other chapters of this code, the International Building Code, and the International Mechanical Code pertaining to flammable liquids, and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, or their equivalent shall apply. 
3401.4 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 105.6 and 105.7, and the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, as amended or its equivalent. 
Section 3404 
3404.2.9 Aboveground tanks. Aboveground storage of flammable and combustible liquids in tanks shall comply with Section 3404.2 and Sections 3404.2.9.1 through 3404.2.9.6.10, and the Michigan Above-ground Storage Tank Rules, or their equivalent. 
3404.2.11 Underground tanks. Underground storage of flammable and combustible liquids in tanks shall comply with Section 3404.2 and Sections 3404.2.11.1 through 3404.2.11.5.2, and the Michigan Underground Storage Tank Rules, or their equivalent. 
Section 3405 
3405.2.4 Class I and II liquids. Class I and II liquids shall be transferred by one of the following methods: 
1.  From safety cans complying with UL 30. 
2.  Through an approved closed piping system. 
3.  From containers or tanks by an approved pump taking suction through an opening in the top of the container or tank. 
4.  Flammable and combustible liquids shall not be dispensed by gravity from tanks. 
5.  Approved engineered liquid transfer systems. 
Exception: Liquids in containers not exceeding a 5.3-gallon (20L) capacity. 
Section 3801 
3801.2 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 105.6 and 105.7 and the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, as amended, or its equivalent. 
Chapter 45 
REFERENCED STANDARDS 
State of Michigan Laws, Rules, or Requirements including but not necessarily limited to the following with amendments: 
Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207 
Michigan Explosives Law 1970 PA 202 
Michigan Fireworks Law 1931 PA 328 
Michigan Model Rocket Law 1965 PA 333 
Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules 
Michigan Underground Storage Tank Rules 1999 
Appendix D 
Fire Apparatus Access Roads 
D101.1 Scope. Fire Apparatus access roads shall be in compliance with this appendix and all other applicable requirements of the International Fire Code, and City of Trenton Standards. 
(Ord. No. 675, § 3, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 710, §§ 2, 3, 1-22-2008) 
Secs. 42-186-42-188. - Reserved. 
Sec. 42-189. - Variances. 
    The chief of the fire department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications, when granted or allowed, and the decisions of the chief of the fire department shall be entered upon the records of the fire department. 
(Code 1974, § 14-63) 
Sec. 42-190. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal to the building board of appeals within 20 days from decision of the chief of the fire department when it is claimed that the true intent of the fire prevention code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, or that the provisions of the code do not fully apply or that an equally good or better form of material or construction or safety method can be used. 
(b)  The building board of appeals is hereby empowered to review appeals from decisions of the chief of the fire department, and the board shall have the power to affirm or deny or modify such decisions of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1974, § 14-64) 
Sec. 42-191. - New materials, processes or occupancies. 
    The fire marshal, the city building inspector and the chief of the fire department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require attention in addition to those enumerated in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, and shall report to the city council any recommended amendments to the fire prevention code. 
(Code 1974, § 14-65) 
Sec. 42-192. - Exemption from liability for city employees. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department, the fire marshal and other employees charged with the enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, while acting for the city, shall not thereby render themselves liable personally, and are hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of their official duties. 
(b)  Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by him in the lawful discharge of his duties and under the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article shall be defended by the legal representative of the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(c)  In no case shall the chief of the fire department, the fire marshal or any of their subordinates be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceedings that may be instituted in pursuance of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, and any officer of the fire department acting in good faith and without malice shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in performance of their official duties in connection therewith. 
(Code 1974, § 14-66) 
Sec. 42-193. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the fire prevention code adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief of the fire department or by the building board of appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a violation of this Code, punishable in accordance with section 1-8. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit the violation to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defects within a reasonable time; and, when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the penalty set forth in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1974, § 14-67) 
Secs. 42-194-42-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXPLOSIVES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Explosives, MCL 29.41 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved means acceptable to the chief of police. 
    Barricade means natural features of the ground such as hills, timber of sufficient density that the surrounding exposures cannot be seen when the trees are bare of leaves, or an efficient artificial barricade consisting of an artificial mound or properly revetted wall of earth of a minimum thickness of three feet. 
    Dealer means any person, not a manufacturer, engaged in the business of buying and selling explosives. 
    Department means the police department of the city. 
    Distributor means any person acting as a manufacturer's agent or jobber who deals in explosives and sells to retail dealers or to consumers. 
    Explosives means gunpowders, powders used for blasting, nitroglycerine, all forms of high explosives, blasting materials, fuses, detonators and other detonating agents, smokeless powders, and any chemical compound or any mechanical mixture containing any oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportion, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, friction, concussion or detonation of any part of the compound or mixture may cause sudden generation of highly heated gases so that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects upon life, limb, or contiguous objects; but does not include gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, turpentine, benzine, butane, propane, colloided nitrocellulose in sheets or rods or grains not under one-eighth inch in diameter, wet nitrocellulose and wet nitrostarch containing 20 percent or more moisture or wet picric acid containing or being in ten percent or more moisture. Manufactured articles, such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, safety fuses, matches, etc., shall not be held to be explosives when the individual units contain explosives in such limited quantity of such nature in such packing that it is impossible to produce simultaneous or destructive explosion of such units to the injury of life, limb or property. 
    Highway means any public street or highway. 
    Inspector means a police officer of the city assigned to inspect premises, equipment and conditions relative to the manufacture, storage, transportation and use of explosives. 
    Magazine means a building or box specially designed, constructed and used only for the storage of explosives. 
    Manufacturer means any manufacturer of explosives or any person who otherwise produces any explosives for sale or distribution in the state, or who may ship explosives into or out of this state. 
    Railroad and railway mean any public steam, electric or other railroad of whatever motive power, but shall not include auxiliary tracks, spurs and siding installed and primarily used in serving any mine, quarry or plant. 
(Code 1974, § 14-78) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-222. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to dealers and others who store explosives and to the manufacture, use, possession, storage, transportation, sale, distribution or gift of explosives. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the armed forces of the United States or to the National Guard. 
(Code 1974, § 14-79) 
Sec. 42-223. - Application for modification of standards. 
    Any person, or his duly authorized agent, confronted with practical difficulties in the carrying out of the strict letter of this article may apply to the chief of police for modification thereof. Only such modifications as will not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property will be considered. The decision of the chief of police, including the particulars of any such application, shall be entered upon the records of the police department, and a signed copy thereof shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1974, § 14-80) 
Sec. 42-224. - Restriction on modifications of standards. 
    The provisions of this article concerning the storage of explosives in substantial quantities are intended to set up proper standards for safety, and no variations will be permitted which lower the factor of safety from these standards. 
(Code 1974, § 14-81) 
Sec. 42-225. - Record of transactions. 
    Every person selling or giving away any explosive shall keep, at his principal office or place of business, a journal or book of record setting forth in legible writing a complete history of the transaction, including the name and quantity of the explosives, the name, residence and business address of the purchaser, and the name and address of the person taking the explosive away, including the license number of automobile or truck. Such journal or book of record shall be open at all times for inspection by the chief of police and police officers of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 14-82) 
Sec. 42-226. - Record of amount of explosives stored or used. 
    Any person operating under a permit required by this article shall keep an accurate record of the amounts of explosives stored or used, including the dates and places of such storage. 
(Code 1974, § 14-83) 
Sec. 42-227. - Magazines and records to be open to inspection. 
    Every magazine and the records of sales of all explosives shall be subject to inspection at any time by any police officer or the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1974, § 14-84) 
Sec. 42-228. - Report of attempted purchases by suspicious persons. 
    A vendor of explosives shall immediately report to the most available police officer any person who desires to purchase explosives of whom he is suspicious, and shall withhold the sale until after proper investigation is made by police authorities. 
(Code 1974, § 14-85) 
Sec. 42-229. - Authority of chief of police to require removal of explosives or that watchman be put in charge. 
    The chief of police may, in his discretion, at any time he deems it necessary for public safety, require the removal of any explosives, or that a watchman be placed continuously in charge of any explosives. 
(Code 1974, § 14-86) 
Sec. 42-230. - Report of accidents, thefts, fires and explosions. 
    All accidents, thefts, fires or explosions, no matter how small, occurring in connection with the keeping, storage, manufacture, sale, transportation or use of explosives, shall be reported to the chief of police at once by telegraph or telephone and be supplemented by a detailed written statement to the chief of police. 
(Code 1974, § 14-87) 
Sec. 42-231. - Report of violations. 
    Any police officer, or the chief of the fire department, finding evidence of violation of this article shall bring it to the immediate attention of the city attorney, and a report of such violations shall be submitted to the chief of police immediately. 
(Code 1974, § 14-88) 
Sec. 42-232. - Restrictions on places of storage. 
    No explosives in any quantity whatsoever shall be stored or kept in any industrial plant or in any building used in whole or in part as a dwelling, school, theater or other place of public assemblage or gathering, or within 500 feet of such place, without a special permit from the chief of police, nor shall any explosive be stored in any residential section. 
(Code 1974, § 14-89) 
Sec. 42-233. - Storage of minor amounts of explosives. 
    Not more than 50 pounds of dynamite or similar high explosives shall be stored in any store, place of business or building. Wherever storage is allowed in quantities of 50 pounds or less, the explosive shall then be stored and kept in a magazine well and suitably built of fire-resistant material or of wood not less than two inches thick covered with sheet iron. Such magazine shall be equipped with strong hinges, a good lock, and suitable handles and shall be mounted on casters or wheels and kept on the first floor of the building at a location to be determined by the police chief or the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1974, § 14-109) 
Secs. 42-234-42-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STORAGE MAGAZINES 

Sec. 42-251. - Classification; general construction requirements. 
    Permanent storage magazines shall be classified and constructed as follows: 
(1)  Class A. A magazine which contains over 3,000 pounds of explosives. These magazines shall be constructed of one of the following: 
a.  Soft brick laid in lime mortar with walls six inches thick. 
b.  Iron of not less than 14 gauge, lined with soft brick laid in lime mortar or lined with tongue and grooved hardwood of not less than seven-eighths inch in thickness or no. 1 shiplap and filled with a mixture consisting of one part cement and ten parts sand and not less than six inches in thickness. 
c.  Wood walls, not less than six inches apart. The inside wall shall be of tongue and grooved hardwood not less than seven-eighths inch thick of no. 1 shiplap and tight. The outside wall shall be covered with not less than 26 gauge iron carried to not less than six inches below the base of the foundation. Walls shall be filled with coarse dry sand or a mixture of one part cement and ten parts sand. 
(2)  Class B. A magazine which contains not over 3,000 pounds of explosives. These magazines shall be constructed similar to class A magazines, but may be erected on wheels or skids so they may be moved. 
(3)  Class C. A magazine which contains not over 300 pounds of explosives. These magazines shall be constructed of double wood walls with sides not less than five inches apart. The studs shall be staggered and filled with coarse dry sand or a mixture of one part cement and ten parts sand, and shall be covered with not less than 26 gauge iron, or of steel of suitable weight with an inside wood wall of satisfactory material and filled with coarse dry sand or a mixture of one part cement and ten parts sand. 
(4)  Class D. A magazine which contains not over 50 pounds of explosives. Magazines of this type shall be constructed of two-inch hardwood plank securely bolted together and built in the shape of an ordinary contractor's toolbox, having a cover of the same material, the cover to hang over the edge of the box not less than one inch on all sides and to be covered with sheetmetal, or of steel of suitable weight and proper dimensions. 
(Code 1974, § 14-90) 
Sec. 42-252. - Foundations. 
(a)  Class A magazines may be of brick, concrete, stone or posts. They shall be of substantial construction and provide a minimum distance of 12 inches between the ground and the floor of the magazine. Openings shall be spaced not less than five feet apart, not less than six inches in width and four inches in height, screened with one-fourth-inch rust-resisting mesh or perforated iron or steel plates with openings not larger than one-fourth inch. 
(b)  Class B and C magazines may be similar to class A, but shall provide a minimum of 12 inches between the ground and the floor of the magazine. 
(Code 1974, § 14-91) 
Sec. 42-253. - Doors. 
(a)  Class A magazine doors shall be constructed of three thicknesses of seven-eighths-inch tongue and grooved hardwood, laid diagonally and covered with a wrought iron or steel plate not less than three-eighths inch thick or its equivalent. 
(b)  Class B magazine doors shall be constructed similar to class A magazine doors or may be of five thicknesses of seven-eighths-inch tongue and grooved hardwood laid diagonally and covered with 26 gauge iron or its equivalent. 
(c)  Class C magazine doors or the top for such magazines shall be constructed of not less than four thicknesses of seven-eighths-inch tongue and grooved hardwood laid diagonally. These may be constructed similar to doors for class A magazines or its equivalent. 
(Code 1974, § 14-92) 
Sec. 42-254. - Door hinges. 
(a)  Class A magazines shall have door hinges bolted through the side of the magazine with round head bolts, or inside hinges may be used. 
(b)  Class B magazines shall have hinges similar to those specified for class A. 
(c)  Class C magazines shall have substantial hinges bolted through the side of the magazine and round head bolts shall be used. 
(Code 1974, § 14-93) 
Sec. 42-255. - Locks. 
(a)  Class A magazine locks shall be of a special construction for magazines or of substantial construction with a hasp that cannot be cut with a hacksaw. Eyes or staples shall be bolted through the sides of the magazines with round head bolts. 
(b)  Class B magazines shall have locks similar to those specified for class A magazines. 
(c)  Class C magazines shall have substantial padlocks similar to those specified for class A magazines. 
(d)  Class D magazines shall have a substantial lock. 
(e)  Each explosive magazine shall be securely locked at all times except when explosives are being placed therein or being removed therefrom. 
(Code 1974, § 14-94) 
Sec. 42-256. - Roofs. 
(a)  Class A magazine roofs shall be constructed of a metal not less than 26 gauge corrugated iron, lapped two corrugations unless covered with flat steel with standing seams. If the roof is not bulletproof and the location is such that it can be shot through, there shall be not less than four inches of sand between the roof and the contents of the magazine. 
(b)  Class B magazines shall be similar to class A magazines or may be constructed of four thicknesses of seven-eighths-inch tongue and grooved hardwood covered with 26 gauge iron. 
(c)  Class C roofs or tops shall be constructed of not less than three thicknesses of seven-eighths-inch tongue and grooved hardwood laid diagonally and covered with 26 gauge iron. 
(Code 1974, § 14-95) 
Sec. 42-257. - Ventilation. 
(a)  Class A magazines shall be provided with interior ventilation by leaving a space two inches in width between the edge of the floor and wall about the entire perimeter of the floor, except at the door opening, and providing a similar space two inches in width around the entire perimeter of the ceiling or lining, or by having floor planking separated one-fourth inch in order to provide free circulation of air from ventilators located below the floor level in the foundation and through ventilators located above the content line of the magazine or in the roof. 
(b)  Class B magazines shall be ventilated similar to class A magazines. 
(c)  Class C magazines shall have bottom floorboards spaced one-fourth inch apart to provide for necessary ventilation. 
(Code 1974, § 14-96) 
Sec. 42-258. - Location. 
(a)  All magazines shall be suitably located and, wherever possible, effort should be made to secure a natural barricade which will cover the most important exposure to hazards. Where a natural barricade is not available, artificial barricades may be required, depending upon the location and the contiguous hazards. The land immediately adjacent to any magazine for at least 50 feet in each direction shall be cleared and kept clear of all brush and combustible matter. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have the right to disapprove any location he deems unfit or dangerous for storing explosives and refuse permission to store explosives in such location. 
(Code 1974, § 14-97) 
Sec. 42-259. - Additional magazine for storage of blasting caps. 
    All dealers and others having a permanent storage of explosives shall have an additional magazine of suitable size and of the types of construction described in this article for the storage of blasting caps and electrical blasting caps. The magazine, if located on the same premises, or if it stores more than 5,000 pounds, shall be at least 100 feet distant from any other magazine if unbarricaded. The location shall be approved by the chief of police. Blasting caps and electric blasting caps, detonators and blasting supplies shall not be stored with other explosives regardless of quantity. 
(Code 1974, § 14-98) 
Sec. 42-260. - General safety requirements. 
(a)  Magazines shall be of ample size, be fire resistant and as near bulletproof as possible, and shall provide conditions whereby explosives may be safely kept with a minimum of deterioration. 
(b)  All empty high explosive containers shall be removed from magazines and destroyed by fire. Each magazine shall be kept free and clear from all paper, rubbish and grit, and debris of any kind, and shall be used exclusively for storage of explosives. No metal tools shall be kept in magazines. The inside of magazines shall not have any exposed or protruding metal parts. 
(Code 1974, § 14-99) 
Sec. 42-261. - Space required between magazines. 
    Magazines for the storage of dynamite or similar explosives shall not be erected within 200 feet of each other if unbarricaded and 100 feet if barricaded. 
(Code 1974, § 14-100) 
Sec. 42-262. - Opening packages and cases. 
    No package of high explosives shall at any time be opened within 50 feet of any magazine. A wooden wedge and mallet shall be used for the opening of explosive cases. 
(Code 1974, § 14-101) 
Sec. 42-263. - Smoking near magazines. 
    No person shall smoke cigarettes, cigars or pipes within 50 feet of any explosive magazine. 
(Code 1974, § 14-102) 
Sec. 42-264. - Use of artificial light and heat near magazines. 
    No artificial light other than portable electric dry cell battery lamps or lanterns may be used in explosive magazines. At no time shall an explosive magazine be provided with artificial heat. 
(Code 1974, § 14-103) 
Sec. 42-265. - Repairs or alterations. 
    Before any repairs or alterations are made to the interior of any explosive magazine, the explosives shall be removed therefrom and the magazine shall be thoroughly cleaned and the chief of police shall be notified of such repairs or alterations. 
(Code 1974, § 14-104) 
Sec. 42-266. - Condemned or leaking dynamite. 
    Condemned or leaking dynamite shall not be repacked and offered for shipment unless the repacking is done by a competent person in the presence of or with the written consent of an inspector or with the written authority of the United States Bureau of Explosives. Leaking dynamite which is unsuitable for repacking shall be destroyed under the supervision of a competent person. 
(Code 1974, § 14-105) 
Sec. 42-267. - Standard table of distances. 
    Whenever new buildings are erected or new railroads or highways are constructed near a magazine, the permissive capacity of such magazine shall be reduced in conformity with the following standard table of distances: 
STANDARD TABLE OF DISTANCES 
Blasting Caps and Electricity Caps Other Explosives Inhabited Building Public 
Railway Public 
Highway No. Over No. Not Over Lbs. Over Lbs. Not Over Barricaded Feet*      1,000      5,000 - -    15    10   5      5,000     10,000 - -    30    20  10     10,000     20,000 - -    60    35  18     20,000     25,000 -      50    73    45  23     25,000     50,000      50     100   120    70  35     50,000    100,000     100     200   180   110  55    100,000    150,000     200     300   260   155  75    150,000    200,000     300     400   320   190  95    200,000    250,000     400     500   360   215 110    250,000    300,000     500     600   400   240 120    300,000    350,000     600     700   430   260 130    350,000    400,000     700     800   460   275 140    400,000    450,000     800     900   490   295 150    460,000    500,000     900   1,000   510   305 155    500,000    750,000   1,000   1,500   530   320 160    750,000  1,000,000   1,500   2,000   600   360 180  1,000,000  1,500,000   2,000   3,000   650 390 195  1,500,000  2,000,000   3,000   4,000   710   425 210  2,000,000  2,500,000   4,000   5,000   750   450 225  2,500,000  3,000,000   5,000   6,000   780   470 235  3,000,000  3,500,000   6,000   7,000   805   485 245  3,500,000  4,000,000   7,000   8,000   830   500 250  4,000,000  4,500,000   8,000   9,000   850   510 255  4,500,000  5,000,000   9,000  10,000   870   520 260  5,000,000  7,500,000  10,000  15,000   890   535 265  7,500,000 10,000,000  15,000  20,000   975   585 290 10,000,000 12,500,000  20,000  25,000 1,055   635 315 12,500,000 15,000,000  25,000  30,000 1,130   680 340 15,000,000 17,500,000  30,000  35,000 1,205   725 360 17,500,000 20,000,000  35,000  40,000 1,275   765 380  40,000  45,000 1,340   805 400  45,000  50,000 1,400   840 420  50,000  55,000 1,460   875 440  55,000  60,000 1,515   910 455  60,000  65,000 1,565   940 470  65,000  70,000 1,610   970 485  70,000  75,000 1,655   995 500  75,000  80,000 1,695 1,020 510  80,000  85,000 1,730 1,040 520  85,000  90,000 1,760 1,060 530  90,000  95,000 1,790 1,075 540  95,000 100,000 1,815 1,090 545 100,000 125,000 1,830 1,100 550 125,000 150,000 1,900 1,140 570 150,000 175,000 1,965 1,180 590 175,000 200,000 2,030 1,220 610 200,000 225,000 2,095 1,260 630 225,000 250,000 2,155 1,295 650 250,000 275,000 2,215 1,330 670 275,000 300,000 2,275 1,365 690 300,000 325,000 2,335 1,400 705 325,000 350,000 2,390 1,435 720 350,000 375,000 2,445 1,470 731 375,000 400,000 2,500 1,500 750 400,000 425,000 2,555 1,530 765 425,000 450,000 2,605 1,560 780 450,000 475,000 2,655 1,590 795 475,000 500,000 2,705 1,620 810  
    Note: A railroad siding used exclusively for loading or unloading explosives is exempt from this table. 
    *Note: Barricaded as here used signifies that the building containing explosives is screened from other buildings, from railways, or from highways by either natural or artificial barriers. Where such barriers do not exist, the distance should be doubled. 
(Code 1974, § 14-106) 
Sec. 42-268. - Warning signs. 
(a)  Class A and B magazines shall have signs with letters not less than six inches in height posted approximately parallel to each side of the magazine at a distance not less than 50 feet and not more than 200 feet from the magazine, reading: "Explosives-Keep Off." 
(b)  Class C and D magazines shall have painted on each side and the top in letters not less than six inches high the words "Explosives-Keep Off." 
(Code 1974, § 14-107) 
Sec. 42-269. - Temporary magazines. 
    For temporary construction work, a magazine having a capacity not to exceed one ton of dynamite may be constructed in accordance with any of the following specifications: 
(1)  The principle of construction of a temporary magazine is simply that of placing one substantial box inside of another substantial box with a five-inch space filled with coarse dry sand (not gravel or crushed rock). The outer box shall be built on the order of any ordinary contractor's toolbox equipped with a sloping hinged lid. It shall be constructed of seven-eighths-inch sheathing and covered with not less than 24 gauge galvanized sheet iron. The outer box shall be one foot longer, one foot wider, and six inches deeper than the interior box so that, when the interior box is set inside the outer box, the tops will be level with each other and there will be a five-inch space on all sides for sand filling. The interior box shall be built of seven-eighths-inch sheathing properly surfaced on the inside and constructed so that no nail, bolt or metal screw head shall be exposed on the inside of the box. The cover shall be of two-inch hardwood plank covered with 12 gauge flat iron, and should overhang the edge of the box one inch on all sides. To prevent sand from falling into the storage space or shifting position, a cover may be placed over the sand space. 
(2)  For a similar purpose, a magazine may be built of two-inch hardwood plank securely bolted together on all sides and built in the shape of an ordinary contractor's toolbox having a cover of the same material as the other parts of the box. The cover shall overhang the edge of the box one inch on all sides, all of which is to be covered with not less than 12 gauge flat iron. 
(3)  For a similar purpose, a magazine well and truly constructed of steel of suitable weight and proper dimensions may be used. 
(4)  All such magazines shall be set on a substantial foundation at least six inches off the ground and equipped with strong hinges securely bolted on the inside and with two strong hasps and with two suitable padlocks. 
(Code 1974, § 14-108) 
Secs. 42-270-42-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRANSPORTATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 

Sec. 42-291. - Qualifications of drivers. 
(a)  Only careful, capable and reliable persons shall operate vehicles carrying explosives. 
(b)  Each such operator shall be familiar with the state law and regulations pertaining to the transportation of explosives and with the provisions of this division. 
(c)  No vehicle carrying explosives shall be operated by any person under 18 years of age. 
(Code 1974, § 14-115) 
Sec. 42-292. - Suitable vehicle required. 
    Every dealer in or transporter of explosives, who makes deliveries of explosives, shall have one or more suitable vehicles for such purpose. 
(Code 1974, § 14-116) 
Sec. 42-293. - Construction of vehicle. 
    The body of each vehicle used for the transportation of explosives shall be entirely enclosed. The doors shall be equipped with strong hinges securely bolted on the inside and provided with two suitable padlocks, which shall be kept locked at all times when explosives are carried. The entire body shall be constructed so that no bolts, screws, or nails or any metal shall be exposed on the inside thereof. For quantities not to exceed 6,000 pounds, it shall be satisfactory to use a securely fastened tarpaulin for the cover. 
(Code 1974, § 14-117) 
Sec. 42-294. - Warning sign. 
    Every vehicle transporting explosives shall have displayed upon each side of the rear thereof a sign, sticker or plate, plainly visible and consisting of the word "explosive" clearly printed in white letters upon a red background, which letters shall not be less than five inches in height, and each letter shall occupy a space or block not less than 11/2 inches in width, and such red background shall not be less than ten inches in height and not less than 24 inches in length. 
(Code 1974, § 14-118) 
Sec. 42-295. - Fire extinguishers. 
    Each vehicle used in transporting explosives shall be equipped with two approved fire extinguishers which shall be properly charged and in good working order at all times. 
(Code 1974, § 14-119) 
Sec. 42-296. - General condition of vehicle; overloading. 
    Each vehicle used in the transportation of explosives shall be in good mechanical condition, and at no time shall it be loaded beyond its capacity. 
(Code 1974, § 14-120) 
Sec. 42-297. - Daily inspection of vehicle. 
    Each owner or operator of a motor vehicle used in transporting explosives shall make a daily inspection of his vehicle and see that the fire extinguishers are in good condition, that the chassis, motor and pan are free from grease and oil and that all of the mechanical parts are in good working order. 
(Code 1974, § 14-121) 
Sec. 42-298. - Driving past fires. 
    At no time shall any vehicle transporting explosives be driven past fires of any kind burning on or near the highway or other thoroughfare until after due caution shall have been taken to ascertain that such passing may be made safely. 
(Code 1974, § 14-122) 
Sec. 42-299. - Use of trailers prohibited. 
    Explosives shall not be transported in any form of trailer, nor shall any trailer be attached to any vehicle which is carrying explosives. 
(Code 1974, § 14-123) 
Sec. 42-300. - Applicability of vehicle requirements. 
    Not more than 50 pounds of dynamite, nor more than 100 blasting caps or electric blasting caps, shall be transported in any vehicle which does not comply with the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1974, § 14-124) 
Sec. 42-301. - Limitations on transporting blasting caps. 
    Not more than 100 blasting caps of any kind shall be transported in any vehicle unless stored in a separate compartment constructed of two-inch wood covered with sheetmetal of not less than 8 gauge with heavy hinges on the door or cover, and when other explosives are transported in the same vehicle the maximum number of blasting caps which may be carried in this compartment shall be 5,000. 
(Code 1974, § 14-125) 
Sec. 42-302. - Loading and unloading. 
    In loading or unloading explosives, care shall be given to the handling of the explosives, and in loading the cases shall be placed or stowed as to prevent displacement during transit. No bail-hook or metal tools shall be used in loading or unloading. 
(Code 1974, § 14-126) 
Sec. 42-303. - Containers required; marking of containers. 
    When explosives are being transported, they shall be packed in strong wooden boxes or other containers suitable for that purpose. Each box or case shall be plainly marked stating the make and type of explosives contained therein. 
(Code 1974, § 14-127) 
Sec. 42-304. - Speed of vehicles; coasting. 
    Vehicles carrying explosives shall not travel faster than 35 miles per hour and shall not coast down any hill. 
(Code 1974, § 14-128) 
Sec. 42-305. - Unnecessary stops; prohibited parking. 
    Vehicles transporting explosives shall not make unnecessary stops and shall not be parked in any public street or highway or in any repair shop or garage or near any church, school or other place of public assembly, unless for emergency repairs to the vehicle. 
(Code 1974, § 14-129) 
Sec. 42-306. - Smoking, carrying matches or use of intoxicants by operator or passengers. 
    The operator of a vehicle carrying explosives shall not smoke, carry matches or use intoxicating liquors while so engaged or permit any other person on such vehicle to do so. 
(Code 1974, § 14-130) 
Sec. 42-307. - Carrying passengers. 
    No passengers or unnecessary persons shall be permitted to ride on vehicles carrying explosives. 
(Code 1974, § 14-131) 
Sec. 42-308. - Carrying items likely to ignite explosives. 
    No metal, metal tools, carbides, oils, matches, firearms, electric storage batteries, flammable substances, acids, or oxidizing or corrosive compounds shall be carried in the bed or body of any motor truck or vehicle transporting explosives. 
(Code 1974, § 14-132) 
Sec. 42-309. - Approval of Coast Guard required for delivery to water vehicles. 
    Whenever any explosives are to be transported through the city for delivery to any type of water vehicle for storage and further transportation over waters bordering the city, such storage and transportation shall be unlawful, and no permit shall be issued for such purpose, unless and until approval has been given by proper authority of the U.S. Coast Guard. The failure to have evidence of such approval upon the person transporting such explosives shall be prima facie a violation of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 14-134) 
Sec. 42-310. - Unloading from railroad cars to vehicles. 
    All railroad cars loaded with explosives shall be properly unloaded and their contents transported to magazines in vehicles which comply with this division. Except during actual unloading, such cars shall be securely locked. 
(Code 1974, § 14-135) 
Sec. 42-311. - Transporting on water. 
    No explosive shall be carried or transported on the waters within, leading to, or bordering upon the city on any vessel which is carrying passengers, except according to federal regulations governing steamboats. 
(Code 1974, § 14-136) 
Sec. 42-312. - Unloading from and loading on boats. 
    The loading and unloading of explosives on boats at any dock shall not be permitted without special permission in writing from the chief of police. He shall have the right to prescribe the requirements pertaining to storage of explosives in any port warehouse, or any dock, or in any freight warehouse, such storage not to exceed 24 hours. 
(Code 1974, § 14-137) 
Secs. 42-313-42-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMIT 

Sec. 42-331. - Required. 
    Any person engaged in the storing or use of explosives within the limits of the city shall, before so doing, obtain a permit therefor, and shall furnish to the chief of police any information required concerning the place of storage or use. 
(Code 1974, § 14-143) 
Sec. 42-332. - Fee. 
    The fee for a permit required by this division shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 14-144) 
Sec. 42-333. - Expiration. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to this division shall be effective for a period not to exceed one year. 
(Code 1974, § 14-145) 
Sec. 42-334. - Denial or revocation. 
    A permit required by this division may be denied or revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  When any person is found to be unreliable or inexperienced in the handling of explosives, the chief of police shall have the right to refuse to grant such person a permit to store, keep, sell or deal in explosives. If the permit was obtained through fraud, misrepresentation or mistake, the permit may be immediately revoked. 
(2)  If any individual, or members of a firm or partnership, or any director, is disloyal or hostile to the United States or any state thereof, or advocates the overthrow thereof by means of force and violence, or has been convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term of more than one year, the chief of police shall have the right to refuse such person a permit to store, keep, sell or deal in explosives in the city. 
(3)  The chief of police shall also in his discretion refuse to issue any permit in such instances as the chief of police shall determine to be for the safety of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 14-146) 
Secs. 42-335-42-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks, MCL 750.243a et seq. 

Sec. 42-361. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Class B fireworks means toy torpedoes, railway torpedoes, firecrackers or salutes that do not qualify as class C fireworks, exhibition display pieces, aeroplane flares, illuminating projectiles, incendiary projectiles, incendiary grenades, smoke projectiles or bombs containing expelling charges but without bursting charges, flash powders in inner units not exceeding two ounces each, flash sheets in interior packages, flash powder or spreader cartridges containing not more than 72 grains of flash powder each and other similar devices. 
    Class C fireworks means toy smoke devices, toy caps containing not more than 0.25 grain of explosive mixture, toy propellant devices, cigarette loads, trick matches, trick noisemakers, smoke candles, smoke pots, smoke grenades, smoke signals, hand signal devices, very signal cartridges, sparklers and explosive auto alarms and other similar devices. 
    Fireworks means a device made from explosive or flammable compositions used primarily for the purpose of producing a visible display or audible effect, or both, by combustion, deflagration or detonation. The term "fireworks" includes class B fireworks and class C fireworks. 
(Code 1974, § 14-157) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.243a(1). 
Sec. 42-362. - Sale, possession, transportation and use prohibited. 
(a)  A person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks, as such term is defined in by state law, except for the use of consumer fireworks on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after the following national holidays: 
(1)  New Year's Day, but not between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(2)  Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, but not between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(3)  President's Day, but not between midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(4)  Memorial Day, but not between midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(5)  Independence Day, but not between midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(6)  Labor Day, but not between midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(7)  Columbus Day, but not between midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(8)  Veterans Day, but not between midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(9)  Thanksgiving Day, but not between midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(10)  Christmas Day, but not between midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(b)  A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission to use those fireworks on those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a person that violates this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $500.00. 
(c)  Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or controlled substance or a combination of both. 
(d)  Low-impact fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or controlled substance or a combination of both. 
(e)  Unmanned free-floating devices. Any unmanned free-floating device (sky lantern) which requires fire underneath to propel it and is not moored to the ground while aloft, have an uncontrolled and unpredictable flight path and descent area so as to pose a potential fire risk and are therefore prohibited. 
(f)  Unless otherwise provided in (b) above, if a person knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly violates this section, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor as follows: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) below, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(2)  If the violation causes damage to the property of another person, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Code 1974, § 14-158; Ord. No. 776, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.243a(2). 
Sec. 42-363. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of section 42-362 and the requiring of a permit under this article are not applicable to the following: 
(1)  Flat paper caps containing not more than 0.25 grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
(2)  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes and toy guns of a type approved by the director of the department of state police in which paper caps as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section are used and which are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion and which are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(3)  Sparklers containing not more than 0.0125 pound of burning portion per sparkler. 
(4)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth inch in diameter, cone fountains and cylinder fountains. 
(5)  Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed thereon, and toy snake devices. 
(6)  Possession, transportation, sale or use of signal flares of a type approved by the director of the department of state police, blank cartridges or blank cartridge pistols specifically for a show or theater, for the training or exhibiting of dogs, for signal purposes in athletic sports, or for use by military organizations, and all items described in this section used by railroads, trucks or vehicles for emergency signal purposes. 
(7)  The sale of fireworks, provided they are to be shipped directly out of state pursuant to regulations of the United States Department of Transportation covering the transportation of explosives and other dangerous articles by motor, rail and water. 
(b)  The exceptions set forth in this section shall not apply to any individual or person who is under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1974, § 14-159) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.243a(3). 
Sec. 42-364. - Permit for public displays. 
(a)  The city council upon application in writing may grant a permit for the use of fireworks otherwise prohibited by section 42-362 within the city for public display by municipalities, associations or other organizations or groups of individuals approved by the city. After a permit has been granted, sales, possession or transportation of fireworks for the purpose described in the permit only may be made. A permit granted under this subsection shall not be transferable, nor shall such a permit be issued to a person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  The city council upon application in writing may grant a permit to a resident wholesale dealer or jobber to have in his possession within the city fireworks otherwise prohibited by section 42-362 for sale only to holders of permits as provided in this section. A permit granted under this subsection is not transferable, nor shall a permit be issued to a person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1974, § 14-160) 
State Law reference- Fireworks permits, MCL 750.243b. 
Sec. 42-365. - Storage. 
    The storage of fireworks at the site of a wholesaler, dealer or jobber shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fireworks shall be stored in a one-story, without basement, noncombustible building which is weather resistant, well ventilated and equipped with a strong door kept securely locked except when open for business. 
(2)  The location of the storage building shall be approved by the fire chief of the city and shall be located not less than the following distances from inhabited buildings, passenger railroads and public highways according to the number of pounds of fireworks stored rounded to the nearest pound: 
Distance From Passenger Railways and Public 
Highways 
(feet) Distance From Inhabited Buildings 
(feet) Net Weight of Fireworks 
(pounds) Class C 
Fireworks Class B 
Fireworks Class C 
Fireworks Class B 
Fireworks 100 or less  25   200  50   200 101 to 200  30   200  60   200 201 to 400  35   200  70   200 401 to 600  40   200  80   208 601 to 800  45   200  90   252 801 to 1,000  50   200 100   292 1,001 to 2,000  58   230 115   459 2,001 to 3,000  62   296 124   592 3,001 to 4,000  65   352 130   704 4,001 to 5,000  68   400 135   800 5,001 to 6,000  70   441 139   882 6,001 to 8,000  73   509 140 1,018 8,001 to 10,000  75   565 150 1,129 10,001 to 15,000  80   668 159 1,335 15,001 to 20,000  83   745 165 1,490 20,001 to 30,000  87   863 174 1,725 30,001 to 40,000  90   953 180 1,906 40,001 to 50,000  93 1,030 185 2,060 50,001 to 60,000  95 1,095 189 2,190 60,001 to 80,000  98 1,205 195 2,410 80,001 to 100,000 100 1,300 200 2,600 100,000 to 150,000 105 1,488 209 2,975 151,001 to 200,000 108 1,638 215 3,275 200,001 or more 110 1,765 220 3,530  
(3)  Smoking, matches, open flames, spark-producing devices and firearms shall be prohibited inside of or within 50 feet of a building used for the storage of fireworks. Combustible materials shall not be stored within 50 feet of a building used for the storage of fireworks. 
(4)  The interior of a building used for the storage of fireworks shall be kept clean and free from debris and empty containers. A building used for the storage of fireworks shall not be used for the storage of any metal tools or any commodity other than fireworks. 
(5)  A building used for the storage of fireworks shall not be provided with heat or lights, except that if lights are necessary an electric safety flashlight or safety lantern shall be used. 
(6)  A building used for the storage of fireworks shall bear lettering on each side and the top, in letters not less than four inches high, with the words "Explosives-Keep Fire Away." 
(7)  A building used for the storage of fireworks shall be under the supervision of a competent person, who shall be not less than 18 years of age. 
(8)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (2) of this section, salutes that do not qualify as class C fireworks shall be deemed to be an explosive and shall be stored in accordance with rules for the storage and handling of explosives promulgated under section 3a of Public Act No. 207 of 1941 (MCL 29.3a). 
(Code 1974, § 14-161) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.243d. 
Chapter 46 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 54; manufactured homes, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; waterways, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Area of special flood hazard and special flood hazard area mean the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. this land is identified as zone A on the flood boundary and floodway map or the flood insurance rate map. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots on which the mobile home is to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets, which is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Expansion to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the mobile homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets. 
    Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map means an official map of the community which is a part of the flood insurance study. 
    Flood hazard area means land which on the basis of available floodplain information is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Flood insurance rate map and FIRM mean an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary and floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible of being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "Flood"). 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land designated in the flood insurance study which must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    New mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets, is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a mobile home. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-32. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion or in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(b)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-1) 
Sec. 46-33. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-3) 
Sec. 46-34. - Delineation of special flood hazard area. 
(a)  The special flood hazard area shall overlay existing zoning districts delineated on the official city zoning map. The boundaries of the special flood hazard area shall coincide with the boundaries of the areas indicated as within the limits of the 100-year flood in the report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study, City of Trenton," with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps. Within the special flood hazard area, a regulatory floodway shall be designated. The boundaries of the regulatory floodway shall coincide with the floodway boundaries indicated on the flood boundary and floodway map. The study and accompanying maps are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(b)  Where there are disputes as to the location of a flood hazard area boundary, the zoning board of appeals and adjustment shall resolve the dispute in accord with section 46-64. 
(c)  In addition to other requirements of chapter 110 applicable to development in the underlying zoning district, compliance with the requirements of this article shall be necessary for all development occurring within the flood hazard area. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-4) 
Sec. 46-35. - Conflicting ordinances or agreements. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this article and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-5) 
Sec. 46-36. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-6) 
Sec. 46-37. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-7) 
Secs. 46-38-46-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 46-61. - Designation of city engineer. 
    The city engineer is hereby designated the zoning administrator under this article and shall administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-16) 
Sec. 46-62. - Duties of city engineer. 
    Duties of the city engineer under this article shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The city engineer shall review all development permit applications to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  The city engineer shall review development permit applications for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
(3)  The city engineer shall notify adjacent and/or affected communities and the state prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and shall submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  The city engineer shall ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  The city engineer shall verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures. 
(6)  The city engineer shall verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed. 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the city engineer shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the city engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(9)  The city engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city engineer and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-17) 
Sec. 46-63. - Development permit. 
(a)  A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article for all new construction, substantial improvements and other developments, including the placement of mobile homes within an area of special flood hazard. 
(b)  No person shall erect, construct, enlarge or improve any building or structure in the city or cause such work to be done without first obtaining a separate development permit for each building or structure when required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Application for a development permit shall be made to the city engineer on forms furnished by him and may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed. 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that a floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in section 46-82. 
(4)  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-18) 
Sec. 46-64. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances from the provisions of this article shall only be granted by the zoning board of appeals upon a determination of compliance with the general standards for variances and each of the following specific standards: 
(1)  A variance shall not be granted within a regulatory floodway where the result would be any increase in flood levels during a base flood discharge, except upon certification by a registered professional engineer or the state department of natural resources that the cumulative effect of the proposed development will not harmfully increase the water surface elevation of a base flood. In determining whether a harmful increase will occur, compliance with part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.3101 et seq.) shall be required, provided that the allowable increase, including the increase used as the design standard for delineating the floodway, shall not exceed 0.1 foot. 
(2)  A variance shall be granted only upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in flood heights in excess of those permitted by this article, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances. 
(3)  The variance granted shall be the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief to the applicant. 
(b)  The zoning board of appeals may attach conditions to the granting of a variance to ensure compliance with the standards contained in this article. 
(c)  Variances may be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Michigan Historic Markers listing of historic sites, or any other state register of historic places without regard to the requirements of this section governing variances in flood hazard areas. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-19) 
Secs. 46-65-46-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 46-81. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(5)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(6)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-25) 
State Law reference- Construction in floodplains, MCL 324.3108. 
Sec. 46-82. - Specific base flood elevation standards. 
(a)  Agency designated. Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with section 8b (6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the city engineer of the City of Trenton is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Trenton under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Trenton assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout the corporate limits of the community adopting this ordinance. 
(b)  Code appendix enforced. Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of Trenton. 
(c)  Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled "Wayne County, Michigan (All Jurisdiction)" and dated February 2, 2012 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26163C; 0412E, 0413E, 0414E, 0416E, 0420E, 0527E, and 0535E dated February 2, 2012 are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-26; Ord. No. 758, § 1, 1-23-2012; Ord. No. 761, § 1, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 46-83. - Mobile homes. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard: 
(1)  All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: 
a.  Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side. 
b.  Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home, with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side. 
c.  Any additions to the mobile home shall be similarly anchored. 
(2)  New mobile home parks and subdivisions, existing mobile home parks and subdivisions, existing mobile home parks and subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced, and mobile homes not placed in a mobile home park or subdivision require: 
a.  Stands or lots elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level; 
b.  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler; and 
c.  In the instance of elevation on pilings: 
1.  Lots large enough to permit steps; 
2.  Piling foundations placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and 
3.  Reinforcement provided for pilings more than six feet above ground level. 
(3)  An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicle access and escape routes shall be filed with the city engineer for all mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-27) 
Sec. 46-84. - Standards for subdivisions and other development proposals. 
(a)  Within areas of special flood hazard: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-28) 
Sec. 46-85. - Floodway protection standards. 
(a)  New construction, substantial improvements and all other development, including fill, shall be prohibited within zones numbered A1-30 on the FIRM, except where it is demonstrated to the zoning administrator that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not harmfully increase the water surface elevation of a base flood. In determining whether a harmful increase will occur, compliance with part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.3101 et seq.) shall be required, provided that the allowable increase shall not exceed 0.1 foot. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply within the regulatory floodway. The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be applied to land situated within the regulatory floodway. 
(b)  All development occurring within the regulatory floodway shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, shall be prohibited. Exception to this prohibition shall only be made upon certification by a registered professional engineer or the department of natural resources that the development proposed will not result in any increases in flood levels during a base flood discharge, and compliance with part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.3101 et seq.). 
(2)  The placement of mobile homes shall be prohibited except in mobile home parks and subdivisions which exist at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(3)  Development which is permitted in the regulatory floodway shall meet the requirements of section 46-82(a)(2). 
(c)  The uses of land permitted in an underlying zoning district shall not be construed as being permitted within the regulatory floodway, except upon compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 141/2-29) 
Chapter 50 - FRANCHISES AND RIGHT-OF-WAY LICENSES AND PERMITS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public utility franchises, ch. XIV. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; community development, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY FRANCHISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 98. 

Sec. 50-31. - Grant of franchise. 
    Subject to all the terms and conditions set forth in this article, and consistent with the requirements of the Charter, the city council may, by ordinance, grant utilities, and their successors and assigns, franchises to lay, maintain, and operate lines, poles, pipe, wires and conduit and transact local business in the city, above and under the highways, streets, alleys, and other public places in the city. Franchises granted may be revocable and nonexclusive or exclusive in accordance with the Charter. Application for franchises shall be made to engineering and building department, which shall investigate the request and make recommendations to the council on the ability of the applicants to use the requested rights-of-way consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-1) 
Sec. 50-32. - Compliance with applicable regulations. 
    A utility granted a franchise shall operate within the city in accordance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the United States, the state and the city. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-2) 
Sec. 50-33. - Use of streets and other public places. 
(a)  The utility and its successors and assigns shall not unnecessarily obstruct the passage of any of the highways, streets, alleys or other public places within the city and shall, within a reasonable time after making an opening or excavation, repair the opening or excavation and leave it in as good condition as before the opening or excavation was made. 
(b)  The utility and its successors and assigns shall use due care in exercising the privileges contained in this article. 
(c)  The utility and its successors and assigns shall defend and save harmless the city from any and all claims or lawsuits alleging property damage or injury arising out of the operation of the franchise or construction work, including all acts or omissions or negligence of the utility or its officers, agents, servants or assigns. 
(d)  No road, street, alley, highway or public place shall be used for the laying of lines, poles, pipes, wire, conduit, or mains or other devices, either below ground or above ground, by a new or existing franchisee, permittee or licensee, except upon application to the engineering and building department of the city or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises, and the payment of any fees, stating the nature of the proposed work, the method of construction and the route. Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of the engineering and building department, or such other authority as may have jurisdiction, to review the proposed plans to ensure payment of all fees and compliance with the Charter and this Code, and to issue a work permit upon compliance. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, but the city shall regulate the location of such facilities. Liability for performance of any work lies solely with the utility, notwithstanding the city's review and approval, including issuance of work permits and inspection. Once a work permit is issued, the engineering and building department will be notified when any work is to take place so that employees of the department of public works can be present. All pipes, wires, conduit, lines, cable or mains shall be underground unless the city determines that underground installation is not reasonable. The applicant shall file a bond with the city of $50,000.00 to guarantee the timely performance and restoration of any construction in the right-of-way. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-3) 
Sec. 50-34. - Standards and conditions of service; rules, regulations and rates. 
    To the extent the utility is under the jurisdiction of the state public service commission, the rates to be charged for its product and the standards and conditions of service and operation under this article shall be the same as set forth in the utility's schedule of rules, regulations, and rates as applicable in the several cities, villages and townships in which the utility is now rendering service, or as shall hereafter be validly prescribed for the city under the orders, rules and regulations of the state public service commission or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises. To the extent the company is not under the jurisdiction of the state public service commission, the rates to be charged for its services and the standards and conditions for service and operations under this article shall be filed with the city clerk prior to beginning any service. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-4) 
Sec. 50-35. - Applicability to successors and assigns. 
    The word "utility," wherever used in this article, is intended and shall be held and construed to mean and include both the utility and its successors and assigns, whether so expressed or not. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-5) 
Sec. 50-36. - Joint use of facilities. 
    The utility shall allow joint use (co-use) of its facilities, subject to the payment of reasonable rental fees, located in the streets, alleys and public places, by other existing or potential franchisees, permittees or licensees of the city, insofar as such joint use will not unreasonably interrupt or interfere with the operation of the utility. If the parties cannot agree upon conditions for such use or reasonable rental fees, the council may require an arbitration to establish the conditions of joint use and the reasonable rental fee. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-6) 
Sec. 50-37. - Payment of franchise fees. 
    All utilities which are granted franchises or renewals of franchises after February 7, 2000, shall, as a condition of their franchise, pay to the city a franchise fee as established from time to time by the city council by resolution, except that utilities which have facilities in the rights-of-way of the city on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be charged a franchise fee based on those facilities, other than a renewal fee or an annual maintenance fee. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-7) 
Sec. 50-38. - Availability of services; performance bond. 
    The utility will make its services available to all citizens of the city, whether industrial, commercial or residential. All potential customers who are in the same category shall be charged at the same rate. To the extent that the pooling of potential customers would allow for a more favorable rate, the utility will allow and facilitate groups who desire to make pooling arrangements. The city may require the posting of a surety bond or cash with the city treasurer, in an amount determined by the council, to ensure performance by the utility of the provisions of this article and to defray the costs of the city in investigating compliance. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-8) 
Secs. 50-39-50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable communications company and company mean any person granted a franchise in accordance with this article. 
    Cable communications system means: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming services. 
    Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to subscribers within the city, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations. 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way. 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Communications Act of 1934 (the Act), except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of section 621(c) of the Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services. 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    Franchise means a nonexclusive contract to transact local business providing cable service using the right-of-way awarded by contract and accepted in writing by the grantee. 
    Gross revenues means revenues derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable service as more specifically set forth in the franchise agreement. 
    Right-of-way means the entire area owned or dedicated by the city or other governmental agency or entity for public use as a street, sidewalk, easement, landscape area or other public place. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-3) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-62. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide fair regulation of cable communications service in the city in the interest of the public; to promote and encourage adequate, economical and efficient cable communications service to the residents of the city; to promote and to encourage harmony between cable communications companies and their subscribers; and to provide for the furnishing of cable communications system service to the residents to the city without unjust discrimination or undue preferences or advantages. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-2) 
Sec. 50-63. - Reports. 
    Every cable communications company shall file annually with the city engineer a current map showing the exact location of the transmission and distribution facilities and equipment in the city used by it in providing cable communications service, and further shall prepare and furnish the city, on written request therefor, at such time and in such form as may be mutually agreed upon, such reports as to its operations, revenues, facilities and activities as may be reasonably necessary to enable the city to perform its obligations, functions and duties under this article. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-4) 
Sec. 50-64. - Rights of city. 
(a)  Any franchise granted under this article is made subject to all applicable provisions of law relating to the city and ordinances thereof, and specifically subject to the rights and powers of the city and limitation upon the cable communications company holding such franchise as are set forth in the state statutes pertaining to cities, which are incorporated in this article by reference, and such cable communications company shall abide by and be bound by such rights, powers and limitations. 
(b)  The right is hereby reserved to the city to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained in this article, existing application ordinances, and the franchise agreement, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the police power, provided that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights granted in this article or the applicable franchise agreement, and shall not be in conflict with the applicable laws of the state or the United States. 
(c)  In the case of any emergency or disaster, the company shall, upon request of the mayor or his designated representative, make available its facilities to the city for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period. 
(d)  The city shall not be liable for any damage occurring to the property of the company caused by employees of the city in the performance of their duties, except for damage caused to the company facilities by the negligence of the city's employees, agents or contractors. The city shall not be liable for the interruption of service by actions of the city employees in the performance of their duties, nor shall the city be held liable for the failure of the company to be able to perform normal service due to acts of God or other factors beyond the control of the city. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall grant to the company any right of property in city-owned property, nor shall the city be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than or in any fashion other than in the city's judgment its own business or needs may require. 
(f)  Except for individual service drops, the company shall not erect any pole, install any underground lines or conduits, run any line, or make any attachment, nor shall any construction of any kind be commenced, without the prior approval of the city engineer or appropriate department of the city, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The city shall have and maintain the right to inspect the construction, operation and maintenance of the system by the company to ensure the proper performance of the terms of this article. 
(g)  If any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article fails to provide cable communications service within and throughout any area as required under the terms of its franchise agreement, the franchise shall, on the anniversary of the effective date of such franchise next following the ten-month period during which cable communications service has not been extended as required under the terms of the franchise agreement, be deemed revoked without the necessity of council action, unless, prior to such date, such person shall have applied to the city council and the council shall have, for good cause shown, granted an extension of the construction of service periods set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(h)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this article may be terminated and canceled without further proceedings 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of a cable communications company, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceedings, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such period; provided, however, that such receiver or trustee may apply for a transfer or assignment of such franchise, as provided in section 50-112, if duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, and provided further, in case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property or facilities of a cable communications company, with or without the appointment of a receiver or trustee, including or excluding the franchise granted under this article, such franchise as granted may be terminated and canceled upon 30 days' written notice of termination served upon the cable communications company and the purchaser thereof, unless, within such 30-day period, the purchaser shall apply to the city for a transfer or assignment to it of the franchise as provided in section 50-112(e). 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-5) 
Sec. 50-65. - Use of franchise fees and other funds. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall budget a minimum of 40 percent of the moneys to be received from cable franchise fees to encourage the use of access channels and further the development of public sector uses of the cable communications system. 
(b)  The city cable communications commission shall recommend a detailed budget for these funds to the mayor and council prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. The commission shall also make detailed budget recommendations for the use of any additional funds received by bequests, bestowals, donations, etc. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-6(c)) 
Sec. 50-66. - Legal recourse of franchisee against city. 
    Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this article or the reasonable enforcement thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-7) 
Sec. 50-67. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the maximum penalties allowable under the Charter and/or applicable state law. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-8) 
Sec. 50-68. - Tampering with equipment; unauthorized connections. 
(a)  No person shall tap, tamper with or cause to be tapped, tampered with or connected any wire or device, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, to any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of a cable communications company without authorization from the cable communications company owning or controlling the wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any connection to a television of videotape recorders, video games, computers and other similar devices in a manner authorized by the cable communications company or to any other connection made without intent to avoid an installation or service charge by the cable communications company. 
(c)  The existence of any unauthorized physical, electronic, acoustic, inductive or other connection of any wire or device to any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment of a cable communications company is presumptive evidence that the person owning or occupying the premises at which the wire or device is located has tapped, tampered with, connected or cause to be tapped, tampered with or connected such wire or device. 
(d)  The provisions of section 50-120(a) and (b) shall not apply to any complaints concerning any matter covered by this section. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article or any franchise agreement entered into pursuant to section 50-111(a), a cable communications company may discontinue service to any person who is violating this section. 
(f)  A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day during or on which a violation of this section occurs or continues. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the city police department. 
(Code 1974, §§ 91/2-24-91/2-30) 
State Law reference- Obtaining telecommunication services with intent to avoid charges, MCL 750.219a. 
Secs. 50-69-50-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-401 et seq. 

Sec. 50-91. - Established. 
    The city council does hereby establish a commission to be known as the city cable communications commission. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-6(a)) 
Sec. 50-92. - Composition; term of office of members; vacancies; compensation of members. 
    The cable communications commission shall consist of nine residents of the city appointed by the mayor, with the approval from the council. Each member shall serve a term of three years. Any vacancy in the office shall be filled by the mayor, with council approval, for the remainder of the term. No employee or person with a one percent or greater equity interest in a cable television franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be eligible for membership on the commission. Members of the commission shall be compensated as provided in section 2-401. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-6(b)) 
Sec. 50-93. - Functions. 
    The cable communications commission, in addition to the functions and responsibilities that the mayor and council may delegate to it from time to time by resolution, shall have the following advisory functions: 
(1)  Discuss this article and franchises thereunder with prospective franchise applicants. 
(2)  Advise the council on applications for franchises. 
(3)  Advise the council on matters which might constitute grounds for revocation of franchises under this article. 
(4)  Recommend to the council, after hearing, resolutions of disputes between franchisees, between franchisees and subscribers, between franchisees and access users, and between access users. 
(5)  Advise the council on the matter of rates under this article, rate increase announcements, and rate regulations under federal law, and generally make recommendations regarding rates, services or classifications. 
(6)  Make recommendations to the council and the cable communications company regarding channel allocation with a view toward maximizing the diversity of programs and services to subscribers. 
(7)  Encourage the use of access channels by institutions, groups and individuals within the city. 
(8)  Encourage and supervise interconnection of systems. 
(9)  Review and report to the council concerning records and reports which the franchisee is required to submit under this article. 
(10)  Conduct evaluations of the system as required and make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding amendments to this article or to the franchise agreement. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-6(d)) 
Secs. 50-94-50-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FRANCHISE 

Sec. 50-111. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable communications system in the city nor shall any person provide a cable communications service or acquire ownership or control of a cable communications company operating in the city without such person having first obtained a franchise therefor from the city in the form of a franchise agreement between the city and the cable communications company, which franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance with the specifications of this article, except as otherwise set forth in such agreement. 
(b)  No person shall use, occupy or traverse the right-of-way or any extensions thereof or additions thereto, whether on, above, or under the surface of the ground, for the purposes of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a cable communications system or facilities therefor or for the purpose of furnishing a cable communications service, without such person having first obtained a franchise therefor from the city in the form of a franchise agreement between the city and the cable communications company, which franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance with all the specifications of this article, except as otherwise set forth in such agreement. 
(c)  The specifications required by this article are minimum requirements of a franchise agreement. Additional requirements, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, deposits, specifications regarding required interconnections, studios or other signal origination facilities, number of channels to be equipped and available for immediate use upon initial construction of the system, use of channels by the city, schools and other educational institutions, quality of community access, availability of equipment to users, required establishment and expansion of service area, other use of channels and other specifications or requirements of a cable communications company or system, may be established in the franchise agreement as permitted by federal law. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-9) 
Sec. 50-112. - Request for franchise; criteria for granting; transfer. 
(a)  The request for an initial or renewal franchise to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system in the city or to furnish a cable communications service shall be made in writing to the council in such form as may be prescribed. The initial request shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the city council, which fee shall be used to cover expenses, direct or indirect, incurred by the city in the preparation of the ordinance codified in this article, amendments to this article, development of proposal solicitation documents and any amendments, and reviewing, investigating and evaluating the proposals submitted. Reimbursement for legal and consulting fees and other expenses incurred in association with the development of a franchise agreement will be separately billed. 
(b)  Upon the filing of such a request and the payment of the fee as prescribed, the city shall consider the request and may seek such additional information as it may deem necessary to establish the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to provide a cable communications service in the city. 
(c)  If the council determines that the applicant possesses the necessary qualifications, legal, financial, technical and otherwise, to reasonably ensure the applicant's ability to satisfactorily install, construct, maintain and operate a cable communications system or to furnish a cable communications service to the public in the city, and otherwise meets the standards set forth by ordinance, state and federal law and regulations, the council may issue a nonexclusive franchise therefor in the city. No franchise shall be issued until the council has held a public hearing on such request after due notice of the time and place of such hearing has been given to the public. 
(d)  In determining whether such a franchise shall be issued, the council shall take into consideration, among other things, the applicant's technical qualifications; financial responsibility and ability to perform efficiently the service for which the franchise is requested, including the prior experience, if any, in providing cable communications systems or furnishing cable communications service; the proposed rate schedule; the nature and scope of the proposed system; and the timetables for development of the proposed system. 
(e)  Neither a franchise nor a cable system shall be sold, assigned or transferred except in accordance with this section. 
(1)  In the event of a change of control of the cable communications company (change of control includes a change in ownership of a majority interest to an unrelated entity), the parties to the sale or transfer shall make a written request to the city for its approval of sale or transfer. The written request shall be accompanied by information required by Federal Communications Commission rules, shall be presented on a form as prescribed by Federal Communications Commission rules, and shall be accompanied by a fee of as established by the city council, which fee shall be used to cover the expenses and costs incurred by the city in reviewing and evaluating the information required. 
(2)  In accordance with federal law, the city shall have 120 days from receipt of the information referred to in subsection (e)(1) of this section to act upon the request for approval. If the city fails to render a final decision on the request within that time, the request shall be deemed granted unless the cable communications company and the city agree to an extension of the time. 
(3)  During the review period described in subsection (e)(2) of this section, the city may advise the cable communications company that a public hearing is deemed necessary. In such event, the cable communications company shall have written notice of the hearing, and of the opportunity to participate fully in it, as far in advance as possible and in no event less than 14 days before the start of the hearing. 
(4)  A decision of the city upon a request pursuant to this section shall be in writing and subject to review and appeal as provided in federal law. 
(f)  In reviewing a request for sale or transfer, the city may inquire into the technical, legal and financial qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the cable communications company shall assist the city in so inquiring. The city shall not unreasonably withhold its approval. In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or control be approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to the franchise. 
(g)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no consent or approval by the city shall be required for a transfer or assignment to any person controlling, controlled by or under the same common control as the cable communications company, or for any sale, transfer or assignment other than a transfer requiring approval. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-10) 
Sec. 50-113. - Franchise nonexclusive; term; form. 
    Any franchise issued pursuant to this article shall be a nonexclusive franchise for a term of years, not to exceed 15 years, as the council may approve and shall be issued in such form as shall be determined by the council. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-11) 
Sec. 50-114. - Fees; reporting; records. 
(a)  During the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this article, the person granted such franchise shall pay to the city for the use of right-of-way, as well as the maintenance, improvements, and supervision thereof, and for the regulation activities required by virtue of the franchise, an amount to be determined by agreement between the city and the person granted such franchise, but the amount shall not be less than five percent of the gross revenues, as defined in section 50-61. The fee paid to the city may not be shown on any bill or invoice rendered to a subscriber unless permitted by federal or state law or regulation. The city shall be furnished with a statement with each payment, certified as correct by the cable communications company, and an annual statement for the entire year. The cable communications company shall provide to the city only those records and reports which pertain specifically to the cable communications company's system under this agreement and only the financial records of the revenues earned by the cable communications company from the operation of its cable system within the city. 
(b)  Such fee shall be paid as provided in the franchise agreement at the office of the treasurer of the city during regular business hours. If the city treasurer's office is closed on the due date, then payment may be made during regular business hours on the next following day on which the office is open for business. 
(c)  The city shall have the right, at its expense and upon 30 days' written notice, to inspect the cable communications company's records showing the gross revenues from which its franchise payments are computed. The right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this franchise shall be always accorded to the city. Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release of or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city might have for further or additional sums payable or for any other performance or obligation of the cable communications company. Acceptance of any payment shall be final upon completion of any audit. The books and records shall be made available to the city in the city offices. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-12) 
Sec. 50-115. - Construction of facilities; right to use right-of-way; purchase of equipment by city. 
(a)  A franchise granted pursuant to this article shall confer upon the grantee the nonexclusive right to erect, install, construct, reconstruct, replace, remove, repair, maintain and operate in or upon, under, above and across the right-of-way as existing as of the date of the grant of the franchise, and all subsequent extensions thereof and additions thereto, in and belonging to the city, all necessary towers, poles, wires, cables, coaxial cables, transformers, amplifiers, underground conduits, pedestals, manholes, and other television and/or radio conductors, equipment and fixtures for the installation, construction, maintenance and operation of a cable communications system (including audio, video and radio signals) or the furnishing of a cable communications service. 
(b)  Prior to the erection or installation of any towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground conduits, manholes, or fixtures for use in connection with the installation, construction, maintenance or operation of a cable communications system under a franchise granted pursuant to this article, the cable communications company of a franchisee under this article desiring to erect or install such facilities for use in connection with its cable communications system shall first submit to the city engineer for review and approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if requested or required, together with a map indicating the proposed location of such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, guy, anchor, underground conduit, manhole, or fixture for use in a cable communications system shall be connected by any person until approval therefor has been received from the city engineer. 
(c)  Any person accepting a franchise pursuant to this article and erecting or installing towers or poles located in the public right-of-way or utility easements shall, upon written request by the city, grant the city reasonable attachment space upon such towers or poles without a rental charge for the attachment of wire or cable owned and used in offering a non-competitive service by the city. The city shall pay any costs incurred by such person in providing attachment space to the city, including all necessary costs or rearrangement of such person's wires, cables or equipment and tower or pole replacement cost for a larger tower or pole, if required. 
(d)  Upon the termination or revocation of any franchise granted pursuant to this article, or should any person wish otherwise to dispose of any tower or pole erected or installed for use in connection with a cable communications system or any portion of such system within the city, the city retains the first right and option to purchase in place such towers or poles as it may require or such portion of the system for the fair market value thereof as determined by an independent appraiser. Further, upon the termination or revocation for cause of any franchise granted pursuant to this article, the franchisee shall have a period of 12 months from the date of termination or revocation to remove its towers, poles, wires, aerial or non-buried cables, fixtures or other facilities from the right-of-way; provided, however, that the cable communications company shall not disturb any underground conduit, manholes or other facilities constructed underground. At the expiration of such 12-month period, any property not removed by the cable communications company, excluding any facilities located underground, shall become the property of the city to do with as it may choose. Any cost to the city in removing such property from the right-of-way shall be reimbursed to the city by the cable communications company. 
(e)  In areas or portions of the city where transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities providing telephone service and electric service are underground, any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall likewise install, construct, maintain and operate its transmission and distribution facilities in like manner underground to the maximum extent feasible and permitted by existing technology and conditions, subject to the approval of the city engineer as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(f)  All construction, installation, maintenance and operation of any cable communications system or of any facilities employed in connection therewith shall, except where inconsistent with city ordinances, rules, regulations, standards and specifications, be in compliance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code as prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the state construction code, any standards issued by the Federal Communications Commission or other federal or state regulatory agencies in relation thereto, and applicable regulations of public utilities operating in the city. Every cable communications system installed, constructed, maintained or operated in the city shall be so designed, constructed, installed, maintained and operated as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the city. 
(g)  Any opening or obstruction in, disturbance of or damage to the right-of-way by any person in the exercise of any right granted pursuant to this article shall be properly guarded by adequate barriers, lights, signals and warnings as to prevent danger to any person or vehicle using such right-of-way and shall be properly and promptly repaired, all in a manner reasonably specified and approved by the city engineer, at such person's expense. 
(h)  Any person owning or maintaining a cable communications system or facilities therefor in or on the right-of-way in the city shall, at such person's expense and without reimbursement from the city, upon request of the city, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove from the right-of-way any property of such person when required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, or tracks, or the construction or change of the transmission or distribution facilities of any telephone or electric public utility or other public improvements. Any such person shall also, at the request of any private party holding an appropriate permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its cable communications transmission or distribution wires or cables to permit the moving of any building or other structure, provided that the actual expense of such temporary raising or lowering shall be paid in full by the party requesting the temporary raising or lowering. 
(i)  If any person shall fail to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this article as set forth in this article to be done in any right-of-way as designated by the city engineer, the city engineer may cause such work to be done and such person shall pay to the city the cost thereof within 30 days of the receipt of an itemized statement of such cost. 
(j)  Any person operating a cable system shall, in addition to all other requirements of this article, within 30 days of the execution of a franchise, file with the city a corporate surety bond with a company authorized to do business in the state and reasonably acceptable to the city. The purpose of the corporate surety bond is to guarantee the timely construction and full activation of the cable system. The corporate surety bond shall be for the purpose of allowing recovery by the city of any and all damages, losses, or costs suffered by the city resulting from the failure of the cable communications company to satisfactorily complete and fully activate the cable system throughout the city, pursuant to the terms and conditions of this article. 
(k)  When the cable system is completed to the reasonable satisfaction of city council, the corporate surety bond need no longer be maintained. 
(l)  The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety nor may the intention not to renew be exercised by the surety until 30 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-13) 
Sec. 50-116. - Standard of service. 
(a)  Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall install, construct, maintain, operate and improve its cable communications system in accordance with the accepted standards of the industry, in conformity with the standards of operation or maintenance for a cable communications system which may be lawfully established by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(b)  Every cable communications system franchised under this article, at a minimum, shall make available the following: 
(1)  At least one specifically designated channel for noncommercial governmental use by the city. 
(2)  One channel for noncommercial use by the city public schools within its boundaries. 
(c)  Any cable communications system franchised under this article may be required by franchise agreement to maintain and have available for public educational and governmental use the necessary equipment and facilities for the production of programming on the access channels specified in this article. 
(d)  The cable communications company shall install as part of its cable system, and shall operate through the term, an emergency alert system (EAS) (or the successor to that system) in accordance with all requirements imposed from time to time by the Federal Communications Commission, including, without limitation, the requirements that cable televisions systems transmit a visual EAS message on at least one channel (47 CFR 11.51(g)(3)) and that cable systems also provide video interruption and an audit EAS message on all channels, with the audio message further stating which channel is carrying the visual message (47 CFR 11.51(g)(2)). In establishing the cable communications company's EAS system pursuant to this section, cable communications company shall: 
(1)  Designate a channel (which may be the government channel) which will be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video; 
(2)  Inform customers of the designated emergency channel at least daily on at least one channel (which may be the government channel) of the multi-channel system; 
(3)  Maintain all channel video blanking capability able to be activated remotely by security measures deemed mutually agreeable by the city and the cable communications company; 
(4)  Test the emergency override system not less than every three months; 
(5)  Cooperate with the city on the use and operation of the emergency alert override system; and 
(6)  Maintain the capacity to permit the city in time of emergency to override by remote control all channels simultaneously consistent with federal regulations as stated in 47 CFR 11.55. 
(e)  Every cable communications system franchised under this article shall maintain such capacity, capability and technical standards as will enable it to interconnect with any other cable communications system located within the city and in any adjacent community. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-14) 
Sec. 50-117. - Rates. 
(a)  No rates or charges for cable communications service provided in the city which the city regulates in accordance with federal law shall be effective until the rates and charges are filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  The city shall comply with rules of the Federal Communications Commission set forth in subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of part 76 (Cable Television Service) of chapter I of title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulation (47 CFR 76.901 et seq.) regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and associated equipment, as amended. 
(c)  If subject to rate regulations, after a company submits for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs or a proposed increase in these rates, the clerk shall publish a public notice of the rates and costs giving interested parties, including the company, a reasonable opportunity to file written comments, which shall be available in the office of the city clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(d)  The city shall comply with procedures set forth in 47 CFR 0.459 regarding confidential business information submitted by the company in a rate regulation proceeding. 
(e)  If subject to rate regulations, a company which willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order directed specifically at the company shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture of up to $25,000.00 per day and $100,000.00 for any single act as determined by the city council under 47 USC 503. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-15) 
Sec. 50-118. - Bond, indemnification and insurance requirements. 
(a)  Every cable communications company, prior to the execution of the franchise agreement, shall file with the city and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise, at its expense, a performance bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit from a bank approved by the city, in the amount of $50,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful performance by such cable communications company of its obligations under its franchise, and upon the further condition that, if such cable communications company shall fail to comply with any one or more provisions of this article or the cable communications agreement with the city, there shall be recoverable any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal of any property of such cable communications company as provided in this article, plus reasonable attorneys' fees and costs, up to the full amount of the performance bond or letter of credit, such condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of any franchise granted under this article and any renewal thereof and thereafter until such cable communications company has liquidated all of its obligations with the city which may have arisen under the franchise or from the exercise of any privilege or right granted. Nothing in this article shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by any cable communications company or in any way to limit its liability for damages or otherwise. 
(b)  No franchise under this article shall be effective until the provisions of subsection (a) of this section have been fully complied with, and the failure to file with the city clerk, within 90 days after tender by the city of the franchise agreement, the letter of credit, indemnity agreement if any, proof of general comprehensive insurance or any other documents and materials as required by subsection (a) of this section or any other provisions of this article or the franchise agreement shall render the franchise null and void without further proceedings. 
(c)  The insurance policies maintained pursuant to a franchise may have the limits of insurance changed not more frequently than every three years to reflect changes in the consumer price index as determined by the council upon notice to the cable communications company. The determination by the council shall be reasonable and in accordance with its police powers and requirements for contractors doing business for the city. All insurance policies maintained and required shall name the city as an additional named insured and shall contain the following endorsement: "It is understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the insurer nor the intention not to renew be stated by the insurer until 30 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew." The provisions of this section regarding minimum requirements of insurance for a cable communications company shall not be construed as limiting the terms, obligations or liabilities imposed under other sections of this article or the agreement between the cable communications company and the city. The letter of credit shall be maintained at the required amount during the entire term of any franchise awarded even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to this article or the franchise. The rights reserved to the city with respect to the performance bond or letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the city and the exercise of any such right or remedy by the city shall not release the cable communications company from its obligations or any liability or affect any other rights the city may have, except as expressly provided for in a franchise or as necessary to avoid duplicate recovery from or payments by the cable communications company to city. 
(d)  The cable communications company and any contractor hired by the cable communications company to install, maintain, improve, restore or remove a cable communications system within the city shall not commence work under this agreement until they have obtained the insurance required in this section. All insurance coverage shall be with insurance carriers reasonably acceptable to the city. If any insurance is written with a deductible or self-insured retention, the cable communications company or contractor shall be solely responsible for the deductible or self-insured retention. The purchase of insurance and the furnishing of a certificate of insurance shall not be a satisfaction of the cable communications company's indemnification of the city. The cable communications company is responsible to meet all MIOSHA requirements for on-the-job safety. The cable communications company and any contractor hired by the cable communications company shall procure and maintain during the life of this contract the following coverage: 
(1)  Workers' compensation insurance in accordance with all applicable statutes of the state. Coverage shall include employer's liability coverage. 
(2)  Commercial general liability insurance on an occurrence basis with limits of liability not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and personal injury, and $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for property damage. Coverage shall include the following extensions: 
a.  Contractual liability. 
b.  Products and completed operations. 
c.  Independent contractors coverage. 
d.  Broad form general liability extensions or equivalent. 
e.  Coverage for X, C and U hazards. 
(3)  Motor vehicle liability coverage, including Michigan no-fault coverage for all vehicles used in the performance of the contract. Limits of liability shall not be less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage. 
(4)  Additional insured. Commercial general liability insurance and automobile liability insurance as described in this section shall include an endorsement stating the following shall be an additional named insured: "The city, including all elected and appointed officials, boards, commissions, officers and employees." 
(5)  Cancellation notice. Workers' compensation insurance, commercial general liability insurance, and motor vehicle liability insurance as described in this section shall include an endorsement stating the following: "It is understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the insurer nor the intention not to renew be stated by the insurer until 30 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew." The notice shall be sent to: 
City of Trenton 
Attention: City Clerk 
2800 Third Street 
Trenton, MI 48183-2992 
(6)  Upon showing of solvency and responsibility, the council may at its sole discretion accept self-insurance coverage where warranted. 
(e)  If so requested by the city, the cable communications company and any contractor hired by the cable communications company shall within 60 days of such request supply a copy of the insurance policy of any of the insurance coverage required under this section. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-16) 
Sec. 50-119. - Termination; revocation or surrender. 
(a)  Any initial franchise granted pursuant to this article shall expire without further proceedings ten months after its effective date if the person granted such franchise has not commenced construction of a cable communications system within such period, unless, prior to such date, such person shall have applied to the city council and the council shall have, for good cause shown, granted an extension of the construction period set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  If any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article fails to provide cable communications service within and throughout any area as required under the terms of the franchise agreement, the franchise shall, on the anniversary of the effective date of such franchise next following the ten-month period during which cable communications service has not been extended as required under the terms of the franchise agreement, be deemed revoked without the necessity of council action, unless, prior to such date, such person shall have applied to the city council and the council shall have, for good cause shown, granted an extension of the construction of service periods set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(c)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this article may be terminated and canceled without further proceedings 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of a cable communications company, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceedings, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such period; provided, however, that such receiver or trustee may apply for a transfer or assignment of such franchise, as provided in section 50-112(e), if duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises; and provided further, in case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property or facilities of a cable communications company, with or without the appointment of a receiver or trustee, including or excluding the franchise granted under this article, such franchise as granted may be terminated upon 30 days' written notice of termination served upon the cable communications company and the purchaser thereof, unless, within such 30-day period, the purchaser shall apply to the city for a transfer or assignment to it of the franchise as provided in section 50-112(e). 
(d)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this article, unless otherwise allowed by law, is revocable prior to its expiration for cause as provided in this section. Any franchise granted pursuant to this article is revocable for cause by the city council prior to its expiration where the cable communications company has failed substantially to comply with any material provision or requirement of this article or the provisions of its franchise agreement. The council shall give a written notice containing full particulars as to the provision or requirement with which compliance is claimed deficient and allow such cable communications company 60 days to cure such deficiencies. The council may hold a public hearing upon ten days' notice to the person granted a franchise in the event of failure to cure such deficiencies. The hearing shall be public, with the cable communications company being permitted to fully participate therein, including the right to introduce testimony and exhibits and to examine and cross examine witnesses. The hearing shall be recorded and at the conclusion thereof the council, if it reasonably finds that the cable communications company has not substantially complied with any material provision or requirement of this article or its franchise agreement, may terminate and revoke the franchise. 
(e)  Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article may surrender it by written notice of intent to surrender its franchise filed with the city clerk not less than 60 days prior to the surrender date. On the surrender date specified in such notice, all rights, privileges and authority under the franchise shall terminate; provided, however, that such person shall have a period of 12 months thereafter to remove his towers, poles, wires, aerial or non-buried cables, fixtures or other facilities from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places, subject to the rights of the city as set forth in section 50-115(d). At the expiration of such 12-month period, any property not removed by such person, excluding any facilities located underground, shall become the property of the city to do with as it may choose. Any cost to the city in removing such property from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places shall be claimed against such person under the performance bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit required under section 50-118. 
(f)  If a cable communications company elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the system, or the council terminates or revokes or fails to renew this franchise for failure to comply with its material terms, the cable communications company shall do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous uninterrupted service. In the event of a change of cable communications company, the current cable communications company shall cooperate with the city to operate the system for a reasonable period in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-17) 
Sec. 50-120. - Hearing and determination of complaints; local office. 
(a)  The city council, or any person or department designated by it, shall, upon its own motion or upon complaint of any person or subscriber of a cable communications company, have authority to hear and determine all complaints concerning the rates, charges, rules, regulations, practices, quality or service rendered or refused to be rendered, equipment furnished or refused to be furnished, or any other matter relating to the service or operation of the cable communications system or any person franchised under the terms of this article. 
(b)  Upon the filing of any complaint against any person pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the council shall give such person at least 20 days' notice of the time and place of a hearing to be given such person upon the matters alleged in the complaint, subject to state and federal laws. 
(c)  To aid in the analysis and resolution of any disputed matters relative to the franchise, the city and the cable communications company may, by mutual agreement (both as to whether to hire and whom to hire), employ the services of technical, financial or legal consultants, as arbitrators. All reasonable fees of the consultants shall be borne equally. 
(d)  Every person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall maintain a reasonably convenient customer service facility or bill payment location which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed local telephone number or toll-free number and be so operated to receive subscriber payments, complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments on a 24-hour basis. The company shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. A written log shall be maintained listing all complaints resulting in service calls, their disposition, and all service interruptions. 
(e)  The company shall maintain a suitable repair force of technicians in order to respond to subscriber complaints or requests for service within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request. The company shall establish to the satisfaction of the city a complaint procedure in order to settle disputes between the company and subscribers. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-18) 
Sec. 50-121. - Priority of use of public property. 
    Any right or privilege granted to any person under this article to use or occupy any street, alley, public right-of-way or public place shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of such property. Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting in any way the city in the lawful exercise of the police power, and the grant of a franchise to any person as provided in this article shall confer no right, privilege or exemption not specifically presented in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-19) 
Sec. 50-122. - Surrender of other franchises. 
    By the application for and acceptance of a franchise pursuant to this article, a cable communications company agrees that, upon subsequent additions of areas to the city, either by annexation, consolidation or otherwise, any and all franchises and/or licenses held by it to provide a cable communications service or to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system in such areas shall be surrendered and any rights or privileges in a right-of-way to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system or to furnish a cable communications service in such areas as may subsequently be added to the city by annexation, consolidation or otherwise shall thereafter be subject to and authorized by this article. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-20) 
Sec. 50-123. - Filing of maps. 
    Upon request, every cable communications company shall file annually with the city engineer a current as-built map showing the location of the transmission and distribution facilities and equipment in the city used by it in providing cable communications service. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-21) 
Sec. 50-124. - Rights of individuals. 
(a)  A cable communications company shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, weight, height or marital status. A cable communications company shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(b)  A cable communications company shall not refuse to hire or employ, or bar or discharge from employment, or discriminate against, any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, race, creed, color, national origin or sex. 
(c)  Neither the cable communications company, the city nor any other person shall tap or monitor or arrange for the tapping or monitoring, or permit, either expressly or impliedly, any other person to tap or monitor, any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever, without the express written permission of the subscriber; provided, however, that the cable communications company shall be entitled to conduct system-wide or individually addressed "sweeps" for the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmission, or billing for pay services. 
(d)  A cable communications company, or any of its agents, affiliates or employees, shall not, without the specific written authorization of the subscriber involved, sell or otherwise make available to any party other than its affiliates: 
(1)  Lists of the names and addresses of such subscribers; or 
(2)  Any list which identifies the viewing habits of subscribers except as such list is necessary for the construction, marketing and maintenance of a cable communications company's facilities and services under this article and the concomitant billing of subscribers for such services. A cable communications company shall not provide information concerning the viewing habits of identifiable individual subscribers to any party for any purpose whatsoever. 
The cable communications company shall not utilize the two-way communications capacity of the system for unauthorized surveillance of any kind. 
(e)  Liability for obscenity, defamation or invasion of privacy on any access channels shall rest with the person, group of persons or any organization or corporation utilizing the access channels. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-22) 
Secs. 50-125-50-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SERVICE STANDARDS 

Sec. 50-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Normal business hours means 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday to Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturday, excluding holidays. 
    Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the company. Those conditions which are not within the control of the company include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the company include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
    Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-31) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-152. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this division is intended to prevent or prohibit: 
(1)  The city and a company from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this article. 
(2)  The city from enforcing through the end of the franchise term preexisting customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this division that are contained in current franchise agreements. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-32) 
Sec. 50-153. - Customer service standards. 
    A company is subject to the following customer service standards certified quarterly by the company: 
(1)  The company will maintain a local, toll-free or collect telephone access line which will be available to subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(2)  Trained company representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries from 9:00 a.m. to midnight, seven days a week. From midnight to 9:00 a.m., the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received from midnight to 9:00 a.m. shall be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
(3)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a company representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions measured on a quarterly basis. 
(4)  Under normal operating conditions, the customer may receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
(5)  Reasonably convenient customer service center/bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours. 
(6)  Under normal operating conditions, each of the following five standards must be met no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
a.  Standard installations will be performed seven business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are located not more than 150 feet from the existing distribution system. 
b.  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, a company shall begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. 
c.  The company must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service pro time during a four-hour block of time during normal business hours. The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. 
d.  A company may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
e.  If a company representative is running late for an appointment and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted, and the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
(7)  The company shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
a.  Products and services offered; 
b.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
c.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
d.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
e.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and 
f.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the business address and telephone number of the company and of the office of the city clerk, 2800 Third Street, Trenton, Michigan 48183-2992, telephone (313) 675-8600. 
(8)  Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible by any reasonable means. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the company. In addition, the company shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by subsection (7) of this subsection. 
(9)  Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including operational charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, a company must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
(10)  Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but not later than: 
a.  The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
b.  The return of the equipment supplied by the company if service is terminated by the company. 
(11)  Credits will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-33) 
Sec. 50-154. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A company shall file with the city clerk a notarized statement signed by an officer or employee certifying compliance with the customer service standards set forth in this division on an annual basis. 
(b)  Failing to file a certificate shall subject a company to pay a civil fine to the city of up to $250.00 per day. 
(c)  A company in noncompliance shall on a quarterly basis file a statement specifying areas of noncompliance along with a remedial plan. Failing to file a noncompliance statement and remedial plan shall subject the company to pay a civil fine to the city of up to $250.00 per day. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-34) 
Secs. 50-155-50-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSES AND PERMITS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Telecommunications Act, MCL 484.2101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-181. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101-484.3120), and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-50), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-182. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    City council means the city council or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    City Administrator means the city administrator or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this ordinance to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the City for its telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  All other terms used in this ordinance shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to section 3 of the Act (MCL 484.3103). 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunications facilities and facilities mean the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunications facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act No. 179 (MCL 484.2102). Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunications facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-51), 10-21-2002) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-183. - Permit required. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(1)). A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the city administrator, and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make two copies of the application and distribute a copy to the city engineer. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(5)). 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231-15.246), pursuant to section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee as established by the city council. 
(e)  Additional information. The city administrator may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city administrator deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city administrator. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(2)). 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the Act (MCL 484.3105(1)), authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251) and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3105(3)), within 180 days from November 1, 2002, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251), shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the application fee required under subsection (d) of this section. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-52), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-184. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(3)), the city administrator shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 50-183(b) for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(6)), the city administrator shall notify the MPSC when the city administrator has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city administrator shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city administrator shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act (MCL 484.3106(1),(2), 484.3115). 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(4)), the city administrator may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(3)), and without limitation on subsection (c) of this section, the city administrator may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-53), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-185. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under chapter 82, article II, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-54), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-186. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3104(3)), obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-55), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-187. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(7)), a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in paper or electronic format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(8)). 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-56), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-188. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(5)), a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommuni-cations facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-57), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-189. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth in section 50-183(d), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to section 8 of the Act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3108). 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-58), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-190. - Modification of existing fees. 
(a)  In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(1)), the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. 
(b)  In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(4)), the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the Act (MCL 484.3108). The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the Act. 
(c)  To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent and, upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-59), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-191. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant section 10(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3110(4)), all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street Fund maintained by the city under Public Act No. 51 of 1951 (MCL 247.651-247.675). 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-60), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-192. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3110(5)), the city administrator shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-61), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-193. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(6)), the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-62), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-194. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the Act (MCL 484.3104(2)), except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-63), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-195. - Compliance with requirements of Act. 
(a)  The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting the ordinance from which this article is derived is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. 
(b)  The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act No. 442 (MCL 15.231-15.246), as provided in section 50-183(c); 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 50-183(f); 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the application fee in accordance with section 50-183(g); 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 50-184(a); 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 50-184(a); 
(6)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 50-184(a); 
(7)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 50-184(b); 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 50-184(c); 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 50-184(d); 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 50-185; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 50-191; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 50-192; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 50-193. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-64), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-196. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(2)), this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-65), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-197. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city administrator or designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this article as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-66), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-198. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to fines of $100 per day. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1(271/2-67), 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 50-199. - Applicability generally. 
    The provisions of this article shall be imposed upon and enforced against all telecommunication systems in the city requiring a license or permit under state law from the city. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-71) 
Sec. 50-200. - Compliance with laws, regulations and orders. 
    All grantees and the city shall comply with all laws, rules, regulations and orders in the exercise and performance of their rights and obligations under this article and under any permit. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-72) 
Sec. 50-201. - Continuity of service. 
    It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee of a permit are honored. If the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the telecommunication system or the city terminates, revokes or fails to renew a permit within a reasonable time, a grantee shall do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. In the event of a change of grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the new grantee in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. If interruption of service is required by a grantee for modification, repairs or the like, the interruption shall be as brief as possible and at times when the impact on subscribers is at a minimum. Records of such interruption shall be kept. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-68) 
Sec. 50-202. - Acceptance of conditions by grantee; incorporation of application and ordinance in permit. 
    The grantee agrees to be bound by all of the terms and conditions of the permit and accepts unconditionally the permit and promises to comply with and abide by all of its terms, provisions and conditions. A grantee also agrees to provide all services set forth in its application and proposal, and, by its acceptance of the license or permit, a grantee specifically grants and agrees that its application and proposal is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the license or permit. In addition, a grantee specifically agrees that this article is incorporated by reference and made a part of the license or permit. In the event of a conflict between the application and proposal of the grantee, this article, and the license or permit, this article shall prevail. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-69) 
Sec. 50-203. - Tampering with equipment; fraudulent connections or sales. 
(a)  No person, whether or not a subscriber or user to the telecommunication system, may intentionally or knowingly remove or damage or cause to be damaged any wire, cable, conduit, equipment, or apparatus of the grantee, or to commit any act with an intent to cause such removal or damage, or tap, tamper with or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit, equipment and apparatus, or appurtenances of the grantee with the intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the telecommunication system without authorization from or compensation to the grantee, or obtain telecommunications service, or sell, rent, offer or advertise for sale, rental or use any instrument, apparatus, device or plans, specifications, or instructions for making or assembling any device to connect to the grantee's telecommunication system with intent to cheat or defraud the grantee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled. 
(b)  The prohibitions, penalties and remedies set forth in this section are in addition to any prohibitions, penalties and remedies for theft of service provided by state and federal law. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-70) 
Secs. 50-204-50-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Permits, MCL 484.2251 et seq. 

Sec. 50-221. - Required. 
    No person shall install, construct, maintain or otherwise operate a telecommunication system in the city without a telecommunication license and no person shall transact business within the city limits on a telecommunication system without a permit. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-51(a)) 
Sec. 50-222. - Issuance. 
(a)  The city council may grant one or more licenses and permits for a telecommunication system in the city subject to this article. 
(b)  The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional licenses and permits for a telecommunication system as it deems appropriate. Additional licenses and permits shall not be deemed to modify, revoke, terminate or damage any rights previously granted to any other grantee. 
(c)  If a license application is filed proposing to install facilities within a franchise or permit territory which overlaps in whole or in part an existing area, a copy shall be served by the applicant by certified mail upon the current grantee. Proof of such service shall be provided to the city. No application for overlapping territory shall be processed until proof of service has been furnished to the city. It is not the intent of this article to either require or prohibit overbuilding. 
(d)  Applications for a new, renewed or amended permits or licenses shall be filed with the engineering and building department, which shall investigate the request and make recommendations to the council on the ability of the applicants to use the right-of-way consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. New, renewed or amended permits which expand the scope of service shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable pre-payment of the permit formation, renewal or amendment fee. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-52) 
Sec. 50-223. - Term. 
    Any license or permit and the rights, privileges, authority, and responsibilities established shall take effect and be in force from and after final acceptance. It shall continue in force and effect for a period established by the license or permit not exceeding 15 years, provided, within 30 days after the date of the city's final acceptance of a license or permit, the grantee files with the engineering and building department its unconditional acceptance of the license or permit, all required letters of credit, and construction surety and insurance certificates, and pays to the city treasurer all reasonable costs actually incurred by the city in preparing, considering and awarding the license or permit, including legal, engineering, technical, publication and other expenses, that is, the permit formation fee. If a grantee fails to timely comply with this section, it shall acquire no rights, privileges, or authority whatsoever from the city. The director of the engineering and building department may extend the term of a license or permit for a period not exceeding one year by written agreement with a grantee on reasonable and necessary terms. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-53) 
Sec. 50-224. - Fees. 
(a)  Permit or license fee. For the reason that the streets, highways and rights-of-way or easements to be used by grantee in the operation of its telecommunication system within the boundaries of the city are valuable public properties, some of which are acquired and maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers, and that the grant to grantee of the use of the streets, highways, rights-of-way or easements is a valuable property right without which the grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, a grantee shall pay a permit formation fee or license fee and renewal fees as determined from time to time by council resolution. 
(b)  Per linear foot or per site fee. In addition, a permittee or licensee shall pay a per linear foot fee or per site fee to the city for all lines, wires, cables, poles, conduits and the like that are erected upon, over, across or under the roads, bridges, streets, public rights-of-way or easements of the city, at the time of erection and annually, as may be established from time to time by the council. 
(c)  Miscellaneous provisions. 
(1)  Grantees sharing the same conduit shall each pay a full fee, formation fee or license fee. 
(2)  Grantees sending signals over an existing line owned by another telecommunication system upon which fees are already paid are not subject to additional per linear foot fees. 
(3)  Grantees using the same line to provide cable television service and to provide telecommunications services shall be subject to both a cable television franchise fee and all fees set by this article, except that the per linear foot fee shall not be charged. 
(4)  License and permit fees shall be in addition to any other tax, charge, fee, or payment due the city by a grantee. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-56) 
Sec. 50-225. - Provision of new services. 
    If the grantee of a permit provides a new service, facility, equipment, fee or grant to any other community which it serves within the state, the same shall be provided in or to the city. The city shall waive this requirement in a permit upon an affirmative demonstration that such service would be undesirable, impractical, infeasible or uneconomical in the city due to population, density or other relevant factors. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-58(a)) 
Sec. 50-226. - Insurance. 
    A grantee shall at all times during the life of a license or permit carry and require its contractors and subcontractors to carry out public liability, property damage, worker's disability, and vehicle insurance in such form and amount as shall be determined by the city as set forth in the license or permit. All required insurance coverage shall provide for 30 days' notice to the city in the event of material alteration or cancellation of such coverage prior to the effective date of such material alteration or cancellation. Failure of the grantee to provide appropriate insurance certificates to the city within 60 days after the execution of a license or permit shall render the license or permit null and void. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-58) 
Sec. 50-227. - Participation by city in legal proceedings; compliance with regulations. 
    A grantee agrees not to oppose intervention by the city in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is a party relating to the city's permit or license. A grantee agrees to abide by all provisions of this article and its license and permit. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-63) 
Sec. 50-228. - Transfer. 
(a)  Neither a license or permit nor any of a grantee's interest therein or in the facilities shall be sold, assigned, transferred, pledged, leased, sublet, hypothecated or mortgaged in any manner, in whole or in part, to any person, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein, or any property or assets relating to a license or permit or the facilities, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. A grantee shall not otherwise provide service to a person who the city contends is required to obtain a license or permit from the city and who lacks such license or permit. Nothing in this section shall prevent a grantee from assigning its rights and obligations to an affiliate (defined as any entity directly owned by the grantee or a parent entity of the grantee) or subsidiary of the grantee upon notice to the city. Any assignment or transfer to a subsidiary or affiliate of the grantee shall not relieve a grantee of its liability under this article. Further, nothing in this section shall prevent or prohibit a grantee or any of its parents, subsidiaries or affiliates from granting a security interest in the license or permit or the facilities arising from a financing transaction. The grant or waiver of any one or more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consents, nor shall the grant of any such consent constitute a waiver of any other rights of the city. In the event of a foreclosure proceeding pursuant to the enforcement of a security interest granted by a grantee, or any parent or subsidiary of a grantee, the city shall have the right to approve the purchaser of the license or permit and/or the facilities at a foreclosure sale, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or unduly delayed. The prohibition against sales, assignments, transfers and similar actions shall also fully apply to any transfer of control of the grantee ("control") and such transfer of control shall also require the prior written approval of the city, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or unduly delayed. 
(b)  No license or permit or any part or portion of its interest in the license or permit may be sold, transferred or assigned until the facilities, equipment and personnel which the grantee has proposed in the current license or permit application to provide and install pursuant to the license or permit are 100 percent completed and operational for a minimum period of three years, except to grantee's parent, affiliate or subsidiary. 
(c)  Any attempted transfer of the license or permit, facilities, control or similar action by a grantee in violation of this section shall be ineffective and void and shall constitute a material event of default by the grantee. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-64) 
Sec. 50-229. - Construction and performance guarantee. 
    A grantee shall, prior to construction and within 30 days of the execution of a license or permit, file with the engineering a building department a letter of credit, surety bond or cash deposit in a reasonable amount set by the terms of the license or permit based upon the construction cost of the lines to be installed upon, over, across, or under the roads, bridges, streets, rights-of-way or easements in the city. The grantee and the city engineer may make arrangements for the periodic release of the cash deposit, surety bond or letter of credit in proportionate amounts as progress is made. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-65) 
Sec. 50-230. - Termination. 
(a)  In addition to all rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct remedy the right to terminate a license or permit and all rights and privileges of a grantee in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A grantee fails after 30 days' prior written notice to comply with any of the provisions of the license or permit or has, by act or omission, violated any term or condition; 
(2)  A grantee becomes insolvent or unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt; 
(3)  All or part of a grantee's facilities are sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by the grantee within 90 days from such sale; 
(4)  A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations with the city under the license or permit; 
(5)  The city condemns all of the property of a grantee within the city by the lawful exercise of eminent domain; or 
(6)  The grantee abandons the telecommunication system or fails to seek renewal of its license or permit. 
(b)  No termination, except for reason of condemnation, shall be effective unless or until the city shall have adopted a resolution setting forth the cause and reason for the revocation and the effective date, which resolution shall not be adopted without 30 days' prior notice to the grantee and an opportunity for the grantee to be heard on the proposed resolution. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-66) 
Secs. 50-231-50-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MICHIGAN CONSOLIDATED GAS COMPANY FRANCHISE 

Sec. 50-251. - Grant of franchise. 
    Subject to all the terms and conditions mentioned in this article, consent is hereby given to Michigan Consolidated Gas Company, a corporation organized under the laws of the state (referred to in this article as the "company"), and to its successors and assigns, to lay, maintain, operate and use gas pipes, mains, conductors, service pipes, and other necessary equipment in the highways, streets, alleys, and other public places in the city, and a franchise is hereby granted to the company, its successors and assigns to transact local business in the city for the purposes of conveying gas into and through and supplying and selling gas in the city and all other matters incidental thereto. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-21) 
Sec. 50-252. - Gas service and extension of system. 
    If the provisions and conditions contained in this article are accepted by the company, then the company shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations; provided that such initial installation and any extensions shall be subject to the main extension provisions, the area expansion program provisions (if and where applicable), and other applicable provisions now or from time to time hereafter contained in the company's rules and regulations for gas service as filed with the state public service commission or successor agency having similar jurisdiction. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-22) 
Sec. 50-253. - Use of streets and other public places. 
(a)  The company, its successors and assigns shall not unnecessarily obstruct the passage of any of the highways, streets, alleys, or other public places within the city and shall, within a reasonable time after making an opening or excavation, repair the opening or excavation and leave it in as good condition as before the opening or excavation was made. The company, its successors and assigns shall use due care in exercising the privileges contained in this article and shall be liable to the city for all damages and costs which may be recovered against the city arising from the default, carelessness, or negligence of the company or its officers, agents, and servants. 
(b)  No road, street, alley, or highway shall be opened for the laying of trunk lines or lateral mains except upon application to the highway commissioner or the city or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises, stating the nature of the proposed work and the route. Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of the highway commissioners or the city council, or such other authority as may have jurisdiction, to issue a permit to the company to do the work proposed. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-23) 
Sec. 50-254. - Standards and conditions of service; rules, regulations and rates. 
    The company is now under the jurisdiction of the state public service commission to the extent provided by statute; and the rates to be charged for gas, and the standards and conditions of service and operations under this article, shall be the same as set forth in the company's schedules of rules, regulations, and rates as applicable in the several cities, villages, and townships in which the company is now rendering gas service or as shall hereafter be validly prescribed for the city under the orders, rules and regulations of the state public service commission or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-24) 
Sec. 50-255. - Applicability to successors and assigns. 
    The words "Michigan Consolidated Gas Company" and "the company," wherever used in this article, are intended and shall be held and construed to mean and include both Michigan Consolidated Gas Company and its successors and assigns, whether so expressed or not. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-25) 
Sec. 50-256. - Term. 
    The franchise granted by this article shall continue in effect for a period of 30 years, subject to revocation at the will of the city at any time during such 30-year period. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-26) 
Secs. 50-257-50-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AMERITECH NEW MEDIA FRANCHISE 

Sec. 50-281. - Grant of franchise. 
    Consent is hereby given, along with a nonexclusive franchise, to Ameritech New Media Corporation, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of Delaware (referred to in this article as the "company") and to its successors and assigns to transact local business in the city for the purpose of providing cable television service within the jurisdictional limits of the city and, in conjunction therewith, to construct, maintain and operate a cable television franchise within the jurisdictional limits of the city and to utilize the streets, highways, alleys, and other rights-of-way in the city consistent with the franchise agreement by and between the city and Ameritech New Media, which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and made part of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-31) 
Sec. 50-282. - Term. 
    The franchise granted by this article shall continue in effect for a period of 15 years. 
(Code 1974, § 271/2-32) 
Chapter 54 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 98. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Food Law of 2000, MCL 289.1101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-31. - Enforcement officers. 
    The power to enforce the provisions of this article is hereby vested in the health officer, the police chief and their deputies. 
(Code 1974, § 15-1) 
Sec. 54-32. - Inspections required. 
    It shall be the duty of the city engineer, police chief or their designees or deputies to visit and inspect at frequent intervals every place where food, beverages or confections intended for consumption by human beings are manufactured, kept, stored, prepared or offered for sale or other disposition. 
(Code 1974, § 15-2) 
Sec. 54-33. - Right of entry of city officials. 
    The city engineer and the police chief or their designees or deputies shall have full power at any time to enter every building, room, basement or cellar occupied or used, or which they have reasonable cause to believe is being used, for the production, manufacture, storage, sale or distribution of food, for the purpose of inspecting the premises and the utensils, fixtures, furniture, product, ingredients and machinery used therein. 
(Code 1974, § 15-3) 
Sec. 54-34. - Issuance of order to correct violation. 
    If, upon inspection, any food producing or food distributing establishment, conveyance, employee, operative, clerk, driver or other person is found to be violating any of the provisions of this article, or if the production, preparation, manufacture, packing, storing, sale, distribution or transportation of any food product is being conducted in a manner detrimental to the health of the employees or is injurious to the quality and food value of such food therein being produced, manufactured, packed, stored, sold or distributed, the officer or inspector making such examination or inspection shall thereupon issue an order or rule to the person in authority or in charge or control of such place, directing that the condition be corrected within such reasonable time as in his direction he deems proper. 
(Code 1974, § 15-4) 
Sec. 54-35. - Failure to comply with order; authority to close establishment. 
    If any person shall fail to make the improvements required by an order issued pursuant to section 54-34 within the time so limited, it shall be the duty of the city engineer or police chief to institute proceedings against the person for the violation of this article and close the business of such person until such improvements and repairs shall have been made and approved by the county department of public health. Should the unsanitary condition found warrant such action, the establishment may be immediately closed by the officer making the inspection, in which case he shall notify the person in charge of the establishment at the time of inspection, in writing, stating his reasons for closing the place, and a continuance to operate after receiving such a notice shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 15-5) 
Sec. 54-36. - Duty of police chief to check licensing. 
    It shall be the duty of the police chief and his duly authorized assistants to check all food establishments to determine whether or not they are provided with proper licenses as required by this article, and the police chief or his duly authorized assistants shall institute action to prosecute any person found to be operating without proper city license. 
(Code 1974, § 15-6) 
Sec. 54-37. - Personal cleanliness of employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for either the owner or proprietor of any firm or corporation maintaining, operating or managing any food establishment in the city to suffer, permit or allow any employee, officer or agent employed therein or thereabout in the handling of any food product intended for human consumption to be or remain in any unsanitary, filthy or dirty condition, either as to person or clothing, while so employed or engaged in the handling of such products intended for human consumption. 
(Code 1974, § 15-7) 
Sec. 54-38. - Condemnation of contaminated and adulterated food. 
    It shall be the duty of the city engineer, sanitary inspector or their assistants to seize, condemn or exclude from sale, delivery or distribution in the city any spoiled, contaminated or adulterated food or any food unfit for human consumption or any food which has been unnecessarily exposed to dust, flies, contamination by the public, vermin or other contaminating material in violation of the terms of this article. It shall further be the duty of the city engineer, sanitary inspector or other assistants to destroy or denaturize all food condemned as unfit for human consumption and issue an order or statement to the owner of such food, stating the reason therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 15-8) 
Sec. 54-39. - Keeping decayed food in receptacles with food intended for human consumption. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or suffer any decayed food or meat or vegetable matter of any kind to remain in any receptacle, icebox or any other compartment wherein any fruits, meats, vegetables or other food intended for human consumption is kept for sale or other disposition. 
(Code 1974, § 15-9) 
Secs. 54-40-54-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPEN AIR MARKETS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 54-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Open air market means a business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the business building, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. 
(Code 1974, § 15-111) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 54-62-54-80. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - License 

Sec. 54-81. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of selling fruits and vegetables, whether at wholesale or retail, or engage in the sale of plant materials not grown on the site or garden supplies in an open air market without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 15-112) 
Sec. 54-82. - Application; health department investigation and approval. 
    Application for a license required by this division shall be made in writing to the city clerk, upon blanks to be provided by the city clerk, who shall refer all such applications to the state health department for investigation and approval. The application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, residence and post office address, and whether the applicant is an individual, firm or corporation. If a partnership exists, the names of the partners must be given, together with their addresses. If the application is made by a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers must be given. 
(2)  The location of the applicant's place of business. 
(3)  An agreement that the applicant will permit the city engineer, police chief, sanitary inspector, and their respective representatives or assistants to inspect the establishment and everything in connection therewith at any time desired. 
(4)  The manner in which the applicant intends to dispose of the goods, whether at wholesale or retail or both, and any other pertinent information desired by the city engineer which may have reasonable bearing on the public health. 
(Code 1974, § 15-113) 
Sec. 54-83. - Investigation and recommendation by city engineer; issuance. 
(a)  Upon the signing of an application for a license required by this division by the applicant or someone duly authorized by him, the city engineer shall make or cause to be made an investigation to ascertain whether such applicant is in a position to observe, and is willing to observe, the terms and conditions of this division. 
(b)  If it shall appear to the city engineer, after such investigation, that the applicant is in a position to maintain a sanitary open air market establishment, and furnish clean, pure, healthy, wholesome and unadulterated food to customers, and is willing to observe the terms and conditions of this chapter and the regulations of the engineering and building department, if the application is approved, then the city engineer shall endorse upon such application a favorable report, and transmit the application to the city clerk, who shall issue a license to the applicant, granting permission to conduct the type of business designated in the application and no other. 
(Code 1974, § 15-114) 
Sec. 54-84. - Denial. 
(a)  If it shall be found by representatives of the state health department, after investigation, that the applicant for a license under this division is not maintaining, or cannot maintain, a sanitary open air market establishment, or is not furnishing clean, pure, healthy, wholesome and unadulterated food to customers, or that the applicant is unwilling to observe the terms and conditions of this chapter and the regulations of the city engineer, or that the applicant is not in a position to do so, then the city engineer shall endorse upon such application an unfavorable report, together with a recommendation that the applicant be denied a license by the city council. 
(b)  The city clerk shall, upon receipt of such a recommendation, present the matter to the city council at its first regular meeting following receipt of the application. The city council shall act upon the application. If the license is denied, the city clerk shall promptly notify the police chief, in writing, of such action. Upon receipt of such notice, the police chief shall immediately order the establishment closed. If the applicant shall not comply with the order, he shall be promptly prosecuted. 
(Code 1974, § 15-115) 
Sec. 54-85. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The city engineer, or any of his duly authorized agents, or the police chief, or any of his duly authorized agents, shall have authority to revoke or suspend any license issued under this division, for the violation of any of the terms of this division or the violation of the health food laws of the state or the violation of the criminal statutes of the state or of the United States. 
(b)  The licensee shall be given written notice of the revocation or suspension. The licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council, if such hearing is demanded by him in writing and presented to the city clerk within ten days from the date of revocation or suspension of the license. The hearing shall be commenced at the following regular meeting of the city council, and the city council, after hearing both sides of the question, shall act as sole judge as to whether or not the revocation or suspension shall stand. 
(Code 1974, § 15-116) 
Secs. 54-86-54-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Sanitary Standards 

Sec. 54-101. - Compliance. 
    Every person who, as owner or manager, keeps, maintains or operates an open air market in the city shall be required to maintain the sanitary standards set forth in this subdivision. 
(Code 1974, § 15-122) 
Sec. 54-102. - Toilet facilities. 
(a)  All open air markets shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities conveniently located within the establishment. 
(b)  Toilet rooms shall not open directly into any food processing room. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair and shall be well lighted and ventilated. 
(Code 1974, § 15-123) 
Sec. 54-103. - Lavatory facilities. 
    All open air markets shall have lavatory facilities conveniently located which are provided with hot and cold running water. Hand-washing signs shall be posted in each toilet room used by employees. 
(Code 1974, § 15-124) 
Sec. 54-104. - Metal sinks required for cleaning utensils and tools. 
    Metal sinks shall be provided in all open air markets for the purpose of cleaning utensils and tools used in the handling, display or dispensing of foods. 
(Code 1974, § 15-125) 
Sec. 54-105. - Hot running water required. 
    An adequate supply of running hot water shall be piped to all sinks located in open air markets. 
(Code 1974, § 15-126) 
Sec. 54-106. - Storage of food generally. 
    All food stored shall be elevated at least 12 inches above the floor unless packaged in watertight containers, and free of possible sources of contamination. No food shall be stored below sewer lines. 
(Code 1974, § 15-127) 
Sec. 54-107. - Protection of food from contamination. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell, expose for sale, or have for other disposition any prepared food, for human consumption, or any cheese, candy, bread, cakes, figs, dates, prunes, raisins, mincemeat or other food, except fruits and vegetables, in broken packages unless the food shall be kept or stored in closed glass cases or other suitable containers, and protected from dust, dirt, flies, insects, and dogs, cats, rats and mice and other contaminating materials. 
(Code 1974, § 15-128) 
Sec. 54-108. - Certain food to be kept in dustproof covered containers. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell, expose for sale, dispose of, or deliver any sugar, honey, pickles, olives, sauerkraut, jelly, peanut butter, applesauce, lard, bread, baked goods or any like products intended for human consumption unless the receptacles in which such product is contained shall be dustproof and covered. 
(Code 1974, § 15-129) 
Sec. 54-109. - Dairy products and eggs to be refrigerated. 
    All dairy products and eggs must be kept under refrigeration at all times at or below a temperature of 50 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1974, § 15-130) 
Sec. 54-110. - Living or sleeping rooms connected with market. 
    Living or sleeping rooms in direct connection with any part of an open air market shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1974, § 15-131) 
Sec. 54-111. - Premises to be free from contamination and rodent-proof. 
    All open air markets shall be free from contamination and shall be rodent-proof. 
(Code 1974, § 15-132) 
Sec. 54-112. - Garbage and trash. 
    All waste, garbage and trash located on the premises of any open air market shall be kept in suitable receptacles, in such a manner as not to become a nuisance or cause the presence of rodents. 
(Code 1974, § 15-133) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 74. 
Sec. 54-113. - Worktables and benches. 
    All worktables and benches in open air markets shall be constructed of tight, smooth material and shall be free from cracks so as to be easily cleaned. 
(Code 1974, § 15-134) 
Chapter 58 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; emergency services and emergency management, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Departments, § 2-91 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-31. - Resisting or interfering with police officer. 
    No person shall resist any police officer of the city in the discharge of his duty, or fail or refuse to obey any lawful command of any police officer or in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent any such police officer from discharging his duty, or in any manner assist or give aid to any person in custody of a police officer to escape or to attempt to escape from custody, or rescue or attempt to rescue any person when in such custody. 
(Code 1974, § 26-1) 
Secs. 58-32-58-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Commission on Law Enforcement Standards Act, MCL 28.601 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 58-61. - Declaration of vacancy. 
    The police chief shall request authorization of the mayor to fill, as necessary, any vacancy. Upon the mayor's approval, the city shall proceed to fill the vacancy in accordance with procedures prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1974, § 24-22) 
Sec. 58-62. - Appointments. 
(a)  Appointments for employment as officers in the police department shall only be made after completely fulfilling the preliminary requirements. Such examination shall be conducted as provided in this division, and appointments shall be made from a revolving list of qualified applicants after confirmation by the city administrator or mayor. 
(b)  Such list of applicants may be held in effect, and continuing appointments made therefrom, for a period of up to two years from the date of application, which may be periodically updated, or terminated earlier if found to be in the best interest of the city with approval of the mayor. 
(c)  In the absence or shortage of currently available applicants in the department's revolving file, the police chief may contact local academies or cause public notice to be given for additional applicants, which notice shall be posted on the city's web-site and cable television or published in the local newspaper carrying official council proceedings, that applications for appointment and examination are being accepted by the city. Such applications shall be received and kept in a revolving file at the city's human resource office where it shall be periodically updated for eligibility. 
(Code 1974, § 24-23; Ord. No. 759, § 1, 1-9-2012) 
Secs. 58-63-58-80. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Minimum Employment Standards 

Sec. 58-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Candidate means a person seeking employment as a sworn police officer empowered to enforce the general criminal statutes of the state. 
    Commission means the state commission on law enforcement standards. 
    Examination means a job-related examination developed in conformance with the American Psychological Association Division 14 principles for the validation and use of personnel selection procedures and all applicable federal and state laws. 
    Test battery means the commission's job-related pre-employment examinations designed to assess: 
(1)  Reading/writing skills; and 
(2)  Physical performance skills. 
(Code 1974, § 24-24) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-82. - Employment qualifications. 
    A person selected to become a law enforcement officer under the Commission on Law Enforcement Standards Act (MCL 28.601 et seq.) shall, for the period of application and subsequent employment: 
(1)  Show proof of residency within six months following expiration of the initial probationary period of employment. 
(2)  Be certified by the state commission on law enforcement standards (COLES) or, in the case of a new officer, be certifiable within one year, as a police officer at time of hire. 
(Code 1974, § 24-25) 
Sec. 58-83. - Selection and employment standards. 
    The city does hereby adopt and incorporate by reference the Selection and Employment Standards of the Michigan Law Enforcement Officers Training Council (MLEOTC), being R28.4102, R 28.4102a, R28.4108, R28.4301, and R28.4311 as amended from time to time by the state commission on law enforcement standards and promulgated pursuant to authority conferred by section 9 of Public Act No. 237 of 1965 (MCL 28.609). 
(Code 1974, § 24-26) 
Sec. 58-84. - Recruitment and employment practices. 
    Recruitment and employment practices and standards shall comply with the law applicable to law enforcement officer employment. 
(Code 1974, § 24-27) 
Secs. 58-85-58-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Continuing Employment Standards 

Sec. 58-101. - Conditions of employment. 
    All employees hired under this division after September 15, 1975, shall be subject to the following continuing conditions of employment: 
(1)  An employee shall be required to maintain a standard of agility and fitness throughout his employment period. All employees shall be tested for fitness and agility at a minimum of once per year under the direction of the department head. The fitness and agility test shall be in accordance with acceptable medical standards and shall take into consideration such factors as an employee's height, weight and age. The employee shall maintain an acceptable score in order to pass the test. 
(2)  All employees shall be required to undergo at least once a year and pass a medical examination. The examination shall show that the employee is free from any physical or mental conditions which might adversely affect the required performance of his duties or which may endanger the employee's life or lives of others. All employees shall be required to have normal visual functions and visual acuity in each eye, correctable to 20/20. Employees must be physically sound, well developed physically, with height and weight in relation to each other, and to age, as indicated by accepted medical standards, and in possession of their extremities. The employee shall be free from any chronic diseases, organic diseases, functional conditions or mental instability which may tend to impair his efficient performance of duty. This examination will be as prescribed by the city physician/facility, when requested by the department head. The examination will be at no cost to the employee. 
(3)  If an employee fails to retain or meet the requirements under subsections (1) and (2) of this section, such employee shall have a 30-calendar-day period from the date of the test or examination to meet such requirements. If found failing after reexamination, the employee shall then be subject to compliance as prescribed under the direction of the city physician/facility, which may or may not preclude active employment until such deficiency is corrected, or the employee may be placed on sick or medical leave for a period not to exceed six months or until such deficiency is corrected. If the impediment is not corrected at the expiration of the six-month period, the employee shall be placed on medical leave, or if qualified the employee may request a disability pension, or the employee may be terminated. 
(4)  If such an employee can produce, at his own expense, medical evidence by a licensed physician to the contrary, the employee's report, together with the city's report, shall be subject to an impartial decision by a third licensed physician selected by the two previous examiners. The expense shall be borne by the city and that decision shall be binding. 
(Code 1974, § 24-33) 
Secs. 58-102-58-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCIPLINE OF MEMBERS 

Sec. 58-131. - Offenses for which disciplinary measures may be taken; types of disciplinary measures. 
(a)  A member of the police department found guilty of violating any of the following listed offenses shall be subject to reprimand, suspension, forfeiture of pay, or dismissal or suffer such other lawful punishment as the chief of police may direct: 
(1)  Cowardice. 
(2)  Willful disobedience of rules or general or special orders of the police department. 
(3)  Being under the influence of liquor or drinking any kind of intoxicating liquor while on duty, unless ordered by competent authority, or entering a place where intoxicating drinks are sold or kept, except in the line of duty. 
(4)  Entering a disorderly house or place where illegal commercial gambling is carried on, not in the performance of police duty. 
(5)  Willful maltreatment of a prisoner or any other person. 
(6)  Conduct unbecoming an officer. 
(7)  Insubordination or disrespect to a superior officer. 
(8)  Neglect of or inattention to duty. 
(9)  General incompetency. 
(10)  Sleeping while on active post duty. 
(11)  Being absent from duty without permission. 
(12)  Leaving his post without proper relief or purpose. 
(13)  Using coarse, profane or insolent language to a superior officer, to a member of the police department, or to any citizen. 
(14)  Not properly patrolling or guarding a post. 
(15)  Making a false statement or report. 
(16)  Neglecting to wear a proper uniform while on duty or neglecting to appear clean and tidy in person and dress. 
(17)  Accepting bribes of money or other valuables. 
(18)  Accepting any fee, reward or gift of any kind from any person arrested, or from any person in his behalf while in custody, or from any person for services rendered or pretended to be rendered as a member of the police department without consent of the chief of police. 
(19)  Gossiping about a member of the police department concerning his personal character or conduct, which is detrimental to such member. 
(20)  Publicly criticizing orders given by a superior officer. 
(21)  Communicating or giving information to any person concerning the business of the police department, which is detrimental to the police department. 
(22)  Communicating or giving police information which may aid a person to escape arrest, or to delay the apprehension of a criminal, or to secure the removal of stolen or embezzled goods or other property or money. 
(23)  Neglecting to pay a just indebtedness incurred while in the service, within a reasonable time. 
(24)  Assigning salary due or to become due to any person without permission from the chief of police. 
(25)  Refusing to give his name or badge number when requested. 
(26)  Neglecting to furnish persons arrested with a receipt for all personal property taken from them. 
(27)  Neglecting to turn over all property taken from persons arrested, or found, or seized, to the proper officer without unnecessary delay. 
(28)  Unjustified use of a revolver. 
(29)  Neglecting to report any member of the police department known to be guilty of a violation of any rule, regulation or order issued for the guidance of the police department. 
(30)  Failure to report a known violation of law or of this Code or other ordinance of the city. 
(31)  Ignorance of rules or orders. 
(32)  Immorality. 
(33)  Conviction of an offense in any court having criminal jurisdiction. 
(b)  Whenever it shall be deemed necessary for the preservation of good order, efficiency and discipline, the chief of police may suspend any one of his subordinates from duty for the reasons enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 26-25) 
Sec. 58-132. - Filing of charges. 
    When the chief of police suspends a member of the police department, he shall, without delay, file a written report of the charges with the city council and furnish the suspended member of the department with a copy of the charges. 
(Code 1974, § 26-26) 
Sec. 58-133. - Statement by suspended member; hearing. 
    Any suspended member of the police department shall make a written statement to the chief of police within 24 hours of his suspension. If he wishes a hearing on the charges, he shall make a written request of the city council within 48 hours from the time of his suspension. 
(Code 1974, § 26-27) 
Sec. 58-134. - Suspended members to turn over property belonging to city. 
    In all cases of suspension of any member of the police department, the suspended officer or member shall immediately surrender to the chief of police all property in his possession belonging to the city. Pending the disposition of the case, such property shall be retained by the chief of police. 
(Code 1974, § 26-28) 
Sec. 58-135. - Wearing uniform while suspended. 
    During a period of suspension, the suspended member of the police department shall not wear his uniform. 
(Code 1974, § 26-29) 
Sec. 58-136. - Complaints initiated by members. 
    When any member of the police department shall feel aggrieved or have complaint against any member of the police department, he shall have the right to file a written report of his complaint with the city council and the chief of police and request a public hearing before the city council. The city council shall have the discretion to decide in committee to either grant or deny the hearing. 
(Code 1974, § 26-30) 
Secs. 58-137-58-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CIVILIAN CROSSING GUARDS 

Sec. 58-161. - Generally; authority of chief of police. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to appoint special guards, to be known as civilian crossing guards, in such numbers as he may deem necessary, to perform police duties under the direction of and in compliance with such rules and regulations as the chief of police shall promulgate. 
(Code 1974, § 26-41) 
Sec. 58-162. - Qualifications, appointment and removal. 
    The chief of police shall promulgate rules relating to the qualifications, appointment and removal of civilian crossing guards. 
(Code 1974, § 26-42) 
Sec. 58-163. - Compensation. 
    Civilian crossing guards shall serve with such compensation as may be provided for by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 26-43) 
Sec. 58-164. - Dress, insignia and equipment. 
    Civilian crossing guards shall wear such badges, dress and insignia as the chief of police shall direct, and shall be equipped in the manner which the chief of police deems necessary for the proper discharge of their duties. 
(Code 1974, § 26-44) 
Sec. 58-165. - Failure to respond for duty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any civilian crossing guard to knowingly and willfully neglect or refuse to respond for assignment or duty when called under the rules and regulations promulgated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1974, § 26-45) 
Sec. 58-166. - Unlawful use of uniform and authority. 
    It shall be unlawful for any civilian crossing guard to exercise his authority as a guard, or to wear the uniform or insignia, or to display his badge in an attempt to exercise his authority, except during the performance of actual authorized police duty. 
(Code 1974, § 26-46) 
Sec. 58-167. - Impersonating civilian crossing guard. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn in as a civilian crossing guard to impersonate such officer, or to wear, carry or display the badge, designated dress or insignia of such civilian crossing guards. 
(Code 1974, § 26-47) 
Sec. 58-168. - Worker's compensation coverage. 
    Civilian crossing guards shall be entitled to all rights and benefits provided under the provisions of the Worker's Disability Compensation Act of 1969 (MCL 418.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 26-48) 
Secs. 58-169-58-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PARKING ENFORCEMENT ATTENDANT 

Sec. 58-191. - Generally; authority of chief of police. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to appoint a parking enforcement attendant to perform traffic parking enforcement duties under the direction of and in compliance with such rules and regulations as the chief of police shall promulgate. 
(Code 1974, § 26-59) 
Sec. 58-192. - Qualifications, appointment and removal. 
    The chief of police shall promulgate rules and regulations relating to the qualifications, appointment and removal of the parking enforcement attendant. 
(Code 1974, § 26-60) 
Sec. 58-193. - Compensation. 
    The parking enforcement attendant shall serve with such compensation as may be provided for by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 26-61) 
Sec. 58-194. - Worker's compensation coverage. 
    The parking enforcement attendant shall be entitled to all rights and benefits provided under the provisions of the Worker's Disability Compensation Act of 1969 (MCL 418.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 26-62) 
Sec. 58-195. - General duties; limitations on authority. 
    The parking enforcement attendant's duties shall be confined to the enforcement of all parking rules, regulations and ordinances as well as the enforcement of permit regulations at the city boat ramps. Other duties may be prescribed from time to time upon approval by the city council. The parking enforcement attendant shall not be responsible for the prevention and detection of crime and the enforcement of the general criminal laws of the state as set forth under the Commission on Law Enforcement Standards Act (MCL 28.601 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 26-63) 
Sec. 58-196. - Failure to respond for duty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any parking enforcement attendant to knowingly and willfully neglect or refuse to respond for assignment or duty when called under such rules and regulations as promulgated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1974, § 26-64) 
Sec. 58-197. - Uniform and equipment. 
    The parking enforcement attendant shall wear such badge, dress and insignia as the chief of police shall direct, and shall be equipped in the manner which the chief of police deems necessary for the proper discharge of such duties. 
(Code 1974, § 26-65) 
Sec. 58-198. - Unlawful use of uniform and authority. 
    It shall be unlawful for any parking enforcement attendant to exercise his authority as such attendant, or to wear the uniform or insignia, or to display his badge in an attempt to exercise his authority, except during the performance of actual authorized parking enforcement duty. 
(Code 1974, § 26-66) 
Sec. 58-199. - Impersonating parking enforcement attendant. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn in as a parking enforcement attendant to impersonate such officer, or to wear, carry or display the badge, designated dress or insignia of such parking enforcement attendant. 
(Code 1974, § 26-67) 
Chapter 62 - MOBILE HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; vegetation, ch. 102; waterways, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110; MH mobile home park district, § 110-311 et seq.; inspection of mobile home units, app. A, § A-81. 
State Law reference- Mobile homes and mobile home parks, MCL 125.2301 et seq.; local regulation of mobile homes, MCL 125.2307. 

Sec. 62-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile home means any vehicle used or so constructed so as to permit it to be used as a dwelling or sleeping place, which is or may be mounted on wheels, and is or may be propelled either by its own power or by another vehicle to which it may be attached. 
    Mobile home park means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which three or more occupied trailer coaches are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home park. 
(Code 1974, § 20-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-2. - Mobile Home Commission Act adopted. 
    The Mobile Home Commission Act (MCL 125.2301 et seq.) is adopted by reference. 
Sec. 62-3. - Parking overnight on street or other public place. 
    No person shall park or cause to be parked any mobile home overnight on any street, alley, highway or other public place in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 20-2) 
Sec. 62-4. - Parking between setback line and curbline. 
    No mobile home shall at any time be parked between the established setback line and the curbline on any lot. 
(Code 1974, § 20-3) 
Sec. 62-5. - Clearance around mobile home. 
    No mobile home shall be used or occupied by any person unless there is a clear, unoccupied space of at least ten feet on all sides thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 20-4) 
Sec. 62-6. - Removal of wheels; blocking and stabilizing. 
    No person shall remove or cause to be removed the wheels or tires from any mobile home except for the purpose of repair, nor shall any person elevate, block or stabilize any such coach other than with jacks designated, provided and intended for such purpose. 
(Code 1974, § 20-5) 
Sec. 62-7. - Limitation on number of occupants. 
    No mobile home shall be occupied for sleeping purposes by a greater number of persons than the mobile home is designed and arranged to accommodate. 
(Code 1974, § 20-6) 
Sec. 62-8. - Mobile home park license. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct, carry on or operate a mobile home park without first having received a license from the city. 
(b)  State permit. No license shall be issued to any applicant for a license required by this section unless he first procures a permit from the state for operation of the mobile home park. 
(c)  Transfer. All licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be personal to the licensee and be nontransferable without the written consent of the city. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation. Any license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to revocation or suspension by a court of proper authority and jurisdiction; provided, however, that the state health director, the county health officer, the city health officer, or any police officer having jurisdiction thereof shall first serve or cause to be served upon the licensee a written notice in which shall be specified the way in which such licensee has failed to comply with the state law or any special rules or regulations promulgated by the state health director pertaining thereto. The notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate such nuisance, insanitary or objectionable condition specified in such notice within five days, or within such longer period of time or extended period of time as may be allowed by the complainant. If the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the notice within the time specified or such extended period of time, the complainant may cause a civil action to be instituted to remove or abate such nuisance, insanitary or objectionable condition as complained of, in the court of proper authority and jurisdiction, in the name of the people, and, if found guilty of such violation, a decision may be entered by the court to revoke or suspend such license. 
(Code 1974, §§ 20-38-28-41) 
Chapter 66 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Loitering where prostitution or illegal business conducted. 
    No person shall loiter: 
(1)  In a house of ill fame or prostitution or place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged or allowed to take place. 
(2)  In or about any place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(b), (c)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(i), (1)(j). 
Sec. 66-2. - Transporting persons to place where illegal business conducted. 
    No person shall transport any person, for consideration, to a place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted, including the business of prostitution, illegal gambling or the illegal sale of liquor, for the purpose of enabling such person to patronize such a business. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(e)) 
Sec. 66-3. - Loitering to solicit business for provision of legal services or bail. 
    No person shall loiter in or about any police station, jail, hospital, court building or any other public building or place for the sole purpose of soliciting engagement for the provision of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(f)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(k). 
Sec. 66-4. - Posting advertisements or other notices on utility poles. 
    No person shall tack, nail, paste or in any manner attach or affix to any telegraph, telephone, electric light, power or fire alarm pole any advertisement or any advertising matter, sign, notice or placard, in any street, alley, park, lane or public place in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 19-9) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 98. 
Sec. 66-5. - Use of tobacco on school property. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section: 
    School district means a school district, local act school district, or intermediate school district, as those terms are defined in the Revised School Code (MCL 380.1 et seq.), a joint high school district formed under such act, or a consortium or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination of these. 
    School property means a building, facility, or structure and other real estate owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by a school district. 
    Tobacco product means a preparation of tobacco to be inhaled, chewed, or placed in a person's mouth. 
    Use of a tobacco product means any of the following: 
(1)  The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking device. 
(2)  The inhaling or chewing of a tobacco product. 
(3)  The placing of a tobacco product within a person's mouth. 
(b)  Use prohibited. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not use a tobacco product on school property. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to that part of school property consisting of outdoor areas, including, but not limited to, an open area stadium, during either of the following time periods: 
(1)  Saturdays, Sundays, and other days on which there are no regularly scheduled school hours. 
(2)  After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled school hours. 
(d)  Penalty. A person who is convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, §§ 19-151-19-154) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.473. 
Secs. 66-6-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING DANGER OR INJURY TO THE PERSON 

Sec. 66-31. - Assault; assault and battery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or an assault and battery upon the person of another. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or an assault and battery upon his or her spouse or former spouse and a person with whom he or she has had a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household. 
(Code 1974, § 19-3) 
State Law reference- Assault and battery generally, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Sec. 66-32. - Stalking. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
    Course of conduct means a pattern of conduct composed of a series of two or more separate noncontinuous acts, evidencing a continuity of purpose. 
    Emotional distress means significant mental suffering or distress that may, but does not necessarily require, medical or other professional treatment or counseling. 
    Harassment means conduct directed toward a victim that includes, but is not limited to, repeated or continuing unconsented contact, that would cause a reasonable individual to suffer emotional distress, and that actually causes the victim to suffer emotional distress. Harassment does not include constitutionally protected activity or conduct that serves a legitimate purpose. 
    Stalking means a willful course of conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment of another individual that would cause a reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested, and that actually causes the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested. 
    Unconsented contact means any contact with another individual that is initiated or continued without that individual's consent, or in disregard of that individual's expressed desire that the contact be avoided or discontinued. Unconsented contact includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Following or appearing within the sight of that individual. 
(2)  Approaching or confronting that individual in a public place or on private property. 
(3)  Appearing at the workplace or residence of that individual. 
(4)  Entering onto or remaining on property owned, leased, or occupied by that individual. 
(5)  Contacting that individual by telephone. 
(6)  Sending mail or electronic communications to that individual. 
(7)  Placing an object on, or delivering an object to, property owned, leased, or occupied by that individual. 
    Victim means an individual who is the target of a willful course of conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment. 
(b)  An individual who engages in stalking is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  The court may place an individual convicted of violating subsection (b) of this section on probation for a term of not more than five years. If a term of probation is ordered, the court may, in addition to any other lawful condition of probation, order the defendant to do any of the following: 
(1)  Refrain from stalking any individual during the term of probation. 
(2)  Refrain from having any contact with the victim of the offense. 
(3)  Be evaluated to determine the need for psychiatric, psychological, or social counseling and, if determined appropriate by the court, to receive psychiatric, psychological, or social counseling at his own expense. 
(d)  In a prosecution for a violation of this section, evidence that the defendant continued to engage in a course of conduct involving repeated unconsented contact with the victim after having been requested by the victim to discontinue the such conduct or a different form of unconsented contact with the victim shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the continuation of the course of conduct caused the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested. 
(e)  A criminal penalty provided for under this section may be imposed in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other criminal offense arising from the same conduct or for any contempt of court arising from the same conduct. 
(Code 1974, § 19-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.411h. 
Sec. 66-33. - Voyeurism. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly go upon the property owned or leased by another and peer through windows, or other entryway, of a building on that property without the express or implied consent of the owner or duly authorized occupant. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(a)) 
State Law reference- Window peepers, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Secs. 66-34-66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-61. - Reward for information leading to conviction of persons damaging public property. 
(a)  The city shall pay a reward to any person furnishing information leading to the apprehension and conviction of persons who do damage to public property within the meaning of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The damage to public property must be to the extent that the damage causes the city to suffer a financial loss by reason of inability to identify the offenders, or by reason of inadequate insurance coverage by the offenders. 
(c)  The amount of the reward authorized by this section shall not be less than $25.00 or more than $100.00, with the ultimate determination of the amount to rest solely in the discretion of the city council. The city council may request a written report and recommendation from the department heads or department supervisors who have control of the public property damaged by the offenders. 
(d)  The reward money authorized by this section shall not be paid until the city attorney and chief of police have jointly certified to the city council that the information furnished was the substantial factor leading to the apprehension and conviction of the persons who damaged the public property. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any city employees or any members of their immediate families, or state, county or other governmental officials whose responsibilities include enforcement of laws. 
(Code 1974, § 26-4) 
Sec. 66-62. - Destruction of property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface or in any manner interfere with or hinder the use of any public or private land, building, shrubbery, trees or appurtenances, or any public property whatsoever, including any property or equipment of any public utility serving the people of the city. 
(b)  No person shall willfully and maliciously destroy, injure, deface, damage or tamper with the personal property of another where the damage done is $500.00 or less. 
(Code 1974, § 19-8) 
State Law reference- Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 66-63. - Graffiti prohibited; possession of spray paint by underage persons. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "spray paint" shall mean any adherent pigmented substance disbursed in particles by means of atomizer or other simple mechanical instrument or applicator. 
(b)  No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or possess, except on property owned or occupied by a parent or legal guardian of such person, any containers used to dispense, or capable of dispensing, spray paint. 
(c)  No person shall maliciously deface the real personal property of another, including public property or that of any public utility serving the city, by the application of spray paint to such property, without the authorization of the owner. 
(d)  The owner of any building or other structure defaced by the application of spray paint or other similar substance shall remove, paint over or otherwise permanently cover property defaced within a reasonable period, not to exceed ten days, after the discovery of its existence, so as to preclude further vandalism or decay of the structure or the immediate surrounding area, subject to weather permitting conditions. 
(e)  In addition to other penalties provided by this Code, any individual convicted of violating subsection (c) of this section may be required by the court, at the option of the owner of property defaced by the graffiti, to assist in its removal. 
(Code 1974, §§ 19-89-19-93) 
State Law reference- Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 66-64. - Tampering with motor vehicles. 
(a)  Any person who shall tamper with a motor vehicle without the permission of the owner of the vehicle or who shall aid and abet another to do so, within the limits of the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person shall be guilty of this misdemeanor, who shall: 
(1)  Intentionally, and without authority from the owner, start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of the motor vehicle; 
(2)  Intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle, the property of another, or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto attached, without the permission of the owner thereof; 
(3)  Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle, with intent to injure the machine or cause the vehicle to be removed without the consent of the owner; provided that this subsection shall not apply in case of moving or starting of motor vehicles by the police under authority of local ordinance or by members of the fire department in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire; or 
(4)  Intentionally, and without authority from the owner, enter or attempt to enter a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1974, § 19-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.416. 
Secs. 66-65-66-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRESPASS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq. 

Sec. 66-81. - Entry without authority. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to break and enter, or to enter without breaking, any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn, factory or other building, boat, ship, railroad car or structure used or kept for public or private use, or any private apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or the outbuildings belonging thereto, or any other structure, whether occupied or unoccupied, without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent or person having immediate control thereof; provided, that this section shall not apply to entering without breaking any place which at the time of such entry was open to the public unless such entry has been expressly denied, or to circumstances where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking was committed by a peace officer, or someone under his direction, in the lawful performance of his duties as a peace officer. 
(Code 1974, § 19-23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.115. 
Sec. 66-82. - Entry after having been forbidden to do so; entry on posted property. 
    Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do, or after such lands or premises have been previously posted with a conspicuous notice forbidding any trespass thereon by the owner or occupant, or agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, or agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 19-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.552. 
Sec. 66-83. - Refusal to leave public premises. 
    No person shall remain in any public place or place open and accessible to the public after its regular closing hours and after having been instructed to leave by a person authorized to give such an instruction. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(k)) 
Sec. 66-84. - Loitering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to linger, loiter, sit or stand in any public room in any hotel, motel, or office or business establishment in the city, or any courthouse corridor, or any bus or railroad station, or the hallways or entrances of any public building, or any parking site or parking facility, accessible to the public, without authorization of the owner, or to use any public room for business or social purposes, or to obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises. 
(b)  The term "public room," for the purpose of this section, includes any basement, attic, building entrance or doorway, lobby, hallway, stairway, mezzanine, elevator, foyer, public restroom, sitting room or other place used in common by the public, tenants, occupants, guests or customers, and situated in a hotel, motel, office building, public building or business establishment in the city. 
(c)  Violations of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, § 2-306(a)(36), 19-2) 
Secs. 66-85-66-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LARCENY AND RELATED OFFENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Larceny, MCL 750.356. 

Sec. 66-101. - Larceny. 
    Any person who shall commit larceny or aid and abet another to commit larceny shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 19-16) 
State Law reference- Larceny prohibited, MCL 750.356 et seq. 
Sec. 66-102. - Retail theft. 
    A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity is guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is offered for sale with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered. 
(2)  While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is offered for sale. 
(3)  With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store. 
(Code 1974, § 19-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.536d. 
Sec. 66-103. - Obtaining money by false pretenses. 
    Any person who shall obtain money by false pretenses or aid and abet another to do so, within the limits of the city, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 19-17) 
State Law reference- False pretenses, MCL 750.218 et seq. 
Sec. 66-104. - Altering serial numbers; possession or sale of goods with altered serial numbers. 
(a)  A person who obscures, defaces, alters, obliterates, removes, destroys, or otherwise conceals or disguises any registration, serial, or other identifying number embossed, engraved, carved, stamped, welded, or otherwise placed or situated in or upon goods or property held for sale in the ordinary course of business with the intent to render the goods or property unidentifiable shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  A person who is a dealer in or collector of any merchandise or personal property or the agent, employee, or representative of a dealer or collector and who possesses goods or property with the intent to sell the goods or property in the ordinary course of business knowing the registration, serial, or other identifying number has been obscured, defaced, altered, obliterated, removed, destroyed, or otherwise concealed or disguised shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  A person who is a dealer or collector of any merchandise or personal property or the agent, employee, or representative of a dealer or collector and who sells goods or property in the ordinary course of business knowing that the registration, serial, or other identifying number has been obscured, defaced, altered, obliterated, removed, destroyed, or otherwise concealed or disguised shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 19-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.536a. 
Sec. 66-105. - Possession of stolen property. 
    Any person who shall have possession of stolen property or who shall aid and abet another to do so, within the limits of the city, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 19-18) 
State Law reference- Receiving or concealing stolen property, MCL 750.116. 
Sec. 66-106. - Bad checks. 
(a)  A person shall not make, draw, utter, or deliver any check, draft, or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository with intent to defraud and knowing at the time of the making, drawing, uttering, or delivering that the maker or drawer does not have sufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository to pay the check, draft, or order in full upon its presentation. 
(b)  A person shall not make, draw, utter, or deliver any check, draft, or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository with intent to defraud if the person does not have sufficient funds for the payment of the check, draft, or order when presentation for payment is made to the drawee. This subsection does not apply if the lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy, or other lawful cause and that fact was not known to the person when the person made, drew, uttered, or delivered the check, draft, or order. 
(c)  As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order for payment of money which is refused for payment by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(d)  Where such check, draft or order is not accepted and is stamped or otherwise indicated on its face by the bank or depository with the words "insufficient funds" or with words to that effect or a notice to that effect is attached to the unaccepted check, such endorsement shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and nonacceptance by the bank or depository, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(e)  No person, with the intent to defraud, shall make or draw, or utter or deliver, any check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply on an account or otherwise upon any bank or other depository who at the time of making, drawing, uttering or delivering such check, draft or order has no account in or credit with such bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order. 
(f)  The word "credit," as used in this section, shall be construed to mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon the presentation thereof for payment. 
(Code 1974, § 19-12) 
State Law reference- Bad checks, MCL 750.131 et seq. 
Secs. 66-107-66-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-131. - Abandoned iceboxes or containers. 
    Any person who knowingly leaves, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container of a kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and suffocation of a child therein, without first removing the snaplock or other locking device from the lid or cover thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 19-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.493d. 
Sec. 66-132. - Jostling others. 
    No person shall push, shove, grab, jostle or roughly crowd other persons or otherwise unnecessarily interfering with their free movement in a public place, a place of public accommodation or any other place generally open and accessible to the public, provided that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to conflict with the regulations of the National Labor Relations Board regarding picketing in labor disputes. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(h)) 
State Law reference- Jostling others, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Secs. 66-133-66-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local regulation of firearms and ammunition, MCL 123.1101 et seq.; firearms and weapons, MCL 28.421 et seq., 750.222 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 66-151. - Discharge of firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or other instrument producing a like effect and noise within the city, except in the lawful defense of his person or property or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Code 1974, § 19-33) 
State Law reference- Discharge of firearms, MCL 750.233 et seq. 
Sec. 66-152. - Possession of loaded firearms. 
    Except as otherwise permitted by law, a person shall not transport or possess in or upon a sailboat or a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, or any other vehicle propelled by mechanical means, a firearm, other than a pistol, which is loaded. 
(Code 1974, § 19-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.227c. 
Sec. 66-153. - Possession of imitation dangerous weapon. 
    No person shall possess, with intent to use unlawfully against another, any imitation pistol, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto, knife or other dangerous weapon. 
(Code 1974, § 19-34(b)) 
Sec. 66-154. - Switchblades. 
    Any person who shall sell or offer to sell, or any person who shall have in his possession, any knife having the appearance of a pocket knife, the blade of which can be opened by the flick of a button, pressure on a handle or other mechanical contrivance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any one-armed person carrying a knife on his person in connection with his living requirements. 
(Code 1974, § 19-34(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.226a. 
Sec. 66-155. - Airguns and BB guns. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any airgun within the city, except on an indoor target range; provided that this section shall not apply whenever airguns using only BB shot are used on premises with the consent of the owner or occupant of such premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of premises within the city to permit the use of any airgun using BB shot upon his premises by any other person unless such use is personally supervised by some person 17 years of age or older. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or carry any airgun using BB shot or pellets in the city unless the gun is enclosed in a case or in a box. 
(Code 1974, § 19-35) 
Sec. 66-156. - Hunting and trapping. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or trap wild game or domestic animals in the out of doors within the city limits using devices which kill, maim or otherwise injure, except by animal control officers or their designees. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the owner of private property to utilize traps to secure rodents or other pests inside buildings, or live traps in the out of doors provided such traps are monitored daily. 
(b)  As used in this section, game shall mean any of the animals identified as game in Public Act 160, 2004, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1974, § 19-36; Ord. No. 686, § 1, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 66-157. - Archery equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fire an arrow having other than a cushioning tip made of a rubberized substance, or its equivalent, intended to protect against injury or to have suctioning properties, with any propelling device, commonly known as a bow, within the city limits provided however, nothing contained herein shall prohibit the use of a bow and arrow of any type on federally managed property in conjunction with its programs, an indoor range, or at any range authorized and approved for safety by the city for a competitive or an instructional program sponsored by the city, an individual, a school, a church or an instructional association. 
(Code 1974, § 19-37; Ord. No. 787, § 1, 4-18-16) 
Secs. 66-158-66-170. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Concealed Pistols 

Sec. 66-171. - Carrying while under the influence of alcohol. 
(a)  No person shall carry a concealed weapon while he is under the influence of alcoholic liquor or controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance. 
(b)  A person found under the influence of alcoholic liquor with a bodily alcohol content of 0.10 or more grams per 100 milliliters of blood, or 210 liters of breath, or 67 milliliters of urine, or a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of $100.00, or both. The court shall additionally order the concealed weapon licensing board that issued the person a license to carry a concealed pistol to permanently revoke the license. 
(c)  A person found to have a bodily alcohol content of 0.08 or more but less than 0.10 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or 67 milliliters of urine, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine $100.00, or both. The court may additionally order the concealed weapon licensing board that issued the person a license to carry a concealed pistol to revoke the license for not more than three years. 
(d)  A person found to have a bodily alcohol content of 0.02 or more but less than 0.08 gram per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or 67 milliliters of urine shall be responsible for a civil infraction and may be fined not more than $100.00. The court may additionally order the concealed weapons licensing board that issued the concealed weapons license to revoke the license for one year. 
(e)  This section does not prohibit an individual licensed under Public Act No. 372 of 1927 (MCL 28.421 et seq.) to carry a concealed pistol who has any bodily alcohol content from transporting that pistol in the locked trunk of his motor vehicle or another motor vehicle in which he is a passenger, or, if the vehicle does not have a trunk, from transporting that pistol unloaded in a locked compartment or container that is separate from the ammunition for the pistol or on vessel if the pistol is transported unloaded in a locked compartment or container that is separated from the ammunition for that pistol. 
(f)  A peace officer who has probable cause to believe a person is carrying a concealed pistol in violation of this section may require the person to submit to a chemical analysis of his breath, blood, or urine. 
(g)  Before a person is required to submit to a chemical analysis under subsection (f) of this section, the peace officer shall inform the person of all of the following: 
(1)  The person may refuse to submit to the chemical analysis, but, if he chooses to do so, all of the following apply: 
a.  The officer may obtain a court order requiring the person to submit to a chemical analysis. 
b.  The refusal may result in his license to carry a concealed pistol being suspended or revoked. 
(2)  If the person submits to the chemical analysis, he may obtain a chemical analysis described in subsection (f) of this section from a person of his own choosing. 
(h)  If a person refuses to take a chemical test authorized under this section, the peace officer shall promptly report the refusal, in writing, to the concealed weapon licensing board that issued the license to the person to carry a concealed pistol. If a person takes a chemical test authorized under this section and the test results indicate that the person had any bodily alcohol content while carrying a concealed pistol, the peace officer shall promptly report the violation, in writing, to the concealed weapon licensing board that issued the license to the person to carry a concealed pistol. 
(Code 1974, § 19-38) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 28.425k. 
Sec. 66-172. - Exhibition of license and identification to police officer. 
(a)  An individual who is licensed to carry a concealed pistol shall have his or her license to carry that pistol and his or her state-issued driver's license or personal identification card in his or her possession at all times he or she is carrying a concealed pistol or portable device that uses electro-muscular disruption technology. 
(b)  An individual who is licensed to carry a concealed pistol and who is carrying a concealed pistol or a portable device that uses electro-muscular disruption technology shall show both of the following to a police officer upon request by that police officer: 
(1)  His or her license to carry a concealed pistol. 
(2)  His or her state-issued driver's license or personal identification card. 
(c)  An individual licensed under this act to carry a concealed pistol and who is carrying a concealed pistol or a portable device that uses electro-muscular disruption technology and who is stopped by a police officer shall immediately disclose to the police officer that he or she is carrying a pistol or a portable device that uses electro-muscular disruption technology concealed upon his or her person, or in his or her vehicle. 
(d)  An individual who violates subsection (a), or (b) is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be fined not more than $100.00. 
(e)  An individual who violates subsection (c) is responsible for a civil infraction, shall be fined not more than $500.00 and the individual' license to carry a concealed pistol shall be subject to suspension for a period of six months. 
(Code 1974, § 19-39; Ord. No. 788, § 1, 10-17-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 28.425f. 
Sec. 66-173. - Carrying in certain places prohibited. 
(a)  An individual who is licensed to carry a concealed pistol, or is exempt from licensure for carrying a concealed pistol, shall not carry a concealed pistol on the premises of any of the following: 
(1)  A school or school property, except that a parent or legal guardian of a student of the school is not precluded from carrying a concealed pistol while in a vehicle on school property if he is dropping the student off at the school or picking up the child from the school. 
(2)  A public or private day care center, a public or private caring agency, or a public or private child placing agency. 
(3)  A sports arena or stadium, including the city's recreation center. 
(4)  A dining room, lounge, or bar area of a premises licensed under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.). This subsection shall not apply to an owner or employee of the premises. 
(5)  Any property or facility owned or operated by a church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other place of worship, unless the presiding officials of the church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other place of worship generally permit the carrying of concealed pistols on that property or facility. 
(6)  An entertainment facility that the individual knows or should know has a seating capacity of 2,500 or more individuals, or that has a sign above each public entrance stating in letters not less than one inch high a seating capacity of 2,500 or more individuals. 
(7)  A hospital. 
(8)  A dormitory or classroom of a community college, college, or university. 
(b)  An individual who violates this section is responsible as follows: 
(1)  An individual is responsible for a civil infraction for a first violation of this section and may be fined not more than $500.00. The court shall order the individual's license to carry a concealed pistol suspended for six months. 
(2)  For a second violation, the individual is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court shall order the individual's license to carry a concealed pistol revoked. 
(Code 1974, § 19-40) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 28.425a. 
Secs. 66-174-66-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 66-201. - Disturbing the peace. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Persist in disturbing the good order, peace, tranquility or dignity of the city, its inhabitants or other persons by engaging in any riotous, violent, turbulent, loud, boisterous or quarrelsome conduct in a public place or a place of public accommodation otherwise open to the public, or in a private place when such conduct is otherwise audible to the public. 
(2)  Persist in disturbing the good order, peace, tranquility or dignity of the city, its inhabitants or other persons by shouting profane, obscene, indecent, vulgar, annoying or threatening language in the presence of others, or in a fashion to be heard by others, thereby causing a provocation, disturbance or reaction. 
(3)  Persist in disturbing the peace and orderly conduct of any meeting of a public body or any meeting open to the general public by any conduct or communication which, by its very existence, inflicts injury or tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace or which prevents the peaceful and orderly conduct of such meeting, after having been informed that such person is, in fact, disorderly or unreasonably causing such a disturbance. 
(4)  Riot, engage in an affray or act in a violent, boisterous, turbulent, quarrelsome, indecent or disorderly manner; or use profane, obscene or vulgar language; or commit any act or do anything to disturb the good order, peace and dignity of the city, its inhabitants or other persons. 
(Code 1974, §§ 19-1(o)-(q), 19-6) 
State Law reference- Disorderly persons, MCL 750.167; disturbing religious worship, MCL 750.169, 752.525; disturbing lawful meeting, MCL 750.170; unlawful assembly, MCL 752.543; riot, MCL 750.541 et seq. 
Sec. 66-202. - Permitting riotous or noisy assemblies in dwellings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any noisy or riotous persons to assemble in any house owned, occupied or controlled by him, to the annoyance or disturbance of the neighborhood and the public peace. 
(Code 1974, § 19-4) 
Sec. 66-203. - Disturbing religious services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any congregation or assembly met for religious worship by making any noise or profane discourse or engaging in any indecent behavior in or near the place of worship as to disturb the solemnity of the meeting. 
(Code 1974, § 19-5) 
State Law reference- Disturbing religious meetings, MCL 750.169, 752.525. 
Sec. 66-204. - Public intoxication. 
    No person shall be so intoxicated in a public place or place generally open and accessible to the public so as to either endanger the safety of oneself or that of another person or his property, 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(i)) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages; intoxicated persons, § 10-69. 
State Law reference- Local ordinances punishing public intoxication, MCL 333.6523, 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 66-205. - Use of controlled substances. 
    No person shall be present at any place with the ability to walk, talk or see so impaired by the use of any controlled substance, as defined by article 7 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7101 et seq.), as to either endanger the safety of oneself or that of another person or his property; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to any person whose faculties have been impaired by medication properly prescribed by a physician and taken as directed. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(j)) 
Sec. 66-206. - Public urination or defecation. 
    No person shall urinate or defecate on any public street or sidewalk or on the floor or walls of any part of a building accessible to the public or any other place in plain view of the public, and not specifically designated for such purpose. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(m)) 
State Law reference- Indecent exposure, MCL 750.335a. 
Sec. 66-207. - Begging and soliciting alms. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in his immediate possession. 
    Ask, beg and solicit mean and include, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
    Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that, when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that, when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  In any public transportation vehicle, or in any bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxistand; 
(6)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)  From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility; or 
(8)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  By accosting another; or 
(2)  By forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(l)) 
State Law reference- Begging, MCL 750.107(1)(h). 
Sec. 66-208. - Malicious use of service provided by telecommunications service provider. 
(a)  A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service provided by a telecommunications service provider, as defined in MCL 750.540(c), with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest, or annoy another person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of another person by any of the following: 
(1)  Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(2)  Falsely and deliberately reporting by message through the use of a telecommunications service or device that a person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, or has been the victim of a crime or an accident. 
(3)  Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telecommunications device and another telecommunications device or between a telecommunications device and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(4)  Using vulgar, indecent, obscene, or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(5)  Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking, deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or after the telephone call is answered. 
(6)  Making an unsolicited commercial telephone call that is received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of this subdivision, "an unsolicited commercial telephone call" means a call made by a person or recording device, on behalf of a person, corporation, or other entity, soliciting business or contributions. 
(7)  Deliberately engaging or causing to engage the use of a telecommunications service or device of another person in a repetitive manner that causes interruption in telecommunications service or prevents the person from utilizing his or her telecommunications service or device. 
(b)  A person violating this section may be imprisoned for not more than 93 days or fined not more than $500.00, or both. An offense is committed under this section if the communication either originates or terminates in this city and may be prosecuted at the place of origination or termination. 
(Code 1974, § 19-7; Ord. No. 754, § 1, 7-5-2011) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e. 
Sec. 66-209. - Desecration of flag. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly cast contempt upon any flag of the United States, flag of the state or flag of the city by publicly mutilating, defacing, defiling, burning or trampling upon the flag, or by displaying the flag on the person, or otherwise in such a manner as to cast contempt upon the flag. 
(b)  The term "flag" as used in this section shall include any flag, standard, colors, or ensign, or any picture or representation of either, made of any substance, or represented on any substance, of any size, evidently purporting to be the flag, standard, colors or ensign of the United States, state or city, or a picture or a representation upon which shall be shown the colors, the stars and stripes, or seal or other representation by which the average person seeing such picture or representation without deliberation may believe the picture or representation to represent the flag, standard, colors or ensign of the United States, state or city. 
(c)  This section shall be construed as supplemental to and in conjunction with the laws of the state and of the United States with respect to desecration or mutilation of the flag and not in derogation of them. 
(Code 1974, § 19-10) 
State Law reference- Prohibited exhibition and display of flag, MCL 750.245 et seq.; disposal of American flag by burning, MCL 324.5514. 
Secs. 66-210-66-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-231. - Soliciting for prostitution. 
    No person shall solicit or accost any other person in a public place or place of public accommodation or access for the purpose of inducing participation in an act of prostitution. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(d)) 
State Law reference- Prostitution, MCL 750.448. 
Sec. 66-232. - Keeping gambling house or devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any common gambling house or gaming room, or to permit, on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, any apparatus or device used for gaming or gambling, or to use such apparatus of device or to assist any other person to use such apparatus for gaming or gambling purposes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any policy or pool slips, tickets, or checks or any paper which is marked additionally with any kind of notation indicating any form of gambling, and the possession of such writing or device shall constitute, prima facie, evidence of intention to use such writing or device for gambling. 
(Code 1974, § 19-11) 
State Law reference- Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Sec. 66-233. - Indecent exposure. 
    Any person who shall knowingly make any open or indecent exposure of his person or of the person of another shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(g)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a. 
Sec. 66-234. - Use of alcoholic beverages and controlled substances at social gatherings. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
    Alcoholic beverage means an alcoholic liquor as defined in section 5 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1105). 
    Allow means to give permission for, or approval of, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages or a controlled substance, by any of the following means: 
(1)  In writing. 
(2)  By one or more oral statements. 
(3)  By any form of conduct, including a failure to take corrective action, that would cause a reasonable person to believe that permission or approval has been given. 
    Control over any premises, residence, or other real property means the authority to regulate, direct, restrain, superintend, control, or govern the conduct of other individuals on or within that premises, residence, or other real property, and includes, but is not limited to, a possessory right. 
    Controlled substance is defined as that term as defined in section 7104 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7104). 
    Corrective action means any of the following: 
(1)  Making a prompt demand that the minor or other individual depart from the premises, residence, or other real property, or refrain from the unlawful possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or controlled substance on or within that premises, residence, or other real property, and taking additional action described in subsection (2) or (3) of this definition if the minor or other individual does not comply with the request. 
(2)  Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to a law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the violation. 
(3)  Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to another person having a greater degree of authority or control over the conduct of persons on or within the premises, residence, or other real property. 
    Minor means an individual less than 21 years of age. 
    Premises means a permanent or temporary place of assembly, other than a residence, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  A meeting hall, meeting room, or conference room. 
(2)  A public or private park. 
    Residence means a permanent or temporary place of dwelling, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  A house, apartment, condominium or mobile home. 
(2)  A cottage, cabinet, trailer or tent. 
(3)  A motel unit, hotel unit, or bed and breakfast unit. 
    Social gathering means an assembly of two or more individuals for any purpose, unless all of the individuals attending the assembly are members of the same household or immediate family. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, an owner, tenant, or other person having control over any premises, residence, or other real property shall not do either of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly allow a minor to consume or possess an alcoholic beverage at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real property. 
(2)  Knowingly allow any individual to consume or possess a controlled substance at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence or other real property. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to the use, consumption or possession of a controlled substance by an individual pursuant to a lawful prescription, or to the use, consumption or possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor for adult-supervised official, religious or educational purposes. 
(d)  Evidence of violation. Evidence of all of the following gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that the defendant allowed the consumption or possession of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance on or within premises, a residence, or other real property, in violation of this section: 
(1)  The defendant had control over the premises, residence, or other real property. 
(2)  The defendant knew that a minor was consuming or in possession of an alcoholic beverage or knew that an individual was consuming or in possession of a controlled substance at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real property. 
(3)  The defendant failed to take corrective action. 
(e)  Penalties. Penalties for violation of this section are as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation, a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment in the city jail for a term not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  For subsequent violations, a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment in the city jail for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
In a case involving damage to the residence or room, a court may order the individual to pay restitution, which may include the reasonable loss of revenue resulting from the inability to rent or lease the room during the period of time the room is being repaired. 
(Code 1974, § 4-8) 
State Law reference- Open house parties, MCL 740.141a. 
Secs. 66-235-66-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OBSCENITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Obscenity, MCL 752.361 et seq. 

Sec. 66-251. - Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute, or offer either to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute, or to have in his possession with intent either to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute, or advertise in any manner, or to otherwise knowingly offer for either loan, gift, sale or distribution, any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent, sadistic or masochistic book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representations of such character. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, possession of six or more identical copies or six or more articles of any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture drawing, photograph, slide, motion picture or recorded matter of an indecent character shall be prima facie evidence of possession with intent to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute the thing. 
(c)  Any person who publishes or distributes for resale or for reading or other perusal any book, magazine or pamphlet, so composed as to constitute a compilation of pictures, illustrations, caricatures, cartoons, words, stories and advertisements, or any combination thereof, featuring and primarily devoted to the purpose of commercial exploitation of the description or portrayal or suggestion of illicit sex, or sexual relations, of perversion, lust or sexual passion, or any combination thereof, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(d)  Any person who shall, as a condition to a sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication, require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale any other article, book or other publication which is contrary to this section or impose or threaten to impose any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of the failure of any person to accept such articles, books or publications, or by reason of the return thereof, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 19-135) 
Sec. 66-252. - Distribution to underage persons. 
    Whoever knowingly either sells or distributes, or imports for the purpose of selling or distributing, to a person under the age of 18 years any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image, or wire or tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character, which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representations of such character, manifestly tending to corrupt the morals of youth, or introduces into a family, school or place of education, or buys, procures, receives or has in possession, any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image, or wire or tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character, which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representations of such character, either for the purpose of sale, exhibition, loan or circulation to a person under the age of 18 years or with intent to introduce such matter into a family, school or place of education shall be guilty of a violation of this division. 
(Code 1974, § 19-136) 
State Law reference- Distribution of obscene materials to underage persons, MCL 722.671 et seq. 
Sec. 66-253. - Test to be applied in determining violations. 
    The test to be applied in cases under this division shall not be whether sexual desires or sexually improper thoughts would be aroused in those composing a particular segment of the community, the young, the immature or the highly prudish, or would leave another segment, the scientific or highly educated or the so-called worldly-wise and sophisticated, indifferent and unmoved. But such test shall be the effect of the book, picture or other subject of complaint considered as a whole, not upon any particular class, but upon all those whom it is likely to reach, that is, its impact upon the average person in the community. The book, picture or other subject of complaint must be judged as a whole in its entire context, not by considering detached or separate portions only, and by the standards of common conscience of the community of the contemporary time period of the violation charged. 
(Code 1974, § 19-137) 
Sec. 66-254. - Prima facie evidence of violation. 
    For the purpose of this division, the depiction, by any method as set forth in this division, of any one or combination of the following acts shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this division: human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or fondling or other erotic or intentional touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
(Code 1974, § 19-138) 
Secs. 66-255-66-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRUGS AND HARMFUL CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 

Sec. 66-271. - State controlled substance act adopted. 
    The controlled substance act, being parts 71, 72 and 74 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7101 et seq., 333.7201 et seq., 333.7401 et seq.), is hereby adopted by reference with the following modifications and deletions: 
(1)  References to the state shall mean the City of Trenton. 
(2)  All references to severity or characterization of severity of the violations as appear in part 74 and the penalty thereof are deleted. 
(Code 1974, § 19-47) 
Sec. 66-272. - Use or sale of model glue. 
(a)  The term "model glue," as used in this section, shall mean any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of model airplanes, boats and automobiles, containing toluene, acetone or other solvent or chemical having the property of releasing toxic vapor. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not pertain to any person who inhales, drinks, eats or otherwise introduces into his circulatory or respiratory system such material or substance pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, dentist or other person authorized to do so. 
(c)  No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale, or otherwise ingest the fumes of any model glue or other intoxicating chemicals or chemical propellants. 
(d)  No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any provision of this section, intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession or receive possession of any model glue. 
(e)  Except as provided in this subsections, no person under 17 years of age shall possess or buy any model glue. Except as provided in this subsection, no person shall sell or transfer possession of any model glue to another person under 17 years of age. A person may sell or transfer possession of model glue to a person under 17 years of age for model building or other lawful use where such minor has in his possession and exhibits the written consent of his parent or guardian. A person making a sale or transfer of possession of model glue to a person under 17 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his parent or guardian shall record the name, address, sex and age of the minor and the name, address and phone number, if any, of the consenting parent or guardian. All data required by this subsection shall be kept in a permanent type register available for inspection by the police department, for a period of at least six months. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to violate any provision of this section. 
(Code 1974, §§ 19-53-19-58; Ord. No. 782, § 1, 4-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Use of chemical agents, MCL 752.271 et seq. 
Sec. 66-273. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  In this section, the term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance, as defined by state law, in violation of state or local law. It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be delivered. 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances. 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance. 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances. 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances. 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana. 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
b.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
c.  Water pipes. 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials. 
g.  Chamber pipes. 
h.  Carburetor pipes. 
i.  Electric pipes. 
j.  Air-driven pipes. 
k.  Chillums. 
l.  Bongs. 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(b)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the objects concerning their use. 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any city, state or federal law relating to any controlled substances. 
(3)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of state law. 
(4)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
(5)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of state or local law. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of state law shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(7)  Instruction, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
(8)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 
(9)  National and local advertising concerning its use. 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(11)  Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
(12)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
(13)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(14)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state law. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists, and embalmers in the normal legal course of their respective business or profession, or to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. 
(g)  Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this section shall be seized and forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1974, §§ 19-140-19-145) 
State Law reference- Drug paraphernalia, MCL 333.7451 et seq. 
Sec. 66-274. - Transporting marijuana. 
    Except as to those persons having a valid Medical Marijuana Card issued by the state, no person shall transport or possess usable marijuana as defined in Michigan Compiled Laws 333.26423, in or upon a motor vehicle or any self -propelled vehicle designated and licensed for land travel unless such usable marijuana contained therein, is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Enclosed in a sealed case that is carried in the trunk of the vehicle. 
(2)  Enclosed in a sealed case that is not readily accessible from the interior of the vehicle, if the vehicle in which a person traveling does not have a trunk. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 1, 2-3-2014; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 7-17-2017) 
Secs. 66-275-66-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 66-301. - Refusal to identify oneself to police officer; search of persons detained for questioning. 
(a)  No person shall refuse to give his name, address and an explanation of his actions upon demand of a police officer who has stopped such person in a public place in the city, whom he reasonably suspects is committing, has committed or is about to commit a felony or a breach of the peace, or is violating a condition of pardon, parole or probation. 
(b)  When a police officer has stopped a person for questioning pursuant to subsection (a) of this section and reasonably suspects he is in danger, he may search such person for a dangerous weapon. The police officer may take and keep any such weapon or any other thing, the possession of which may constitute a crime, until he has completed the questioning, at which time he shall either return such item, if lawfully possessed, or arrest such person. 
(Code 1974, §§ 26-2, 26-3) 
Sec. 66-302. - False requests for emergency assistance. 
    No person shall summon, for the purpose of fraud, annoyance or interference, by telephone or otherwise, the police or fire departments, any public or private ambulance or any other emergency service, to respond or report to an address where the service called for is not needed. 
(Code 1974, § 19-1(n)) 
State Law reference- False fire alarms, MCL 750.240; false report of crime, MCL 750.411a. 
Sec. 66-303. - Unlawfully accessing law enforcement computer data. 
(a)  In this section: 
    Access means to approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in, retrieve data from, or otherwise use the resources of a computer, computer system, or computer network. 
    Computer means an electronic device which performs logical, arithmetic, and memory functions by the manipulations of electronic or magnetic impulses, and includes input, output, processing, storage, software, or communication facilities which are connected or related to a device in a system or network. 
    Computer network means the interconnection of communication lines with a computer through remote terminals, or a complex consisting of two or more interconnected computers. 
    Computer program means a series of instructions or statements, in a form acceptable to a computer, which permits the functioning of a computer system in a manner designed to provide appropriate products from the computer system. 
    Computer software means a set of computer programs, procedures, and associated documentation concerned with the operation of a computer system. 
    Computer system means a set of related, connected or unconnected computer equipment, devices, and software. 
    Shared information network consortium (SINC) means the management information system created by interlocal government agreement entered into by the city on February 1, 1999, pursuant to the Urban Cooperation Act of 1967 (MCL 124.501 et seq.) to assist participating communities in the assembly, retention, and retrieval of law enforcement data. 
(b)  No person other than an authorized law enforcement officer employed by the city shall access the shared information network consortium management information system, unless specifically authorized in writing by the chief of police. 
(c)  No law enforcement officer employed by the city shall access that portion of the shared information network consortium management information system outside his clearance level as established by the access protocols published by SINC. 
(d)  No person shall intentionally and without authorization gain access to, alter, damage, or destroy, or tamper with for the purposes of damaging or destroying, a computer, computer system or computer network, or gain access to, alter, damage, or destroy a computer software program or data contained in the shared information network consortium management information system, its computers or computer network. 
(Code 1974, §§ 26-68, 26-69) 
Secs. 66-304-66-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - UNDERAGE PERSONS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Sale to underage persons, § 6-3; purchase, consumption or possession by underage persons; furnishing fraudulent identification to underage person, § 6-4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-331. - Parental neglect. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this subsection: 
    Criminal acts means those acts which violate state statutes, this Code or other ordinances of the city and shall include traffic violations. 
    Habitual offender means any person who commits two or more criminal acts, including traffic violations, within a 12-month period. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age residing at the home of his parent. 
    Parent means the mother, father, legal guardian or any other person having the care, custody and control of any minor or such other adult with whom a minor may be found to reside with. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent of any minor to fail to supervise a reasonable degree of parental control which would result in the minor committing any criminal act or to permit a minor to become delinquent as defined in the Probate Code of 1939 (MCL 701.1 et seq.) pertaining to juveniles. 
(c)  Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission of any criminal act within the city or becomes delinquent as defined in the Probate Code of 1939 (MCL 701.1 et seq.), the parent of such minor shall be immediately notified by the police department advising the parent of such detention, the reason therefor and their responsibility under this section. 
(d)  A record of all notifications to parents made pursuant to this section shall be kept by the police department. 
(Code 1974, §§ 19-85-19-88) 
Sec. 66-332. - Contributing to neglect or delinquency of minor. 
    Any person who shall, by any act, or by any work, encourage, contribute toward, cause to tend to cause any minor under 17 years of age to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of probate court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 19-69) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.145. 
Sec. 66-333. - Curfew. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under 17 years of age to loiter, idle, congregate or otherwise be in or on any public street, highway, alley, or park, or any public place, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., or for minors 15 years of age or under to be in such place from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  The curfew established by subsection (a) of this section does not apply if the minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian. 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop. 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel. 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop. 
(5)  Involved in an emergency. In this subsection, the term "emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
(6)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor. 
(7)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly. 
(8)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. 
(c)  Any person assisting, aiding, abetting or encouraging any minor under 17 years of age to violate the provisions of the curfew established by this section shall be guilty of an offense, and when any minor is found violating this section a presumption shall arise that the parent or legal guardian having the care and custody of the minor assisted, aided, abetted and encouraged such minor in so violating this section. 
(d)  The parent or guardian of any minor child under 17 years of age shall be held responsible for the enforcement of this section. 
(e)  Any parent or guardian found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8. Any minor violating the provisions of this section shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. 
(Code 1974, §§ 19-75-19-79) 
State Law reference- Curfew, MCL 722.151 et seq. 
Sec. 66-334. - Tattoos. 
(a)  A person who does not hold a current medical license from the state shall not apply, or contract to apply, any image, insignia, letters or any other indelible graphic illustration, otherwise known as a "tattoo," in or under the skin of an individual under the age of 18 through injection of inks, dyes or any other form of pigment, by way of needle, laser, electronic device, or other procedure without first having obtained the express written consent of the minor's parent or legal guardian, and a current telephone number of the minor's parent or legal guardian, which consent shall be verified by telephone or in person and issued within 30 days prior to administration of the procedure. 
(b)  Such consent forms, which shall contain the parent or legal guardian's signature, printed name, phone number and date of consent, shall be retained by the individual applying the tattoo, for a period of 90 days from administration of the procedure and made available for inspection upon request by the city. 
(Code 1974, § 19-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 333.13102. 
Secs. 66-335-66-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOBACCO[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Youth Tobacco Act, MCL 722.641 et seq. 

Sec. 66-351. - Purchase, possession or use. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 shall consume, possess, buy, sell, transfer or deliver any preparation containing tobacco products which may be inhaled, swallowed or otherwise voluntarily placed in a person's mouth, on public or school property, or on private property without the consent of the property owner or other individual authorized to control, and be responsible for, the property. 
(b)  A person who is convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be deemed responsible for committing a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, § 19-71) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 722.642. 
Sec. 66-352. - Sale or delivery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian of a minor, to give, sell, transfer or deliver any preparation containing tobacco products which may be inhaled, swallowed or otherwise voluntarily placed in a person's mouth to an individual under the age of 18 except as follows: 
(1)  To an employee in the course of his employment, during regular working hours, if the tobacco product is not provided for personal consumption. 
(2)  To an individual enrolled in a course offered by an accredited educational institution in an academic building under the supervision of a faculty member, if the purpose is solely educational and necessary to the course. 
(3)  To an individual in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple, or at a sanctioned funeral, burial, or cremation service for a deceased individual. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who offers cigarettes, cigarette tobacco, or smokeless tobacco for wholesale or retail sale to make such a sale to any person under the age of 27 without first establishing the customer's birthdate by requesting to review an official photo identification bearing the customer's date of birth. 
(c)  A person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1974, § 19-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 722.641. 
Sec. 66-353. - Vending machines. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person in a place of public accommodation to which access by minors is not prohibited by law shall not sell or distribute cigarettes, cigars, or other tobacco products through the use of a vending machine, or install or maintain a vending machine with the intent of selling or distributing cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products. 
(b)  This prohibition shall not apply to a cigarette machine that meets either of the following criteria: 
(1)  The cigarette vending machine is located in an establishment that has a class C license as defined in the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.), and one of the following applies: 
a.  The establishment has a bar that is located in a room that is separated from the remainder of the establishment by a wall and a doorway, and the cigarette machine is located entirely in that room. 
b.  The establishment has a bar that is not located in a room that is separated from the remainder of the establishment by a wall and a doorway, and the cigarette machine is located not more than 20 feet from the bar, is located clearly within the bar area and not in a hallway, coat room, restroom or similar unrelated area, and is in the direct visual supervision of an adult. 
(2)  The cigarette vending machine is located entirely in an area, office, plant, factory or private membership club that is not open to the public, and is located not less than 20 feet from all entrances and exits that are accessible to the general public. 
(c)  A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a person has a vending machine that dispenses cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1974, § 19-73) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.470. 
Secs. 66-354-66-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OUTDOOR ASSEMBLIES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 70; public meetings or entertainments, § 70-109. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-381. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attendant means any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly by the payment of money or other consideration. 
    Licensee means any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this article. 
    Outdoor assembly and assembly mean any event, attended by more than 500 attendants, all or any part of which includes a theatrical exhibition, public show, display, entertainment, amusement or other exhibition, including, but not limited to, musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals or similar gatherings, but does not mean: 
(1)  An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or agency on publicly owned land or property. 
(2)  An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed and covered structure. 
    Site includes any and all real estate within the city, irrespective of private or public ownership. 
    Sponsor means any person who organizes, promotes, conducts, or causes to be conducted an outdoor assembly. 
(Code 1974, § 22-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-382. - Findings. 
    The city council finds and declares that the interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city require the regulation, licensing and control of assemblages of large numbers of people in excess of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 22-1) 
Sec. 66-383. - Prohibited conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person licensed to hold an outdoor assembly to knowingly: 
(1)  Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance. 
(2)  Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display or exhibition. 
(3)  Permit any person on the premises to cause a disturbance in, around, or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct. 
(4)  Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell or possess intoxicating liquor while on the premises. 
(5)  Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any controlled substances as defined in article 7 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7101 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 22-3) 
Secs. 66-384-66-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 66-401. - Required. 
    No person shall sponsor, operate, maintain or conduct an outdoor assembly in the city until he has first obtained a license for each such assembly. 
(Code 1974, § 22-19) 
Sec. 66-402. - Advertising or promoting assembly prior to issuance of license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, promote or sell tickets to an outdoor assembly without first obtaining a license to conduct the assembly. 
(Code 1974, § 22-20) 
Sec. 66-403. - Application procedure and contents. 
    Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the city clerk and shall be made at least 60 days prior to the date of the proposed assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable fee established by the city council and shall include at least the following: 
(1)  The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the application. If the person making the application is a partnership, corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all partners, officers and directors, or members. Where the person is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be filed, and the names and addresses shall be provided of all shareholders having a financial interest greater than $500.00. 
(2)  A statement of the kind, character and type of proposed outdoor assembly. 
(3)  The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed assembly is to be conducted together with an affidavit from the owner indicating his consent to the use of the site for the proposed assembly. 
(4)  The dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. 
(5)  An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential numbering or other method which will be used for accounting purposes. 
(Code 1974, § 22-21) 
Sec. 66-404. - Review of application. 
    Upon receipt by the city clerk of the application required by this division, copies of the application shall be forwarded to the chief of police and health officers for the city, the state fire marshal, and such other appropriate public official as the city clerk deems necessary. Such officers and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within 20 days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 22-22) 
Sec. 66-405. - Additional required information. 
    Each application for a license required by this division shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective licensee's plans to provide for the following: 
(1)  Police and fire protection. 
(2)  Food and water supply and facilities. 
(3)  Health and sanitation facilities. 
(4)  Medical facilities and services, including emergency vehicles and equipment. 
(5)  Vehicle access and parking facilities. 
(6)  Camping and trailer facilities. 
(7)  Illumination facilities. 
(8)  Communications facilities. 
(9)  Noise control and abatement. 
(10)  Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal. 
(11)  Insurance and bonding arrangements. 
(12)  A map of the overall site of the proposed assembly. 
(Code 1974, § 22-23) 
Sec. 66-406. - Standards for issuance; bond and insurance requirements. 
    In processing an application for a license required by this division, the city shall, at a minimum, require the following: 
(1)  Security personnel. The licensee shall employ such security personnel as are sufficient to provide for the adequate security of the maximum number of attendants at the assembly and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of the assembly. No license shall be issued unless the chief of police in cooperation with the director of state police is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee for the duration of the assembly. 
(2)  Water facilities. The licensee shall provide potable water sufficient in quantity and pressure to ensure proper operation of all water-using facilities under conditions of peak demand. The water shall be supplied from a public water system, if available, and if not available then from a source constructed, located and approved in accordance with any applicable state or local law, or from a source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the health officer. 
(3)  Toilet facilities. The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flush type water closets. If such flush type facilities are not available, the health officer may permit the use of other facilities which are in compliance with law. 
(4)  Lavatory and drinking facilities. The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with law. All lavatories shall be provided with hot and soap and paper towels. 
(5)  Number and type of facilities generally. The number and type of facilities required shall be determined on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
Facilities Number of Male 
Attendants 
per Facility Number of Female 
Attendants 
per Facility Number of 
Attendants 
per Facility Toilets 300 200 Urinals 100 Lavatories 200 200 Drinking fountains 500 Taps and faucets 500  
(6)  Shower facilities. Where the assembly is to continue for more than 12 hours, the licensee shall provide one shower facility for every 100 male attendants and one shower facility for every 100 female attendants. 
(7)  Construction of facilities. All facilities shall be installed, connected an maintained free from obstructions, leaks and defects and shall at all times be in operable condition. 
(8)  Food service. If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with law. 
(9)  Medical facilities. If the assembly is not readily and quickly accessible to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to provide adequate facilities on the premises of the assembly. 
(10)  Liquid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid waste disposal in accordance with all rules and regulations pertaining thereto as established by the health officer. If the rules and regulations are not available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste disposal shall be in accordance with the United States Public Health Service Publication No. 526, entitled "Manual of Septic Tank Practice." If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance with law. Prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the health officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of liquid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(11)  Solid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on, and removal from, the premises. Storage shall be approved by the city and be in sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the health officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed refuse collector, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(12)  Insect and rodent control. The licensee shall implement effective control measures to minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the premises. Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides, shall not be used in any way so as to contaminate food, equipment or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health. Solid waste containing food waste shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin. 
(13)  Public swimming pools. The licensee shall provide or make available public swimming pools only in accordance with state and local law. 
(14)  Access and traffic control. The licensee shall provide or ingress to and egress from the premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic onto and off of the premises. Access to the premises shall be from a highway or road which is a part of the county system of highways or which is a highway maintained by the state. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided, designated and kept open for access by ambulances, fire equipment, helicopters and other emergency vehicles. The director of the department of state police and the director of the department of state highways must approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic control. 
(15)  Parking. The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all motor vehicles, but in no case shall he provide less than one automobile space for every four attendants. 
(16)  Camping and trailer parking. A licensee who permits attendants to remain on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall provide for camping and trailer parking and facilities in accordance with state and local law. 
(17)  Illumination. The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all occupied areas sufficient to ensure the safety and comfort of all attendants. The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved by the city manager. 
(18)  Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain public liability insurance with limits of not less than $100,000.00 for injury to one person and $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person and property damage insurance with a limit of not less than $50,000.00 from a company approved by the state commissioner of insurance, which insurance shall insure liability for death or injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto and which insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of the license. The evidence of insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the city clerk in writing at least ten days before the expiration or cancellation of the insurance. 
(19)  Bond. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain, from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state, a corporate surety bond in the amount of $100,000.00, in a form to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the licensee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this article and all applicable provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the city against any and all loss, injury or damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the assembly and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining the assembly site for any costs attributable to cleaning up or removing debris, trash or other waste resultant from the assembly. 
(20)  Fire protection. The licensee shall, at his own expense, take adequate steps, as determined by the state fire marshal, to ensure fire protection. 
(21)  Sound equipment. Sound-producing equipment shall not be operated on the premises of the assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous, or so as to be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace. 
(22)  Fencing. The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site, of sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of the maximum permissible attendants from gaining access and which will have sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready and safe ingress and egress. 
(23)  Communications. The licensee shall provide public telephone equipment for general use on the basis of at least one unit for each 1,000 attendants. 
(24)  Additional health and safety requirements. Prior to the issuance of a license, the city council may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or of citizens of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 22-24) 
Sec. 66-407. - Action by city council. 
    Within 30 days of the filing of the application for a license required by this division, the city council shall issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny a license. 
(Code 1974, § 22-25) 
Sec. 66-408. - Notice of denial or imposition of conditions. 
    Where conditions are imposed as a prerequisite to the issuance of a license to hold an outdoor assembly or where a license is denied, notice to that effect must be mailed to the applicant within five days after such action, by certified mail, and, in the case of denial, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the notice. 
(Code 1974, § 22-26) 
Sec. 66-409. - Grounds for denial. 
    A license required by this division may be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to comply with any requirements of this article or with any conditions imposed pursuant to this article, or with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(2)  The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or any supporting document. 
(Code 1974, § 22-27) 
Sec. 66-410. - Contents; posting; transfer. 
    Any license issued pursuant to this division shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the kind and location of the assembly, the maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the license and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this article. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the assembly, and shall not be transferred to any other person or location. 
(Code 1974, § 22-28) 
Sec. 66-411. - Revocation. 
    The city council may revoke a license issued under this division whenever the licensee fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any of the provisions and requirements of this article or with any of the provisions, regulations, statutes or other laws of the state. 
(Code 1974, § 22-29) 
Secs. 66-412-66-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HANDBILLS 

Sec. 66-441. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, or paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature. 
    Newspaper means and includes any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the federal postal service in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law, and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public. 
    Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
    Public place means any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings. 
(Code 1974, § 3-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-442. - Purpose. 
    To protect the people against the nuisance of and incident to the promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity requires the regulation thereof and to that end the purposes of this article are specifically declared to be as follows: 
(1)  To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter. 
(2)  To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and handbills. 
(Code 1974, § 3-16) 
Sec. 66-443. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to newspapers or to the distribution of mail by the United States. 
(Code 1974, § 3-18) 
Sec. 66-444. - Distributing or scattering in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any public place within the city or to hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; however, it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such handbill. 
(Code 1974, § 3-19) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Sec. 66-445. - Placing in vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the handbill, or the placement of handbills on vehicles in a manner that will prevent them from being blown about or scattered by the elements. 
(Code 1974, § 3-20) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Sec. 66-446. - Distribution on uninhabited or vacant private premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant except in a manner that will prevent such handbills from being blown about or scattered by the elements. 
(Code 1974, § 3-21) 
Sec. 66-447. - Distribution on posted property. 
(a)  Soliciting or canvassing on private property which is posted with signage indicating "No Trespassing", "No Canvassing", "No peddlers or Agents" or "No Advertisements" or similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises, is prohibited however, it shall be the duty of the owner, landlord or person in control of any premises remaining vacant for a period more than five days to post in a conspicuous position on the premises such signage as is indicated by the section. 
(b)  The term "vacant," as used in subsection (a) of this section, shall not be deemed to include temporary absence from the premises by its regular occupants. 
(Code 1974, § 3-22; Ord. No. 791, § 1, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 66-448. - Distribution on inhabited private premises. 
    No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or any other person then present in or upon such private premises; however, in the case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this article, the person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1974, § 3-23) 
Sec. 66-449. - Distribution on private premises prohibited during certain hours. 
    No handbills may be distributed on private premises before 9:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. of any day. 
(Code 1974, § 3-27) 
Chapter 70 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 38; outdoor assemblies, § 66-381 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 102; waterways, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Authority to operate system of public recreation, MCL 125.51 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Public hearing required for certain physical changes in public parks. 
(a)  This section shall only apply to those parks that are owned, leased or otherwise under the control of the city. This section does not apply to any park facility that is owned by another unit of government. 
(b)  In this section, the term "physical changes" means the following: 
(1)  Any physical change to the existing grade of the land in excess of three feet or more. 
(2)  Any new recreation equipment where expenditure is in excess of $10,000.00 per park, in any one purchase. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to ordinary repairs or maintenance programs. 
(d)  A public hearing shall be held before the city council prior to any physical changes being implemented, as defined in this section, with respect to the city park system. 
(e)  Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least one week prior to the public hearing. The city shall also notify, by mail, all owners of record of property and the occupants of all residential properties located within 300 feet of construction limits of the physical change. 
(Code 1974, § 23-49) 
Secs. 70-2-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-401 et seq. 

Sec. 70-31. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a parks and recreation commission of the city to act solely in an advisory capacity. 
(Code 1974, § 23-16) 
Sec. 70-32. - Composition; appointment of members. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall consist of nine members, who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation of a majority vote of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-17) 
Sec. 70-33. - Persons ineligible for membership. 
    No person shall be eligible for appointment to the parks and recreation commission who is the holder of any public office, elective or appointive, under the Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 23-18) 
Sec. 70-34. - Director of parks and recreation to serve as nonvoting member. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall serve as a nonvoting permanent member of the parks and recreation commission. 
(Code 1974, § 23-19) 
Sec. 70-35. - Term of office of members. 
    All members of the parks and recreation commission, other than the director of parks and recreation, shall serve a term of three years. 
(Code 1974, § 23-20) 
Sec. 70-36. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the parks and recreation commission occurring before the expiration of any term of office shall be reported by the commission to the mayor and city council and filled by appointment for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1974, § 23-21) 
Sec. 70-37. - Organizational meeting; officers; bylaws. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall immediately after appointment meet and organize by the election of one of its members as chairperson, and by the election of such other officers as it deems necessary. The commission shall adopt bylaws for the orderly conduct of its meetings and for the proper process of its functions. 
(Code 1974, § 23-22) 
Sec. 70-38. - Regular meetings. 
    Regular meetings of the parks and recreation commission shall be held monthly and as often as may be deemed necessary by the chairperson. 
(Code 1974, § 23-23) 
Sec. 70-39. - Filing of minutes. 
    A copy of the minutes of all parks and recreation commission meetings shall be filed with the city clerk for submittal to the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-24) 
Sec. 70-40. - Commission to act in advisory capacity. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall act as an advisory commission to the city council and the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1974, § 23-25) 
Sec. 70-41. - Recommendation of master plan for city recreation programs. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall consider, study and recommend an overall master plan for the development of citywide recreation programs. 
(Code 1974, § 23-26) 
Sec. 70-42. - Recommendations on land acquisitions. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall review and from time to time make recommendations to the city council on necessary land acquisition to assist in the development of the city parks and recreation program. 
(Code 1974, § 23-27) 
Sec. 70-43. - Recommendations regarding new parks and improvements to existing parks. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall consider, study and make recommendations relative to the development of parks and recreation programs in new areas, and shall also consider and study and make recommendations for improvements of existing parks and recreation programs. 
(Code 1974, § 23-28) 
Sec. 70-44. - Assistance by other city agencies. 
    The parks and recreation commission may call on any department, board or commission of the city for such technical and advisory assistance as may be needed. 
(Code 1974, § 23-29) 
Sec. 70-45. - Expenditures. 
    The parks and recreation commission and its members shall not incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the parks and recreation commission, prior approval of such expenditures shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-30) 
Secs. 70-46-70-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 

Sec. 70-71. - Appointment. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall be appointed by the mayor on the basis of his training, education and experience in physical education and public recreation activities and shall be a full-time administrative officer. 
(Code 1974, § 23-41) 
Sec. 70-72. - Director to be administrative head of department of parks and recreation; accountability to mayor. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall be the administrative head of the department of parks and recreation, and he shall be accountable and responsible to the mayor for the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1974, § 23-42) 
Sec. 70-73. - General duties. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by this Code, the Charter or state law or as may be required of him by the mayor or city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-43) 
Sec. 70-74. - Duty to provide recreational activities. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall provide recreational and out-of-doors activities for the inhabitants, and especially for the children, of the city and shall provide for a full and complete yearround adult and children recreational program. 
(Code 1974, § 23-44) 
Sec. 70-75. - Maintenance of park property. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall maintain and repair parks, playgrounds, public grounds and play areas, including the interior and exterior of all community buildings and park service buildings, and provide for the safe storage and maintenance of all park and recreational equipment. 
(Code 1974, § 23-45) 
Sec. 70-76. - Recommendations to city council. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall recommend to the city council the acquisition and establishment by the city of all necessary parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, summer camps and facilities required to organize, establish, equip, maintain and operate the department of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1974, § 23-46) 
Sec. 70-77. - Arrangements for use of board of education park facilities and equipment. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall communicate and arrange with the city board of education for the use of park facilities and equipment belonging to the board of education, for such time as may be available to the city, and to provide and arrange a program for such use thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 23-47) 
Sec. 70-78. - Inventory of parks and recreation equipment. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall prepare for the mayor and city council, within 30 days following the end of each six months of the fiscal year, an inventory of all equipment under the control of the parks and recreation department. 
(Code 1974, § 23-48) 
Secs. 70-79-70-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONDUCT IN PARKS 

Sec. 70-101. - Basis of city actions or decisions. 
    All actions and decisions of the director of parks and recreation under the provisions of this article shall be based upon the following: 
(1)  Public safety. 
(2)  Preserving the right of the public to the parks. 
(3)  Avoiding damage to the parks. 
Sec. 70-102. - Closing time for parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be or remain in any city park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The provisions of this section do not apply to any persons who have received special permission from the city council or its designee to remain in the park during those hours. Special permission may be granted to those who have established to the city council or its designee that reliable and adequate adult supervision will be present during such extended time period. 
(b)  Notice of the park closing hours shall be conspicuously posted. 
(c)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(23), 23-1) 
State Law reference- Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 70-103. - Animals generally. 
(a)  No person shall lead or allow to be loose upon city park premises any animal, except that dogs may be taken into the park system provided they are held by a suitable leash not more than six feet in length. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A person with disabilities because the person with disabilities is being led or accompanied by a guide or leader dog, hearing dog, or service dog if the guide or leader dog is wearing a harness or if the hearing dog or service dog is wearing a blaze orange leash and collar, hearing dog cape, or service dog backpack, and the person with disabilities being led or accompanied has in his possession a pictured identification card certifying that the dog was trained by a qualified organization or trainer. 
(2)  A trainer of guide or leader dogs, hearing dogs, or service dogs because the trainer is being led or accompanied by a guide or leader dog, hearing dog, or service dog if the guide or leader dog is wearing a harness or if the hearing dog or service dog is wearing a hearing dog cape or service dog backpack, if the trainer is being led or accompanied by an adult dog for the purpose of training the dog, and if the trainer has in his possession picture identification and identification stating that he is a representative or employee of an organization or trainer, or is a trainer, included on the state department of labor list of organizations or trainers that train guide or leader dogs, hearing dogs, or service dogs. 
(c)  As used in subsection (b) of this section: 
    Adult dog means a domestic dog of the species Canis familiaris that is 12 months of age or older. 
    Audibly impaired means audibly impaired as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 82 of 1981 (MCL 752.61). 
    Blind person means a blind person as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 260 of 1978 (MCL 393.351). 
    Deaf person means a deaf person as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 82 of 1981 (MCL 752.61). 
    Person with disabilities means a person who is audibly impaired, blind, deaf, or otherwise physically limited. 
    Physically limited means physically limited as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 1 of 1966 (MCL 125.1351). 
(d)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(24), 23-59) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Rights of persons with disabilities or trainer relative to guide, hearing, leader or service dogs, MCL 750.502c. 
Sec. 70-104. - Horses and similar animals. 
    No person shall drive any horse, mule, pony or other such riding animal in any of the parks of the city, unless bridle paths have been established, in which case no person shall drive any such animal in the park except on such designated bridle path Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(25), 23-60) 
Sec. 70-105. - Injuring or interfering with animals or birds. 
    No person shall trap, catch, wound or kill or treat cruelly, or attempt to trap, catch, wound or kill, any bird or animal, or molest or rob any nest of any bird or animal, in the city park system. 
(Code 1974, § 23-61) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14. 
Sec. 70-106. - Sports, games and other amusements. 
    No person shall engage in any sport, game, exercise or amusement in the city park system except such portions thereof as may be designated for such activities by the director of parks and recreation and then only under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by him. 
(Code 1974, § 23-62) 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainment, ch. 10. 
Sec. 70-107. - Use of vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall bring or use any vehicle upon any portion of the city park system where such vehicles are prohibited from being brought or used by direction of the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  The police department is hereby authorized to remove and/or impound any and all vehicles which have been brought into or used in the city park system, where any such vehicles are prohibited from use by direction of the director of parks and recreation, excepting those vehicles legally parked in a designated parking area. 
(Code 1974, § 23-63) 
Sec. 70-108. - Offering articles for sale; peddling or soliciting. 
    No person shall offer or exchange for sale any article or thing, or do any hawking, peddling or soliciting, or buy or offer to buy any article or thing, or take up any collection or solicit or receive contributions of money or anything of value in the city park system, except when authorized to do so by permit from or contract with the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1974, § 23-64) 
Cross reference- Peddlers and transient merchants, § 22-301 et seq. 
Sec. 70-109. - Public meetings or entertainments. 
    No person shall call or hold any public meeting or give any concert or public entertainment of any kind in the city park system without the express consent of the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1974, § 23-65) 
Cross reference- Outdoor assemblies, § 66-381 et seq. 
Sec. 70-110. - Entering restricted areas. 
    No person shall enter upon any portion of the park system where persons are prohibited from going as indicated by sign or notice. 
(Code 1974, § 23-66) 
Sec. 70-111. - Improper speech or conduct. 
    No person shall use any abusive, threatening, insulting, indecent, profane or obscene language, or language calculated to occasion a breach of the peace, or be guilty of any indecent act or behavior in the city park system. 
(Code 1974, § 23-67) 
Sec. 70-112. - Sleeping; using hammocks. 
    No person shall sleep in the city park system between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or place, swing, occupy or use any hammock therein. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(27), 23-69) 
Sec. 70-113. - Use of playground equipment by adults. 
    No person 18 years of age or more shall in any manner use any of the playground apparatus or devices meant exclusively for the use of children. 
(Code 1974, § 23-70) 
Sec. 70-114. - Throwing missiles; shooting golf balls. 
    No person shall throw or cast any stones or other missiles within the city park system or shoot any golf balls or other similar missiles in any part of the park unless there is an area specifically designated for such activity. 
(Code 1974, § 23-71) 
Sec. 70-115. - Obstructing traffic. 
    No person shall set or place, or cause to be set or placed, any goods, wares or merchandise or property of any kind so as to obstruct travel in the city park system. 
(Code 1974, § 23-72) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Sec. 70-116. - Setting fires. 
    No person shall light or make use of any fire in the city park system, except such portions thereof as may be designated by the director of parks and recreation and the fire prevention division of the fire department for such purpose and then only under regulations as are prescribed by such officer and division. 
(Code 1974, § 23-73) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 
Sec. 70-117. - Intoxicants. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, give away or drink any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine in any city park or in the city park system, unless a valid permit has been issued as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Upon written application to the director of parks and recreation, or his designee, a limited permit may be issued for discreet consumption of alcoholic beverages for family or social parties, and recognized club activities. Such permit, if issued, shall be subject to the rules and regulations and restrictions imposed by the department of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1974, § 23-74(b), (c)) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquors, ch. 6. 
Sec. 70-118. - Depositing refuse; use of receptacles. 
    No person shall deposit, dump, throw or place any coal, ashes, dust, manure or rubbish in or upon any part of the city park system. Paper, garbage or refuse matter shall not be so deposited except in receptacles provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1974, § 23-75) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 70-119. - Posting or displaying advertisements. 
    No person shall display any placard or advertisement of any kind in the city park system, nor shall any person stencil or otherwise affix any notice or bill, advertisement or other paper upon any structure or thing in or about the park premises. 
(Code 1974, § 23-76) 
Sec. 70-120. - Gambling. 
    No person shall play at games of chance or use any gambling device in the city park system. 
(Code 1974, § 23-77) 
State Law reference- Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Sec. 70-121. - Damaging property or trees. 
    No person shall cut, break, climb on, or in any way injure or deface any tree, shrub, plant, or turf or any of the buildings, fences, bridges, lamps or posts or other structure or property within the city park system. 
(Code 1974, § 23-78) 
Cross reference- Vegetation, ch. 102. 
Sec. 70-122. - Disorderly conduct. 
    No person shall make, countenance or assist in making any improper noise or engage in any riot, disorderly conduct or collect with other persons in crowds for unlawful purposes or to the annoyance, obstruction or disturbance of other persons in any city park. 
(Code 1974, § 23-79) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 70-123. - Interference with park police officers or other employees. 
    No person shall resist any park police officer or city employee exercising his duty within the park area or fail or refuse to obey any lawful command of any such park police officer or park employee or in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent any such park police officer or park employee from discharging his duty, or in any manner assist or give aid to any person in custody to escape or to attempt to escape from custody, or rescue or attempt to rescue any person when in such custody. No person shall interfere with or in any manner hinder any employee of the city while engaged in constructing, repairing or caring for any city park property. 
(Code 1974, § 23-80) 
Secs. 70-124-70-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY EVENTS 

Sec. 70-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Special event includes the city's Midsummer Festival, Fireworks Display, Treadmill Run, and Taste of Trenton, or other similar type events located within the city, coordinated or sponsored by the city, and designated as such by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 23-91) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-152. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the terms of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00, plus court costs. 
(Code 1974, § 23-95) 
Sec. 70-153. - Prohibited activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in attendance at any special event to engage in any of the following conduct or activities in an area designated for a special event by resolution of the city council: 
(1)  Bring any animal (including any fish or reptile) into the area designated for the special event, whether or not in a restraining device, unless the animal is necessary to assist the handicapped, or is registered to participate in an official event, contest, or other activity authorized by the city or the other collective sponsors of the special event. 
(2)  Bring or ride any bicycle, unicycle, moped, or motorized scooter into the area designated for the special event, unless the cycle is registered to participate in an official event, contest, or other activity authorized by the city or the other collective sponsors of the special event or required by the owner to assist with a handicap; however, it shall be permissible to walk such devices to any storage rack, if any, which is provided by the city or sponsors for that purpose. 
(3)  Wear or utilize any skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, or other similar device in the special event area. 
(4)  Take or carry any radio, tape player, stereo, boom box, speakers, or other device which audibly transmits music, voice, or other sound into the special event area; however, it shall be permissible for an individual to wear a radio, tape, or compact disc device transmitting sound only through earphones or headphones to the carrier. 
(5)  Possess open intoxicants or consume alcoholic beverages in the area designated for the special event unless such beverages are purchased from and dispensed by an individual or entity licensed to sell such beverages, which has permission from the state liquor control commission for outdoor sales if applicable, and such entity is approved by the city council to sell such beverages for consumption in the area designated for the special event subject to those restrictions as to time, dates, and locations as it may impose. 
(6)  Bring into the area designated for the special event any container of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1974, § 23-92) 
Sec. 70-154. - Enforcement. 
    Refusal or failure to comply with this article shall be cause for removal of the individual from the special event or arrest or issuance of a citation for violation of this article by a police officer, and removal of the contraband item from the designated area. 
(Code 1974, § 23-93) 
Sec. 70-155. - Authority to make additional rules and regulations. 
    The city hereby authorizes the designated coordinating agency or sponsor to adopt such other reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary for the orderly conduct of activities at and during the special event. 
(Code 1974, § 23-94) 
Sec. 70-156. - Additional restrictions on consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing the provisions of chapter 6 regarding consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages or the penalties therein. 
(Code 1974, § 23-96) 
Chapter 74 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Disposal of sick, injured or dead animals, § 14-3; disposal of carcasses, § 14-55; disposal of waste; incinerators, § 22-148; environment, ch. 38; deposits of offensive or unwholesome substances, § 38-222; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 54; garbage and trash, § 54-112; manufactured homes, ch. 62; depositing refuse; use of receptacles in parks, § 70-118; trash containers; removal of trash, § 82-134; utilities, ch. 98; solid waste collection, app. A, § A-12. 
State Law reference- Solid waste management, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; litter control, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means the solid residue of combustion of fuel used in heating and cooking operations, as occurring in households, apartments, offices or other business places, but shall not include residue from industrial plants or operations. 
    Brush means brush vegetation or tree trimmings, other than grass, weeds, leaves and small garden plants from the normal household. 
    Commercial rubbish means the miscellaneous waste and materials resulting from the operation of mercantile enterprises, and includes packing boxes and cartons, excelsior, paper and rubbish from offices, stores and mercantile establishments but excludes construction and trade wastes. 
    Domestic rubbish means waste materials resulting from normal household or living conditions such as paper, rags, bottles, tin cans, cardboard, wornout clothing, furniture, excelsior and similar substances. 
    Garbage means waste foodstuffs or table wastes, of vegetable or animal origin, together with other incidental admixtures. 
    Garden rubbish means garden plants and debris from residential yards. It shall not include rubbish from work of landscape gardens or private companies such as landscaping firms or nurseries. 
    Loader pickup means any amount of concrete, dirt, bricks, sod, shingles or other debris which must be collected with a front loader. 
    Special pickup means large, bulky objects such as appliances, furniture, windows, building materials, brush, tree limbs or other items too large to place in containers or too heavy to be collected by refuse collection personnel. 
    Trade waste means the waste material resulting from industrial operations and is not classified as municipal waste, except as otherwise provided. 
    Transfer station means the city facility available for residents' or local businesses' dumping of refuse. 
    Yard waste means lawn clippings and leaves from the normal household. 
(Code 1974, § 16-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-32. - Violations. 
    Unless otherwise designated as a municipal civil infraction, any person who shall fail to heed a warning ticket issued by the city for violation of any provisions of this article, and shall thereafter violate any provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 16-8) 
Sec. 74-33. - Authority to make additional rules and regulations. 
    The director of public works is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations from time to time as appear necessary within the scope of this article. Any violation of the rules or regulations so made by the director of public works constitutes a violation of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 16-2) 
Sec. 74-34. - Assistance with enforcement. 
    The director of public works shall, in cases where violation of any provision of this article exists, be empowered to call upon the police department, fire department or health department for assistance when needed for enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 16-7) 
Sec. 74-35. - Collection schedule. 
    The director of public works shall establish schedules designating the days collection service is to be rendered and methods of collection of waste matter, and shall by appropriate means provide the citizens of the city with information concerning such schedule. A schedule may be secured at the office of the director of public works. 
(Code 1974, § 16-19) 
Sec. 74-36. - Burning garbage. 
    It shall be unlawful to burn garbage in the city, except in cases where the city health officer or fire marshal shall deem it necessary to dispose of any material by burning and then only pursuant to a permit issued by the fire marshal or chief of the fire department. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(15), 16-3) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 
Sec. 74-37. - Limitations on persons collecting refuse. 
    No agent, servant, officer or employee of the city or any contractor licensed by the city, or any other person engaged in the work of collecting and removing refuse, shall interfere with, disturb, break, destroy, handle, take or use any article or substance, or trespass upon any property except insofar as shall be necessary in the work of such collection and removal, or remove or take any article of refuse for his own use. Refuse collection personnel are not permitted to enter houses and buildings for the collection of refuse, nor shall they accept any money for their services from persons served. 
(Code 1974, § 16-20) 
Sec. 74-38. - Hours of collection. 
    The collection of waste matter shall not commence before 7:00 a.m. or be continued after 7:00 p.m., except for the protection of the public health or welfare, in which case the director of public works may require the extending of the time limit established in this section. 
(Code 1974, § 16-21) 
Sec. 74-39. - Placement and removal of containers generally. 
    Receptacles, containers or bundles of combustible rubbish and combustible rubbish mixed with garbage containers shall be placed on the outside of the sidewalk after sundown of the day preceding the day scheduled for collection. All empty receptacles or containers are to be removed from the street the same day that the collection is made. Receptacles, containers and bundles of articles of noncombustible rubbish shall be placed on the outside of the sidewalk after sundown of the day preceding the day scheduled for collection, which collection day may be separate from the day scheduled for the collection of garbage and combustible rubbish, as set by the director of public works or his authorized representative. All empty receptacles or containers are to be removed from the street the same day that the collection is made. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(15), 16-22) 
Sec. 74-40. - Placement and removal of containers of garden and domestic rubbish and garbage. 
    All garden and domestic rubbish and garbage shall be kept in receptacles to be located within the rear property lines where an alleyway is provided. Where an alleyway is not provided, all garden and domestic rubbish and garbage shall be placed in receptacles, and shall be placed at the curbline at a place most accessible to the collector. Receptacles shall be placed within the property lines adjacent to the alley, or at the curbline, whichever applies, after sundown of the day preceding the day scheduled for collection, and all empty receptacles or containers shall be removed the same day the collection is made. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(15), 16-23) 
Sec. 74-41. - Collection from private property. 
    Rubbish shall not be collected by the city from private property except under the following circumstances: The city may provide curbside collection of residential rubbish from individual single-family condominium units with fully enclosed attached garages providing secure storage, located in private developments in which the dwelling units are individually owned and individually taxed by the city, provided there exists within each such development access to each of the individual dwelling units sufficient to accommodate the weight, size and turning radius of the city's regular rubbish disposal vehicles, as certified in writing to council by the director of public works and the city engineer prior to the initiation of service. 
(Code 1974, § 16-24) 
Sec. 74-42. - Duty of occupants to provide containers. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the occupant of every dwelling, flat, apartment house or other building or other persons disposing of any rubbish or garbage to provide sufficient containers to hold the accumulation of normal rubbish between collections. 
(Code 1974, § 16-25) 
Sec. 74-43. - Responsibility of landlords to dispose of rubbish. 
    Rubbish from dwellings run by landlords must be disposed of by the landlords, whether or not they reside on the premises. 
(Code 1974, § 16-34) 
Sec. 74-44. - Construction waste. 
(a)  Construction waste from building construction, alterations or repairs and earth dirt from excavating, unusual or special manufacturing or trade wastes shall not be collected by the city; however, in cases where the occupant of a private dwelling does his own work and does not pay private persons or contractors to perform such work, the city will make special pickups upon call and upon such dates and times as the director of public works designates. 
(b)  Any rubbish from contractors, builders, remodelers, landscapers, nurserymen or other tradesmen must be disposed of by the persons generating the rubbish. 
(Code 1974, § 16-35) 
Sec. 74-45. - Dirt, concrete or metal; bulky objects. 
    Large amounts of dirt, concrete, or metal and bulky objects such as old furniture which are too large to place in containers must be separated and will be collected by the city forces as a special pickup on days to be designated by the director of public works if the rubbish to be collected is a result of residents doing work or causing rubbish to be placed for collection themselves. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(16), 16-36) 
Sec. 74-46. - Tree limbs, brush, grass clippings and leaves. 
(a)  All tree limbs, trimmings, brush and clippings too large or bulky to be placed in containers will be collected by the city where such limbs, trimmings or clippings are not the result of work by a private contractor, provided they are cut in lengths not to exceed four feet in length or four inches in diameter. Logs over four inches in diameter must be cut in lengths not to exceed three feet and be stacked for easy removal by collection forces. All such materials shall be placed at the sidewalk and collected by the city at such time as designated by the director of public works. 
(b)  All grass clippings and leaves shall be bagged in the authorized mesh bags or otherwise reusable containers provided they are labeled as containing yard waste. No plastic or paper bags shall be permitted for the disposal of clippings or leaves. During the fall leaf season, leaves may be deposited along the street edge for pickup as part of the city's regularly scheduled leaf pickup program. 
(c)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(16), 16-37) 
Cross reference- Vegetation, ch. 102. 
Sec. 74-47. - Newspapers and magazines. 
    Newspapers, magazines or cardboard too bulky to put in containers will be collected with the regular rubbish provided they are tied in bundles not to exceed 100 pounds in weight. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(16), 16-38) 
Sec. 74-48. - Fee for loader pickups. 
(a)  The fee for loader pickups shall be as established by the city council per cubic yard of material collected. 
(b)  In the event payment is not made when billed, the expense shall be charged to the owner of the real estate by placing the cost of the pickup on the tax roll. 
(c)  The fee for reclaiming refrigerant materials from refrigerant charged appliances, including but not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, and air conditioners, shall be as established by the city council payable to the city in advance of any special pickup. 
(Code 1974, § 16-39; Ord. No. 656, § 1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 74-49. - Use of transfer station. 
(a)  The refuse transfer station will be available for residents' dumping free of charge. Proof of residency is required. 
(b)  Businesses registered and located within the city shall be allowed dumping privileges at the transfer station at the rate established by the city council. All dumping charges that are not paid on time shall be deemed delinquent, to which there shall be added and collected a ten percent penalty. Dumping privileges will be revoked for those businesses the accounts of which are in arrears until such time as all fees and charges are paid in full and the city shall in the interim not enter into any contract with any such business in default to the city, pursuant to section 12.2 of the City Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 16-40; Ord. No. 667, § 1, 1-5-2004) 
Sec. 74-50. - Discarding refrigerant-charged appliances. 
    No discarded appliance charged with a refrigerant, including but not limited to refrigerators, freezers, and air conditioners, shall be collected as refuse by the city without proof of payment of the refrigerant recovery fee set forth in section 74-48 to the engineering and building department. Upon payment of the fee, a sticker, indicating proof of payment, will be provided to the applicant which must be visibly affixed to the outside of the discarded appliance to be set at curbside for collection. The appliance may be scheduled for a special pickup at the time of payment, or by phone, for the next regularly scheduled designated pickup day. No such appliances shall be disposed of by any person at the city's refuse transfer station. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 2, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 74-51. - Special pick-ups. 
    Special pick-up services will be provided for those items defined in section 74-31, to residential customers by appointment only, made through the department of public works during regular business hours, for a fee established and set forth in sections A-12 and A-19 of appendix A, which fee shall be billed and payable monthly. Contractor generated materials are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 1, 8-2-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 739, § 1, adopted August 2, 2010, added section "special pick-ups" as section 74-50. Editorially changed to section 74-51. 
Secs. 74-52-74-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTAINERS 

Sec. 74-71. - Approved waste and refuse containers. 
(a)  General container standards for household waste. The city shall distribute, at no charge, to each single-family residential unit one city-approved trash cart for household waste only, which shall be property of the city, but remain with the residential unit and identified by address. Homeowners in need of additional trash carts may purchase them from the city. Only trash carts issued by the city are permitted to be used for solid waste collections for single-family residences. Each trash cart shall be maintained in a nuisance and odor-free condition and shall be closed at the top to prevent the scattering of contents by weather conditions or animals. No container with yard waste inside will be accepted. 
(b)  Other approved containers. Other household waste containers for multifamily residential units (such as dumpsters) may be used with the express approval of the director of public services or such other officials designated by the city. 
(c)  Homeowner must utilize containers. Beginning seven days following the official announcement by the city of the conversion, it shall be the duty of every occupant, tenant and proprietor of any residential unit to arrange for, use and on collection days, place in a suitable position for ready access to the refuse collector, trash cart containers capable of holding all refuse which would ordinarily accumulate on such premises between the times of successive collections. The owner of any multiple dwelling shall furnish or require the tenant thereof to use a proper trash cart container. Trash cart containers located at multiple-family dwellings shall be marked so as to indicate the residential unit to which they belong. 
(d)  Illegal containers. All containers other than city-issued trash carts with permissible waste therein, are deemed to be illegal containers and will not be picked up. 
(e)  Yard waste containers. Additional and distinct trash cart containers, brown in color with green lids and appropriately labeled, must be used for the containment and collection of yard waste, including grass, leaves, weeds, garden clippings and small tree trimmings. Such containers must be purchased from the city, and must likewise be placed within reach of the street by the mechanical arm of the city's collection vehicle. Only yard waste in such containers will be collected by the city. Materials may not extend out of top of such containers more than one-half of height of the lid. Any large tree limbs will require a special pick-up. Plastic bags may not be placed in the containers as such material is not biodegradable and will not be collected. 
(Code 1974, § 16-26; Ord. No. 706, § 1, 3-5-2007) 
Sec. 74-72. - Noncompliance. 
    If proper containers are not utilized as required by this article, trash will not be picked up and the occupant of the premises shall be notified of the violation. If within one week, the notice is not complied with, it shall be considered a violation of this Code. Violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, and result in the issuance of a municipal civil infraction notice, for which the fine is $10.00 per violation, payable at city hall. Failure to pay the fine within 14 days shall result in the issuance of a civil infraction citation for which the fine is $50.00 per violation. Multiple violations for the same offense will result in additional fines in accordance with section 2-376. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(15), 16-27; Ord. No. 706, § 2, 3-5-2007) 
Sec. 74-73. - Unsafe containers. 
    Any containers having damaged wheels or hinges shall be so marked by the resident for repair or replacement, and will be collected for warranty repair or replacement. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(15), 16-33; Ord. No. 706, § 3, 3-5-2007) 
Sec. 74-74. - Collection of refuse; placement. 
(a)  All residential household and yard waste shall be placed in approved containers in a position accessible to collection crews, adjacent to the curb within reach of the seven-foot mechanical arm, from the street or alley. During winter months, solid waste shall not be placed on top of the snow bank, nor shall it be placed in the roadway. The owner shall either shovel out an area behind the curb in which to place his/her wastes or he/she shall place it in his/her cleared driveway. Collection crews will not collect waste unless it is placed within reach of the public street or alley. Residential units shall bring their solid waste to the public right-of-way for collection. Should collection crews be unable to discharge the contents of trash carts into collection vehicles using normal handling procedures, the trash carts, including their contents, will be left at curbside. The owner shall make provisions to assure that the solid waste therein can be collected on the next collection day. Collection crews will not empty trash carts by means other than mechanical dumping. 
(b)  Vehicles must be parked so as not to hinder locating or collecting the refuse placed at the curb. 
(c)  The city will not be liable for damage to any property where sanitation crews are required to collect refuse from a location other than within reach of the curb. 
(d)  Business establishments shall provide access to collection sites. All business establishments are responsible for their collection sites. Those sites blocked by vehicles or other obstructions will not be collected. 
(e)  No trash carts or other containers for refuse other than those approved by the city shall be placed, kept, stored or located within the right-of-way of a street or alley; provided, however, that the city may authorize the location of such containers within the public right-of-way at specified places and times when such location is necessary for the expeditious collection and disposition of refuse. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 4, 3-5-2007) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 706, § 4, adopted March 5, 2007, repealed the former § 74-74, and enacted a new § 74-74 as set out herein. The former § 74-74 pertained to use of paper or plastic bags in lieu of metal containers and was derived from Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(15), 16-28. 
Sec. 74-75. - Use of containers other than approved containers. 
(a)  It shall be permissible to use cardboard drums or bushel baskets for the storage of grass clippings, newspapers, garden rubbish or other materials not likely to cause offensive odors or attract flies or rodents; however, no garbage, or cans or containers containing food scraps or other table rubbish, shall be placed in such containers. 
(b)  Shopping bags, cardboard or wooden boxes, barrels, paper sacks of other than approved types or bushel baskets will not be considered as proper containers and will be collected as rubbish upon notification by collectors, except as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(15), 16-29) 
Sec. 74-76. - Garbage to be wrapped and drained. 
    All garbage shall be securely wrapped and drained of excess liquid before being placed in containers. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(15), 16-30) 
Sec. 74-77. - Placing ashes in containers. 
    All charcoal or ashes from barbecue pits, fireplaces or other stoves shall be thoroughly cold and doused with water before being placed in rubbish containers. Large amounts of ashes from heating systems or other sources must be placed in metal containers. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(15), 16-31) 
Sec. 74-78. - Manure and offal to be wrapped. 
    Any manure or offal from household pets or domestic animals must be placed in paper bags or wrapped so as not to be obnoxious or offensive. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(15), 16-32) 
Sec. 74-79. - Interference with containers or contents. 
    No person shall move, molest, burn or interfere with any refuse container or its contents or any waste material set out for collection by the city, except employees of the city charged with such duty. 
(Code 1974, § 16-5) 
Sec. 74-80. - Placing materials in containers that may cause fire. 
    No person shall place any substance or hot materials in refuse containers that may cause fires. 
(Code 1974, § 16-4) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 
Secs. 74-81-74-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL RUBBISH 

Sec. 74-101. - Compliance. 
    No commercial waste shall be collected unless such waste is places for collection in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1974, § 16-55) 
Sec. 74-102. - Commercial refuse containers. 
    The director of public works shall provide a list of approved suppliers of detachable metal refuse containers of two to six cubic yards, which can be moved and dumped by a front loading hoisting unit. The containers shall be placed, at the discretion of the director of public works, in locations convenient to establishments producing large quantities of refuse. In such cases, users may be required to share the use of such containers with other users nearby. The size and number of such containers shall be determined by the director of public works. 
(Code 1974, § 16-44) 
Sec. 74-103. - Commercial rubbish to be placed in special containers approved by city. 
(a)  Commercial rubbish shall be placed in special commercial containers approved by the city. These containers will be placed and serviced by the city in accordance with provisions of this division. 
(b)  Commercial establishments generating limited quantities of rubbish shall have the option of purchasing from the city, and utilizing in lieu of commercial containers, not more than two residential sized trash carts for the disposal of their rubbish, provided they are sufficient to fully enclose the rubbish. Pickups will be scheduled to coincide with residential pickups in their area. 
(c)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, § 16-45; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 7-6-2010) 
Sec. 74-104. - Duty to provide clean and sufficient containers. 
    The proprietor, manager or agent of a commercial establishment where wastes accumulate shall keep clean, proper and sufficient containers as required by this division for the storage of rubbish between collections. 
(Code 1974, § 16-46) 
Sec. 74-105. - Collection charges. 
(a)  The rubbish collection charges for each container emptied by the city pursuant to this division shall be as established by the city council 
(b)  Rubbish collection charges shall be billed quarterly in the same manner as water and sewage charges to the city. In the event payment is not made when billed, the expense shall be charged to the owner of the real estate by placing the cost of such collection on the tax roll. 
(Code 1974, § 16-47; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 3-15-2004) 
Sec. 74-106. - Purchase of refuse containers. 
    All stores, office buildings, bowling alleys, theaters, service stations, restaurants, apartments, townhouses, small industries, schools and like establishments which generate more rubbish than rubbish generated by an average domestic household shall be required to purchase average suitably sized refuse containers to store refuse prior to pickup by the city. Refuse containers are to be purchased directly from approved suppliers. 
(Code 1974, § 16-48) 
Sec. 74-107. - Manner of placing rubbish in containers. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of each user of commercial rubbish containers to place all materials for disposal inside of a container meeting the requirements of this division. All boxes must be broken down, cut up and flattened before placing in containers. Boxes or containers over three feet in length and two feet in width or depth must be cut up so they will lie flat in the containers. The contents of boxes or containers used for collection of rubbish inside of business places must be removed from the boxes or containers prior to being emptied into the containers. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(17), 16-49) 
Sec. 74-108. - Certain items not to be placed in containers. 
(a)  Large pieces of metal such as parts of cars, fenders, mufflers, or gas tanks or large pieces of lumber over three feet in length shall not be placed in containers required by this division. Also, flammable materials, and liquids such as paint, oils, lubricants, etc., shall not be placed in containers required by this division. No building materials or rubbish from contractors or tradesmen shall be put in such containers. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(17), 16-50) 
Sec. 74-109. - Doors and lids of containers to be kept closed. 
    Each user shall close the doors or lids of containers required by this division after placing material inside. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(17), 16-51) 
Sec. 74-110. - Area around containers to be kept clean and free from litter. 
    In no case shall establishments store, pile or scatter rubbish for collection on the ground around or near containers required by this division. The area adjacent to such containers shall in all cases be kept clean and free from litter. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(17), 16-52) 
Sec. 74-111. - Contents of containers to be protected from wind. 
    The contents of all containers required by this division shall be protected so that wind cannot blow out and scatter the contents over the streets, alleys and public ways of the city. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(17), 16-53) 
Sec. 74-112. - Vehicles blocking containers. 
    No vehicle shall be parked in such a manner that detachable containers are not accessible by the collection truck during the hours designated for collection. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(17), 16-54) 
Sec. 74-113. - Collection regulations; collection schedule. 
(a)  Properly stored commercial rubbish shall be collected by the city under such rules and regulations as the city engineer shall from time to time establish. 
(b)  The city shall empty containers as required, but not more than twice per week unless the size and volume of business warrants collections more than twice per week and if the necessity for extra pickups is due to users abiding by terms of this division. 
(c)  Collection frequency as outlined in section 74-35 shall be subject to change when affected by conditions beyond the control of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 16-56) 
Sec. 74-114. - Excessive amounts of waste. 
(a)  Reasonable and ordinary quantities of commercial waste from any establishment or business shall be collected by the city. 
(b)  When, in the opinion of the city engineer or his agents, any person operates any mercantile, manufacturing, trade or food establishment or other place or business where a large quantity of commercial waste is produced as an incident to the conducting of such establishment or business, and produces and accumulates excessive quantities or rubbish, the director shall require such person to remove such commercial waste as his own expense and in such manner as not to violate any of the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  If such person fails or neglects to remove such excess, the city shall remove the excess and shall charge the cost thereof to such person. If payment therefor is not made when billed, the expense of disposing of such excess waste shall be charged to the owner of the real estate by placing the cost of such disposal on the tax roll. 
(Code 1974, § 16-58) 
Secs. 74-115-74-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 

Sec. 74-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Litter means all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description. 
    Public or private property or waters includes, but is not limited to, the right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse, or the shores or beaches thereof, and shall include the ice above such waters, or any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area or any residential or farm properties or timberlands. 
(Code 1974, § 16-69) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-142. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction, for which the fine is $50.00. The court, in lieu of any other sentence imposed for such violation, may direct a substitution of litter-gathering labor, including, but not limited to, the litter connected with the particular violation. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(17), 16-77) 
Sec. 74-143. - Littering prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person knowingly, without the consent of either the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property, to dump, deposit, place, throw or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving, of litter on or into any public or private property, including privately owned or leased trash receptacles, or waters other than property specifically designated and set aside by the owner or operator for use by the general public. 
(Code 1974, § 16-70) 
Sec. 74-144. - Scattering construction waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit construction waste from building operations such as paper, cloth, rocks, litter or any other debris to be scattered on public or private property in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 16-71) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Sec. 74-145. - Posting and publication of requirements; city receptacles. 
    The city may post notice signs and otherwise publicize the requirements of this article. The city may establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter on the city property and publicize the location thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 16-72) 
Sec. 74-146. - Duty of abutting property owners to keep streets, alleys and easements free of litter. 
(a)  In the case of any alley, street or easement, where any substance has been deposited in violation of this article, it shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any lot or premises to remove from one-half of the alley, or street or easement adjoining such lot or premises all such substances. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every occupant of premises abutting upon an alley, street or easement to keep his adjoining one-half of the alley, street or easement in a clean, neat and orderly condition and to keep all weeds and grasses removed or cut to a height not to exceed one foot at all times. 
(Code 1974, § 16-73) 
Sec. 74-147. - Causing litter to fall into path of or hit vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly cause any litter or any object to fall or to be thrown into the path of or to hit a vehicle traveling on any street or highway in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 16-74) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Sec. 74-148. - Litter to be placed in receptacles. 
    Newspapers, handbills and wastepaper or other litter shall not be scattered or thrown upon public or private property but shall be deposited in private or public rubbish receptacles. 
(Code 1974, § 16-75) 
Sec. 74-149. - Use of public sidewalk receptacles. 
    Public sidewalk receptacles are for use of pedestrians only and shall not be used by vendors or by occupants of adjacent premises. 
(Code 1974, § 16-76) 
Chapter 78 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments, ch. XI. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-12(9); administration, ch. 2; community development, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 

Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost, when referring to the costs of any improvement, shall mean the cost of surveys, plans, rights-of-way, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, condemnation and legal fees, and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessment therefor and financing thereof. 
    Public improvement means any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against any one or more lots or parcels of land to be especially benefitted thereby, in proportion to the benefit derived or to be derived therefrom, except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1974, § 27-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-2. - Special assessments authorized. 
    The entire cost and expense, or any part thereof, of all public improvements may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands especially benefited by the improvement, in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1974, § 27-18) 
Sec. 78-3. - Initiation of proceedings. 
    Proceedings for making public improvements to be paid for by special assessment may be initiated by resolution of the city council or by petition of not less than 51 percent of the property owners of land in the proposed public improvement district. 
(Code 1974, § 27-19) 
Sec. 78-4. - Form of initiatory petitions. 
    All petitions for public improvements shall be addressed to the city council and shall set forth the proposed public improvement and the proposed public improvement district. All signatures on the petition shall be obtained within 30 days before the date of filing the petition with the city clerk, and such petitions shall include an affidavit by one or more of the circulators that the signatures appearing thereon are genuine and each signer declares himself to be the owner of the interest in the land indicated. 
(Code 1974, § 27-20) 
Sec. 78-5. - Initiatory petition signatures when title is not held in fee simple. 
    For the purpose of obtaining signatures to a petition required by this chapter, the signature of one tenant, in the case of tenants by the entireties, or joint tenancies, shall be considered adequate. In the case of tenancy in common, signatures of all common tenants shall be a requirement, and in the case of property being held under land contract, the party in whose name the property is assessed for taxation shall be deemed to be the owner. 
(Code 1974, § 27-21) 
Sec. 78-6. - Filing of initiatory petition. 
    All petitions required by this chapter shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall report the receipt of all such petitions to the city council at the next regular meeting following receipt of the petition. 
(Code 1974, § 27-22) 
Sec. 78-7. - Review and recommendation of city departments on initiatory petition. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a petition required by this chapter from the city clerk, the city council shall submit a copy thereof to each of the city departments for the purpose of review and examination. 
(b)  The city departments shall, upon completion of the review and examination of the petition, submit to the city council a written report in relation to its application with their respective department. The reports should include recommendations as to the necessity, feasibility and desirability of the proposed improvement, and any other facts or recommendations which will aid the city council in determining whether the improvement shall be made, and how the improvement shall be financed. 
(c)  The city engineer's report shall include ascertaining the assessed valuation of all property affected by the proposed improvement, the number of parcels which show tax delinquency, the number of parcels owned by public authorities, the number of parcels which are vacant, an estimated cost of the proposed project, the need for the improvement, and the extent of the improvement and proposed boundaries of the district. The city engineer's report shall be filed with the city clerk, together with his recommendations as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by special assessment and what proportion, if any, should be borne by the city at large, and any other facts or recommendations which will aid the city council in determining whether the improvements shall be made, and how the improvements shall be financed. 
(Code 1974, § 27-23) 
Sec. 78-8. - Hearing on initiatory petition. 
(a)  In the absence of written objections being received from the city departments, the city council shall resolve to proceed with the prescribed special assessment procedure for the making of any public improvement by holding a public hearing on the petition for the public improvement. 
(b)  Should the written reports from the city departments disclose objections, the city council shall provide a hearing to be held on the advisability of proceeding with the petitioned improvements, which meeting shall be held not less than one week after notice thereof has been sent by first class mail to all property owners who have petitioned for the proposed improvement. 
(c)  At the time and place specified in the notice for the public hearing, the city council shall meet and hear any person to be affected by the proposed public improvement. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 27-24) 
State Law reference- Required notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 78-9. - Council resolution required prior to undertaking improvement. 
    No public improvement to be financed in whole or in part by special assessment shall be undertaken, or any contract let therefor, before adoption by the city council of a resolution finally determining to proceed with such improvement, and establishing a special assessment district therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 27-25) 
Sec. 78-10. - Estimate of costs and public hearing required; notice of hearing. 
    No resolution finally determining to proceed with an improvement and establishing any special assessment district therefor shall be adopted until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing has been held on the advisability of so proceeding, which hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district, as shown by the current assessment roll of the city, in accordance with Public Act No. 162 of 1962 (MCL 211.741 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 27-26) 
Sec. 78-11. - Determination to make improvements; objections. 
(a)  If, after public hearing, the city council shall determine to proceed with the improvement, it shall so determine by resolution. The resolution shall include the determination of the necessity for the improvement; set forth the nature thereof; designate the limits of the special assessment district to be affected; describe the improvements to be assessed; determine the part or proportion of the cost to be paid by lands especially benefited thereby, and the part or proportion, if any, to be paid by the city at large; and determine the number of installments in which the assessment may be paid, the rate of interest, not exceeding six percent, to be charged, and if any balance is to be deferred. The city council shall direct the city engineer to prepare plans, profiles and specifications for the work to be done. 
(b)  If, prior to the adoption of the resolution, there are any objections in writing filed with the city clerk by the owners of property in the district which, according to the estimates, will be required to bear more than 50 percent of the amount of such special assessment, the passage of such resolution shall require the affirmative vote of five members of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 27-27) 
Sec. 78-12. - Completion of plans; advertisement for bids. 
(a)  When the plans, profiles and specifications have been completed, the city engineer shall return the plans, profiles and specifications to the city council, and the city council shall, if the work is to be done by independent contractors, order the advertisement for sealed bids for the work, in accordance with the purchasing procedure. 
(b)  The advertisement for sealed bids shall specify that no contract shall be let until the special assessment roll has been confirmed and no bid may be withdrawn for 45 days after the opening thereof. 
(c)  If the work is to be done by the city, the city engineer shall present a revised estimate of cost at the time the plans, profiles and specifications are returned to the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 27-28) 
Sec. 78-13. - Determination of costs; preparation of roll. 
    After the opening of sealed bids, the city council shall revise the estimated cost of the improvement upon the basis of bids received, or, where the work is to be done by the city, shall revise the estimated cost on the basis of the estimate of the city engineer, after receipt of such estimate, and shall direct the city assessor to make a special assessment roll of the part or proportion of the cost to be borne by the lands especially benefited, according to the benefits received, and report the roll to the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 27-29) 
Sec. 78-14. - Certification and filing of roll. 
    When the city assessor shall have completed the special assessment roll, he shall attach thereto or endorse thereon his certificate to the effect that the roll has been made by him pursuant to a resolution of the city council, giving the date of adoption, and that in making the assessments he has, as near as may be, according to his best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in such resolution and to the Charter, and to the provisions of this chapter. Thereupon, he shall file such special assessment roll with the city clerk, who shall present the roll to the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 27-30) 
Sec. 78-15. - Review of roll; notice of hearing. 
    Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the city council shall order it filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination and shall fix the time and place when it will meet and review such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district, as shown by the current assessment roll of the city, in accordance with Public Act No. 162 of 1962 (MCL 211.741 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 27-31) 
Sec. 78-16. - Hearing on roll; corrections and changes. 
    The city council shall meet and review the special assessment roll at the time and place appointed, or at an adjourned date therefor, and shall consider any objections thereto. The city council may correct the roll as to assessments or description of any lot or parcel of land, or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall be noted in the city council's minutes. After the hearing and review, the city council may confirm such special assessment roll, with corrections as it may have made, if any, or may refer it back to the city assessor for city revision, or may annul any proceedings in connection therewith. 
(Code 1974, § 27-32) 
Sec. 78-17. - Confirmation of roll. 
    The city clerk shall, upon confirmation of a special assessment roll by the city council, endorse the date of confirmation upon the roll. The roll, upon confirmation, shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1974, § 27-33) 
Sec. 78-18. - Special assessment to constitute lien on property; character of lien. 
(a)  All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof to be paid in installments, shall, from the date of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed, and, until paid, shall be a charge against the respective owners of the lots and parcels of land, and a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed. 
(b)  The lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the Charter for city taxes, and shall include the accrued interest and fees. 
(Code 1974, § 27-34) 
Sec. 78-19. - Use of special assessment funds restricted. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special assessment account, and shall be used to pay for the cost of the improvement for which the assessment was levied, and all expenses incidental thereto, to repay any principal or interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments. 
(Code 1974, § 27-35) 
Sec. 78-20. - Due date of assessments; installment payments; delinquent payments. 
    All special assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the assessment roll or in annual installments not to exceed ten in number, as the city council may determine at the time of confirmation. If payment is to be made in annual installments, the city council shall determine that the first installment shall be due upon confirmation, and that subsequent installments shall be due on July 1 in each succeeding year and shall be placed upon the annual city tax roll. If payments are delinquent, an interest charge until the due date of each such deferred installment shall be provided for, not to exceed six percent per year, subject to the right of advance payment of any such installment with interest to the date of payment. 
(Code 1974, § 27-36) 
Sec. 78-21. - Transmittal of assessment to treasurer for collection; notice to property owners for payment. 
    Whenever any special assessment roll is confirmed and is payable, the city council shall direct the city clerk to transmit the assessment roll to the city treasurer for collection. The city treasurer shall mail statements of the several assessments to the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land assessed, as indicated by the records of the city assessor, stating the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; however, failure to mail any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time in which to pay the assessment. 
(Code 1974, § 27-37) 
Sec. 78-22. - Spreading of installments on tax roll. 
    Second installments of special assessments shall be spread upon the city tax roll for the year in which it falls due, in a column headed "special assessments," together with interest on all unpaid installments from the date of confirmation of the roll, on July 1 in the year in which the installment is spread upon the roll; provided that any fraction of a month shall be considered a full month. Thereafter, one installment shall be spread in the same manner upon each annual tax roll, together with the accumulated interest upon all unpaid installments. 
(Code 1974, § 27-38) 
Sec. 78-23. - Collection procedure. 
    After each special assessment or installment thereof has been placed on the tax rolls, the assessment or installment shall be collected by the city treasurer with the same rights and remedies as provided in the Charter for the collection of taxes. Special assessments or installments thereof which become due on July 1 of any year shall be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on July 1 of the same year, and if uncollected on the following March 1 shall be returned to the county treasurer as unpaid taxes, as provided in section 9.19 of the Charter. Initial special assessments or installments which become due other than on July 1 shall, if unpaid for 90 days or more on May 1 of any year, be certified as delinquent to the city council by the city treasurer, and the city council shall place such delinquent assessments on the tax roll for that year, together with accrued interest to July 1 of such year. The total amount of such assessment and interest shall thereafter be collected in all respects as are city taxes on July 1 of that year, and shall be subject to the same fees and penalties as are city taxes due on that date, and if uncollected on the following March 1 shall be returned to the county treasurer as unpaid taxes, as provided in section 9.19 of the Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 27-39) 
Sec. 78-24. - Action to collect assessment; effect of irregularities. 
    In addition to any other remedies, and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties, may be collected in an action in the name of the city against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If, in any action, it shall appear that, by reason of any irregularity or informality, the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant, or upon the lot or premises sought to be charged, the court may nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city, which is a proper charge against the lot or premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant, or upon such lot or premises. 
(Code 1974, § 27-40) 
State Law reference- Assumpsit to collect special assessments, MCL 211.501 et seq. 
Sec. 78-25. - Certification of cost of improvement. 
    Upon completion of a public improvement made pursuant to this chapter, the financing thereof and the payment of the cost thereof, the city clerk shall certify to the city council the total cost of such improvement, together with the amount of the original roll for the improvement. 
(Code 1974, § 27-41) 
Sec. 78-26. - Additional assessments to cover deficiency in costs. 
    Should the assessments in any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expense incident thereto, or to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such assessment roll, then the city council may make additional assessments to supply the deficiency against the city and the several lots and parcels of land, in same ratio as the original assessments. The additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed 25 percent of the assessments as originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the city council is held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notices shall be published and mailed, as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1974, § 27-42) 
Sec. 78-27. - Disposition of funds when assessment exceeds cost of improvement. 
    In cases in which special assessments prove larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto, the excess may be placed in the general fund of the city, if such excess is five percent or less of the assessment, but, should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five percent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed. The refund shall be made by a credit against future unpaid installments to the extent that such installments then exist, and the balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by special assessments. 
(Code 1974, § 27-43) 
Sec. 78-28. - Limitation on suits and actions. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment: 
(1)  Unless, within 30 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the city council of intention to file a suit or action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal; and 
(2)  Unless such suit or action shall be commenced within 60 days after confirmation of the roll. 
(Code 1974, § 27-44) 
Sec. 78-29. - Illegal assessments; reassessment procedure. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the city council, is invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the city council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have the power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment, and for the collection thereof, shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for in the original assessment, and whenever any sum or part thereof levied upon any property in the assessment so set aside has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied on the reassessment, or if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be made. 
(Code 1974, § 27-45) 
Sec. 78-30. - Effect of vacating special assessment. 
    No judgment or decree nor any act of the city council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the premises, or which by regular mode of proceeding may have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
(Code 1974, § 27-46) 
Sec. 78-31. - Special requirements for street paving improvements. 
    Special assessments made for the purpose of paying the cost of paving any local street shall be assessed pro rata and according to the frontage of each parcel abutting upon the improvement. In the case where the paving abuts the side of any corner lot, the corner lot shall be assessed 60 percent thereof, and the remaining 40 percent shall be assessed pro rata and according to the frontage of each parcel lying within 50 percent of the block in which the corner lot is located. If, from the shape or size of any such parcel of land, the assessment thereof, according to the formula set out in this section, would be unjust or disproportionate to the assessments on the other parcels of land in the district, the city council may assess such parcel of land as in its opinion may be just. 
(Code 1974, § 27-47) 
Sec. 78-32. - Special requirements for sidewalk improvements or nuisance abatement. 
    The assessment for the cost of the construction or maintenance of any sidewalk, or the abatement of any hazard or nuisance to be made pursuant to subsections (v), (w), (x) and (y) of section 2.3 of the Charter, or for any similar assessment against the individual or property, shall be made by resolution of the city council. Notice of the time at which the city council will act thereon shall be given by first class mail to the owner of the property to be assessed, as shown by the current tax roll of the city, except that no notice shall be required in the case of assessments for the removal of weeds or any hazards. For the purpose of collection of such assessments, the adoption of such resolution shall be equivalent to the confirmation of a special assessment roll. The amount of any such special assessment shall become a debt to the city, upon adoption of such resolution, and shall be subject to the collection fees, and become a lien, as provided in section 11.10 of the Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 27-48) 
Sec. 78-33. - Procedure for single lot assessments. 
    When any expenditure is made on account of any separate or single lot, parcel of land, or premises, which, by the provisions of the Charter or by law, the city is authorized to charge and collect as a special assessment against the lot, parcel of land, or premises, and which assessment is not of that class of special assessments required to be made pro rata upon lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district, a statement of the labor or services for which such expenditure was incurred, verified by the controller, with a description of the lot and the name of the owner or person chargeable therewith, if known, shall be reported to the city council in the manner prescribed by it. The city council shall determine the part of such expenditure that shall be charged, and the person against whom, if known, and the premises upon which the charge shall be levied as a special assessment. As often as the city council deems expedient, the city clerk shall give notice of the several amounts so determined and reported to the several persons chargeable therewith. The notice shall be sent by first class mail to the last known addresses of such persons as shown on the assessment roll of the city, or by publication. The notice shall state the basis of the assessment, and the amount thereof, and shall give a reasonable time, not less than 30 days, within which payment shall be made to the city treasurer. In all cases where payment is not made within the time set, the fact shall be reported by the city treasurer to the city assessor, who shall charge such amounts, together with a penalty of ten percent of such amounts, against the persons or real property chargeable therewith, on the next tax roll. 
(Code 1974, § 27-49) 
Chapter 82 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any road, street, sidewalk or alley saved from repeal, § 1-12(10); any ordinance establishing the grade or any road, street or sidewalk saved from repeal, § 1-12(11); consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places, § 6-1; peddlers and transient merchants, § 22-301 et seq.; community development, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; franchises and right-of-way licenses and permits, ch. 50; manufactured homes, ch. 62; distributing or scattering in public places, § 66-444; parks and recreation, ch. 70; special assessments, ch. 78; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 86; street and subdivision names, § 86-136; streets, § 86-161 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94; driving across sidewalk or pedestrian right-of-way into business premises, § 94-5; vegetation, ch. 102; certain varieties of trees and shrubs prohibited in public places, § 102-38; fastening materials on public property which impede growth, § 102-43; injuring trees and shrubs in public places, § 102-44; waterways, ch. 106; interfering with streets while launching or hauling out boats, § 106-2; zoning, ch. 110; frontage on public street, § 110-683; permit for moving buildings, app. A, § A-76. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Special assessment not to excuse violations. 
    Whenever any person fails to perform any act required by this chapter for which a special assessment may be made as prescribed in this Code, this shall not relieve such person from the penalty prescribed for violations of this Code in section 1-8. 
(Code 1974, § 28-6) 
Sec. 82-2. - Damaging or interfering with streets, barricades or signs. 
    No unauthorized person shall move, alter, deface, injure or destroy any part or accessory of any street or alley or any sign or barricade erected or placed to protect, warn or guide the public. 
(Code 1974, § 28-1) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 82-3. - Obstructing street or other public place. 
    No person shall obstruct or encumber any street, alley or any public space with any article or thing whatsoever. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(28), 28-2) 
Sec. 82-4. - Encroachments over street or sidewalk. 
    No person shall suspend anything above any sidewalk or within any street area unless expressly authorized by this Code. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(28), 28-3) 
Sec. 82-5. - Display of merchandise or placement of signs in streets or sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall place, store or exhibit any goods, wares or merchandise or material for sale, nor solicit for sales of goods or services, upon any public street or alley in the city, or place any sign or advertising device thereon. Violations of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, a participating merchant may utilize public street space duly authorized and designated for the display and sale of merchandise during a city sponsored "special event" only, as defined in this code, by first obtaining a permit for the event from the city, which permit shall be displayed on site at all times during the event. Use of the street by a merchant, or other person authorized by the merchant, in the "special event" area, without a valid permit shall constitute a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $250.00 per day. 
(c)  No merchant shall place, store or exhibit any goods, wares or merchandise or material which are not maintained in its regular inventory, upon any public sidewalk in the city during a "special event", nor permit or engage another to solicit, display or offer for sale any such goods or merchandise, in the sidewalk area immediately in front of or adjacent to their property. 
(d)  No merchant shall place, store or exhibit any goods, wares, merchandise or material on the public sidewalk, or allow another to do so, in such a manner so as to obstruct the free and unobstructed passage of pedestrians. 
(e)  Violations of subsections (c) or (d), shall constitute a municipal civil infraction with a fine of $50.00 per day 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(28), 28-4; Ord. No. 774, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 82-6. - Leaving construction debris on sidewalk. 
    No person owning, building or repairing any house or other building shall permit any lumber, brick, plaster, mortar, earth, clay, sand, stone or other material to remain on the sidewalk after sunset of the day upon which it was placed there, without permission, in writing, from the chief of police, subject to any safeguards prescribed by the chief of police. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(28), 28-5) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Sec. 82-7. - Removal of snow, ice and rubbish from sidewalk. 
    The occupant of any premises, or the owner of any unoccupied premises, is required to keep the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such premises cleared, insofar as it is practicable and reasonable, from snow, ice, rubbish, excessive dirt or any encumbrance, to facilitate pedestrian use. Whenever any snow or ice has fallen or accumulated, it shall be cleared within 12 hours after it has fallen or accumulated. If the owner or occupant fails to comply with this requirement, the city may remove the snow, ice, rubbish or other material and charge the cost against the abutting property as provided in section 78-32. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(28), 28-33) 
Sec. 82-8. - Removal of snow and debris from condominium developments. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a duly authorized annual request from the condominium association representing a condominium development consisting of single-family units with individual off-street parking, the city may provide street snow clearing and sweeping services on qualified streets within the development subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  That the entrance street to the development not be gated or otherwise have an obstructed or controlled access; 
(2)  That the streets to be cleared in the development are first examined and certified made by the city engineer as being of sufficient size, shape and weight-bearing capacity to accommodate the city's existing equipment; 
(3)  That the development consists of units with off-street parking; 
(4)  That the association, together with the individual owners, have enacted and actively enforce requirements that vehicles parked on the street be removed during sweepings and snow fall events so as to facilitate clearing, the failure of which shall relieve the city of any obligation to clear and may, in the event of repeated violations, result in forfeiture or denial of future service; 
(5)  That the association and its members acknowledge that clearing of private streets in which there is no public right-of-way will necessarily result in the unnatural accumulation of snow which may be relocated by the clearing equipment into driveways, driveway approaches, sidewalks and private lawns causing access obstructions and/or property damage for which the city will not be responsible, and that such clearing will occur on a nonpriority basis permitting the primary streets and public roads in the city to be cleared first; 
(6)  That the association shall execute on behalf of its members, and submit at the time of application, the city's waiver, release and indemnification agreement waiving and releasing the city from claims for property damage and personal injuries associated with the clearing service. Failure to do so shall result in denial of applications. 
(b)  Applications for service must be made annually to the city and postmarked no later than december 15th of each year to assist the city in planning for the provision of the additional service. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 11-21-2005) 
Secs. 82-9-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Curb cuts and sidewalks replacement, app. A, § A-4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 82-31-82-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSSWALK, CURB CUT OR DRIVEWAY PERMIT 

Sec. 82-51. - Required. 
    No person shall construct, alter or change any crosswalk or driveway apron or any opening in or through any curb in any street or public way without first procuring a permit from the city engineering and building department and paying the charges established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 28-17) 
Sec. 82-52. - Agreement to construct driveway apron prerequisite to issuance of curb cut permit. 
    No permit to cut any curb shall be issued by the engineering and building department unless the applicant shall agree in such application, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to install a driveway apron of concrete or other material of comparable quality within 90 days after completion of the cut. 
(Code 1974, § 28-18) 
Sec. 82-53. - Plans and specifications. 
    No work for which a permit is required under this division shall be done by any person except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the engineering and building department. Such plans and specification shall be approved if they are consistent with all laws and ordinances and do not endanger public safety. 
(Code 1974, § 28-19) 
Sec. 82-54. - Bond or insurance. 
    No permit shall be granted for any work under this division until a bond or policy of insurance has been filed with the engineering and building department. The bond or policy of insurance shall be in the sum of $1,000.00, unless a larger bond shall be required by the city council at the time any permit is granted by it upon appeal. All bonds or policies of insurance shall be conditioned to pay all damages to the streets of the city and to hold the city harmless of every other damage of every other nature, whether to persons or property, for which the city may be held liable by reason of, or which is occasioned by, the doing of a thing or the exercise of the privilege for which the permit upon which the bond or policy of insurance was based, was granted. 
(Code 1974, § 28-20) 
Sec. 82-55. - Appeals. 
    If the engineering and building department shall refuse to issue any permit required by this division, the applicant may appeal to the city council, which shall grant a hearing thereon. The decision of the city council on such appeal shall be final. In granting a permit after such hearing, the city council may impose such conditions therefor as it may deem desirable to protect the safety of persons and property during the moving of any building and the replacement of any utility wires, poles and other street appurtenances as may be moved or taken down therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 28-21) 
Sec. 82-56. - Inspection of work. 
    All work done pursuant to any permit issued under this division shall be inspected by the city engineer or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1974, § 28-22) 
Sec. 82-57. - Suspension or revocation. 
    The city engineer may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this division where either the workmanship or materials used do not conform to the plans and specifications approved or required upon issuance of the permit, or when the terms of any permit or this chapter are violated. No person shall perform any work authorized by any permit or cause any such work to be performed while that permit is suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1974, § 28-23) 
Secs. 82-58-82-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 82-81. - Permit required; posting of permit. 
    No person shall construct any sidewalk without first procuring a permit from the engineering and building department. Permits issued pursuant to this division shall be prominently displayed on the construction site for which the permit is issued. 
(Code 1974, § 28-29, 28-30) 
Sec. 82-82. - Specifications. 
    No person shall construct any sidewalk except in accordance with the lines, grade, slope and specifications established by the city engineer. Such specifications shall be consistent with public safety. 
(Code 1974, § 28-31) 
Sec. 82-83. - Sidewalk repairs. 
    Whenever it becomes necessary to repair any existing sidewalk in the city, the entire cost of the repairs shall be paid from the general fund of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the city engineer to report to the city council all existing sidewalks in need of repair, and the approximate cost of repairing the sidewalks, and file a completed report with the city council at the conclusion of the repairs. 
(Code 1974, § 28-32) 
Secs. 82-84-82-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 82-101. - Authority to make additional rules and regulations. 
    The engineering and building department may make such additional rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the city council, pertaining to the making of openings or excavations in streets, in the building of any vault, stair or area in or under the streets, as are necessary to secure the health and safety of the public and for the protection of property. Such rules and regulations shall constitute the standards upon which the permit required by this division shall be issued. 
(Code 1974, § 28-40) 
Sec. 82-102. - Permit required. 
    No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street or public place without first procuring a permit therefor from the engineering and building department. 
(Code 1974, § 28-39) 
Sec. 82-103. - Barricades required. 
    No person making an opening in a street, alley or public place shall fail to guard the opening fully during the period of construction, and no person using or causing any such opening to be used shall fail to guard or barricade the opening while in use, so as to protect the safety of the public. 
(Code 1974, § 28-41) 
Sec. 82-104. - Duty to close opening. 
    No person using any street opening or causing a street opening to be used shall fail to close the opening in accordance with the directions of the engineering and building department. 
(Code 1974, § 28-42) 
Sec. 82-105. - Payment of costs. 
    Each applicant for a permit to open a street shall pay the cost of making the opening and restoring the surface of the street to its proper condition, which cost shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 28-43) 
Secs. 82-106-82-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FARMERS' MARKET 

Sec. 82-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Farmer means any person offering for sale any farm product, be it produce, meat, eggs, poultry or otherwise. It need not be raised by the farmer. 
    Invention means any item, be it metal, crockery, cloth, glass, wood or otherwise, that is offered for sale. It need not be made by the person offering it for sale. 
    Location means any paved or improved city-owned parking lot or street so designated by the director of the parks and recreation department and agreed by council resolution. 
    Time means from 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. Saturday only, starting June 1 and ending October 31, unless given special permission by council resolution. In a special permission, the council can insist on special conditions such as time, place, items or otherwise not mentioned in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 121/2-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-132. - Participation in program; exemption from license requirement. 
    Any person wishing to take part in the farmers' market program and invention sale may do so, provided he makes an affidavit to the city clerk to this effect. A certificate shall be issued in such case, showing that the affiant is exempt from the provisions of the city ordinance requiring a license. There will be no charge. 
(Code 1974, § 121/2-2) 
Sec. 82-133. - Operation of program. 
    The farmers' market program shall be under the direction of the parks and recreation program and shall abide by all rules and regulations promulgated by the city and the state. 
(Code 1974, § 121/2-3) 
Sec. 82-134. - Trash containers; removal of trash. 
    Each participant in the farmers' market shall provide his own container for his own trash and take it with him at the designated closing time or when he leaves. 
(Code 1974, § 121/2-4) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 74. 
Sec. 82-135. - Designation of sales areas. 
    The director of parks and recreation or his assistants shall designate each sales area in the farmers' market to the certificate holder. 
(Code 1974, § 121/2-5) 
Sec. 82-136. - Advertising. 
    The director of parks and recreation may have erected any large signs, billboards or newspaper advertisements deemed necessary for the success of the farmers' market program. 
(Code 1974, § 121/2-6) 
Sec. 82-137. - Prohibited conduct. 
    Any person participating in the farmers' market who conducts his stand or himself in a way that is a nuisance shall be asked or forced to leave and his certificate revoked. 
(Code 1974, § 121/2-7) 
Sec. 82-138. - Compliance with state and federal regulations. 
    All state and federal regulations, if any, must be observed at the farmers' market as provided for by law. The certificate in this case is not an exemption. 
(Code 1974, § 121/2-8) 
Chapter 86 - SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat saved from repeal, § 1-12(12); community development, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98; vegetation, ch. 102; waterways, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110; subdivision plan review fees, app. A, § A-86. 
State Law reference- Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lateral sewer means one which serves or is intended to serve as an outlet for a local district and empty into a trunk outlet with other districts. 
    Parking space means an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of drives or aisles giving access thereto, accessible from streets or alleys, and to be usable for the storage or parking of self-propelled passenger automobiles. 
    Subdivide has the meaning ascribed to it in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Trunk line sewer means one which serves or is intended to serve as a common outlet for a number of district laterals. 
(Code 1974, § 29-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Subdivision defined, MCL 560.102(f). 
Sec. 86-32. - Variances. 
(a)  Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with this article, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the general city plan or this article. 
(b)  In granting variances and modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Code 1974, § 29-7) 
Secs. 86-33-86-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLATS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 86-61. - Approved plats deemed part of city plan. 
    Every plat approved by the planning commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of, or an addition to, or a detail of, the city plan and a part thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 29-2) 
Sec. 86-62. - Approval of plat by council required prior to transmitting plat to other approving authorities. 
    No plat shall be transmitted to any county or state approving authority for official action as required by the state platting procedure until each plat shall have, in the first instance, been approved by the city council, in accordance with the regulations of this article and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 29-3) 
Sec. 86-63. - Descriptions of subdivided lands not to be by metes and bounds. 
    No description of any lot or parcel in a plat of a subdivision shall be by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer of the lot or parcel. 
(Code 1974, § 29-4) 
Sec. 86-64. - Property not to be conveyed by reference to non-recorded plat. 
    No person shall sell or convey any lot in any plat by reference thereto until the plat has been duly recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(Code 1974, § 29-5) 
Sec. 86-65. - Sale of improperly subdivided land. 
    Any sale of or option or contract to sell land subdivided contrary to the provisions of this article shall be voidable as provided in section 267 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.267). 
(Code 1974, § 29-6) 
Secs. 86-66-86-80. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Preliminary Plat[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Preliminary plats, MCL 560.111 et seq. 

Sec. 86-81. - Application for approval. 
    An application, in writing, shall be submitted to the planning commission by the owner or his authorized representative for approval of a preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision lying in the limits of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 29-18) 
Sec. 86-82. - Contents. 
    Three copies of the preliminary plat at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch showing the following shall be submitted with the application for approval of the preliminary plat: 
(1)  The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, a description of the land to be platted, the name and address of the owner and the technical author of the plan. 
(2)  The location of existing property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, utilities and other physical features. 
(3)  The location of the adjoining streets, utilities, buildings and other physical features which relate to the development of the subdivision. 
(4)  The location, name and width of proposed streets, alleys, easements and public utilities, parks, plantings, lots and building lines on the property to be subdivided. 
(5)  Any engineering data deemed necessary relative to the topography, street cross sections, sewer elevations, water elevations and other pertinent matters. 
(6)  The proposed use of the property. 
(7)  The areas proposed to be dedicated for public purposes. 
(8)  The proposed grade elevations at street intersections or breaks of grades. 
(9)  The date, north point and graphic scale. 
(Code 1974, § 29-19) 
State Law reference- General specifications for preliminary plat, MCL 560.111. 
Sec. 86-83. - Filing fee. 
    The subdivider shall pay a filing fee to the city treasurer at the time a preliminary plat is filed with the planning commission. The fee shall be as established by the city council and shall cover the cost of advertising and notices, the cost of checking statements, and the cost of recording the approved plat. 
(Code 1974, § 29-20) 
State Law reference- Fees authorized, MCL 560.246. 
Sec. 86-84. - Tentative approval. 
    Preliminary plats shall be subject to the tentative approval of the planning commission, which shall take into consideration the city requirements and the most appropriate use of the land. Particular attention will be given to the standards of design, the justification for the development of public improvements and the subdivision conformity to the existing street plan. The width, location and arrangement of streets, the dimensions of lots, the location of utilities and other features will be studied. No preliminary plat shall be approved by the planning commission without first affording a public hearing thereon. 
(Code 1974, § 29-21; Ord. No. 702, § 1, 3-6-2006) 
State Law reference- Tentative approval of preliminary plat, MCL 560.112. 
Sec. 86-85. - Subdivider to be advised of required changes if plat is disapproved. 
    If the preliminary plat is not approved, a list of the changes necessary to render the plan acceptable shall be made known to the subdivider. 
(Code 1974, § 29-22) 
Sec. 86-86. - Signing of approved plans; filing of copies. 
    Plans tentatively approved by the planning commission shall bear the signature of the chairperson of the commission and one copy shall be filed in the office of the city engineer, one copy shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, one copy shall be filed with the planning commission and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. 
(Code 1974, § 29-23) 
Sec. 86-87. - Approval of preliminary plat does not constitute acceptance of subdivision. 
    The approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute an acceptance of a subdivision. 
(Code 1974, § 29-24) 
Secs. 86-88-86-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Final Plat[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Final plats, MCL 560.131 et seq. 

Sec. 86-101. - Time limit for filing. 
    The final or record subdivision plat shall be submitted to the planning commission in quadruplicate within one year after approval of the preliminary plat.f If the final plat is not filed within one year after approval of the preliminary plat, the approval of the preliminary plat shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and the application is granted by the planning commission. 
(Code 1974, § 29-25) 
Sec. 86-102. - Preparation. 
    If a preliminary plat meets the approval of the planning commission, then the subdivider may proceed to make an accurate survey of the property and prepare the final plat. 
(Code 1974, § 29-26) 
Sec. 86-103. - Standards; contents. 
    The final plat shall be prepared and presented in accordance with the provisions of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and, in addition, shall show the following: 
(1)  The plat shall make reference to any private restrictions which shall accompany the plat, and shall contain proper acknowledgement of the owner and mortgagees accepting the platting restrictions. 
(2)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (1) of this section, the planning commission shall require a statement from each subdivider indicating: 
a.  Ownership of the property proposed to be subdivided as evidenced by an abstract of title certified to date, or, at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance. 
b.  The improvements and utilities to be installed by the subdivider. 
c.  The private restrictions to be imposed upon the property after subdivision. 
d.  The streets, alleys and parks as agreed upon with the planning commission with a recital that the streets, alleys and parks are dedicated to the use of the public. 
e.  That the easements indicated on the plat are not dedicated to the public, but the right to use the easements is reserved for public utilities and that no permanent structures are to be erected within the lines of the easements. 
f.  The total area in acres of the tract to be subdivided. 
g.  The net area in lots. 
h.  The total lot frontage in feet, classified as to residential frontage, business frontage and industrial frontage. 
i.  The area in streets. 
j.  The area in parks. 
k.  The improvements and utilities to be installed by the subdivider as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 29-27) 
State Law reference- Final plat specifications, MCL 560.132 et seq. 
Sec. 86-104. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 702, § 2, adopted March 6, 2006, repealed § 86-104, which pertained to the requirement of a hearing before action on a final plat and was derived from Code 1974, § 29-28. 
Sec. 86-105. - Notice of hearing. 
    Any final plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing for approval of the plat shall be sent. The notice shall be sent to the person at the address shown on the plat, by registered mail, of the time and place of the hearing not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names and addresses appear upon the latest city tax record. 
(Code 1974, § 29-29) 
Sec. 86-106. - Approval, modification or disapproval. 
(a)  The planning commission shall examine the map for compliance with the preliminary plat and the required changes thereof and shall approve, modify or disapprove the final plat within 60 days after submission thereof to it, provided that the applicant for the planning commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. 
(b)  If the planning commission fails to approve, modify or disapprove the plat within 60 days after submission, or within such period of time as has been extended, it may be transmitted to the city council for final determination. The city council shall have the power to accept or reject the approval, modification or disapproval of any plat by the planning commission. 
(Code 1974, § 29-30) 
Secs. 86-107-86-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to require improvements, MCL 560.182. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 86-131. - Approval of plans and specifications; supervision of work. 
    Plans and specifications for installations made pursuant to this division must be approved by the city engineer and the construction must be carried out under the direction of the office of the city engineer in strict accordance with the specifications established by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 29-88) 
Sec. 86-132. - Prerequisites to acceptance of plat. 
    A plat will not be approved or dedication of a street accepted unless the improvements required by this division are made, or a surety bond with two sureties or a surety company bond is furnished to guarantee the improvements. 
(Code 1974, § 29-89) 
Sec. 86-133. - Time limit for completing improvements. 
    Whenever any utility or other improvement is required to be installed under the provisions of this division, the installation shall be completed within a period established by resolution of the city council, such period commencing from the date of approval of the plat, unless delay is caused by strike, disaster, calamity, war, riot, insurrection, act of God or other cause beyond the control of the owner. 
(Code 1974, § 29-90) 
Sec. 86-134. - Inspector. 
    The city engineer shall assign a city inspector to inspect work done pursuant to this division for such time as may be necessary to ensure full compliance with the required specifications. The wages of the inspector shall be paid from a sum for inspection to be deposited by the subdivider with the city treasurer. 
(Code 1974, § 29-91) 
Sec. 86-135. - Conformity to master thoroughfare plan. 
    All subdivisions shall be in harmony with the master thoroughfare plan. 
(Code 1974, § 29-42) 
Sec. 86-136. - Street and subdivision names. 
(a)  Except as to certain nonthrough streets, described in Section 166, all proposed streets, obviously in alignment with another already existing and named street must bear the same name as the existing street. New street names shall not duplicate existing street names except as provided herein, and all names must be approved by the planning commission. 
(b)  Duplication of proposed subdivision names with the names of existing subdivisions shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1974, § 29-31; Ord. No. 701, § 1, 2-21-2006) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Sec. 86-137. - Monuments. 
    Monuments shall conform to and shall be placed as required by the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 29-62) 
State Law reference- Monuments, MCL 560.125. 
Sec. 86-138. - Use and area restrictions. 
    Property use and area restrictions must be in accordance with chapter 110, pertaining to zoning. 
(Code 1974, § 29-74) 
Sec. 86-139. - Procedure when use of property is more restricted than zoning designation. 
    Wherever property is subdivided with the intention that it shall have a use more restricted than that designated in chapter 110, such use shall be stated either in an application for an amendment to chapter 110 or in a separate statement filed with the planning commission. 
(Code 1974, § 29-75) 
Sec. 86-140. - Property unsuitable for building. 
    No property shall be subdivided for residential use if such is considered unsuitable for building purposes by the planning commission. 
(Code 1974, § 29-76) 
Sec. 86-141. - Number and location of business lots. 
    Business lots, when platted, shall bear a reasonable relation in number to the probable future number of families constituting the purchasing power of the neighborhood. The planning commission will reserve the right to allocate business lots in accordance with its master plan and chapter 110, pertaining to zoning. 
(Code 1974, § 29-77) 
Sec. 86-142. - Paved surfaces generally. 
    Off-street parking facilities in conjunction with business lots, sidewalks and roadways, including curbs, shall be installed in every new subdivision. 
(Code 1974, § 29-43) 
Sec. 86-143. - Alleys. 
    Alleys, having a minimum width of 24 feet, are required in the rear of all local business and commercial lots. A diagonal cutoff shall be made at all acute and right angle intersections of alleys sufficient to provide an inside turning radius of 30 feet. At the intersection of alley lines with street lines, a corner cutoff line shall be provided between points established by measuring a distance of five feet in both directions along the alley line and the street line from the point of their intersection. 
(Code 1974, § 29-55) 
Sec. 86-144. - Easements. 
    Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than six feet in width shall be provided on each side of rear lot lines and of side lot lines where necessary for utilities. Easements shall be direct and continuous from block to block. Easements along natural watercourses and channels shall conform substantially with the lines of the natural waterways and may be required to be wider than six feet. 
(Code 1974, § 29-56) 
Sec. 86-145. - Open space; park, school and playground sites. 
    Due consideration shall be given by the subdivider and the planning commission to the dedication or reservation of suitable sites for future schools, parks and playgrounds. The location of such sites shall conform as nearly as possible to the master plan of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 29-73) 
Sec. 86-146. - Conformance with zoning requirements for off-street parking facilities. 
    The subdivider and the planning commission shall consider the off-street parking provisions as provided for in chapter 110, pertaining to zoning, and make adequate allowance for such off-street parking. 
(Code 1974, § 29-69) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 110. 
Sec. 86-147. - Size of off-street parking areas. 
    Off-street parking facilities, on the basis of one parking space, exclusive of drives or aisles giving access thereto, shall be provided for each 60 square feet of platted business area. 
(Code 1974, § 29-57) 
Secs. 86-148-86-160. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Streets[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 

Sec. 86-161. - Relation to adjoining street system. 
(a)  The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the continuation of principal existing streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. In general, streets shall be of a width as great as that of the street so continued or projected. The centerline of such streets shall continue with the centerline of existing streets. 
(b)  In general, the streets shall extend to the boundary of the subdivision to provide proper access to adjoining property, and provide for proper connection with the highway system of contiguous land. 
(c)  Where the planning commission has adopted a plan or plat of a neighborhood or area of which the subdivision is a part and the proposed plat provides coordination with the street systems of the city different from that of continuations of projections of existing streets and the subdivider's plat conforms in general to such neighborhood or area plat or plan of the planning commission, the planning commission may approve the subdivider's plat. 
(d)  Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's tract, a sketch of a proposed future street system of the unsubmitted part shall be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street system of the part not submitted. 
(e)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(Code 1974, § 29-44) 
Sec. 86-162. - Access of lots to streets. 
    All lots, parks or public properties must have means of ingress and egress, either by a street, lane or drive. Building permits shall not be issued for the construction of buildings which do not have access on a public street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to a street, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 29-45) 
Sec. 86-163. - Accommodation of future streets when parcel is divided into large tracts. 
    Where a parcel of land is subdivided into larger tracts than for building lots, the platting shall not be such as to stop the opening of major streets and the extension of adjacent minor streets, which in the judgment of the planning commission should ultimately be opened and extended. 
(Code 1974, § 29-46) 
Sec. 86-164. - Intersections. 
    Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as is practicable. Streets converging at one point shall be reduced to the least practicable number. 
(Code 1974, § 29-47) 
Sec. 86-165. - Streets in relation to railroads. 
(a)  Whenever a subdivision is to be laid out adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, a street shall be placed parallel to the railroad. 
(b)  The intersection of the centerline of the parallel street with that of any street which crosses the railroad shall not be less than 300 feet from the line of the railroad right-of-way. 
(Code 1974, § 29-48) 
Sec. 86-166. - Dead-end streets. 
    Dead-end streets will not be approved if they exceed 750 feet in length or do not lend themselves to adequate fire protection as determined by the fire department and planning commission. Every permanent dead-end street shall be of such width at the closed end so as to permit a turn-around having an outside roadway radius so as to permit the proper turn-around area as approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1974, § 29-49; Ord. No. 700, § 1, 2006) 
Sec. 86-167. - Half streets. 
    The dedication of half streets will be permitted where a subdivision adjoins undeveloped property. If there already exists a dedicated and recorded half street or alley on an adjoining plat, the other half must be dedicated on the proposed plat to make the street or alley complete. 
(Code 1974, § 29-50) 
Sec. 86-168. - Width. 
(a)  The width for major streets shall conform to the width designated on the master thoroughfare plan. 
(b)  The minimum width for minor streets shall be 60 feet, except in cases where the topography or special conditions make a street of less width more suitable. The planning commission may waive the requirements of this subsection. 
(Code 1974, § 29-51) 
Sec. 86-169. - Grade. 
(a)  Profiles may be required of all streets at the discretion of the planning commission. 
(b)  The minimum grade allowed shall be four-tenths of one percent. 
(c)  The street cross section shall provide a slope from the property line to the curb. There shall be a minimum grade or wash of one-fourth inch per foot for the sidewalk and a minimum grade of three-eighths inch per foot for the area between the sidewalk and the curb. 
(Code 1974, § 29-52) 
Sec. 86-170. - Corner radius. 
    Curb corners shall be rounded with a radius of not less than 20 feet. Intersections where the interior angle is less than 60 degrees shall have the curb corners rounded with at least a 30-foot radius, and when the interior angle is less than 135 degrees it is recommended that the corner be rounded with a minimum radius of ten feet. Property lines at such corners shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
(Code 1974, § 29-53) 
Sec. 86-171. - Access to streets across ditches and watercourses. 
    Subdividers shall provide access to all proposed streets across watercourses or ditches in a standard manner approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1974, § 29-54) 
Sec. 86-172. - Street trees. 
    Whenever the planning commission deems it desirable in order to ensure continuity of purpose, street trees shall be planted in conformance with a planting plan approved by the city planning commission. 
(Code 1974, § 29-58) 
Sec. 86-173. - Street signs. 
    When, in the opinion of the planning commission, the identity of any street appears desirable, the establishment of street signs of the same type and design in general use within the community shall be required. 
(Code 1974, § 29-59) 
Secs. 86-174-86-190. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Sewers, Water Mains and Fire Hydrants[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; utilities, ch. 98. 

Sec. 86-191. - Required; installation. 
(a)  The installation of storm sewers, sanitary sewers, stormwater inlets, house connections from sewers to beyond the lot line location, water mains with house connections to the city main and fire hydrants at a location to be approved by the chief of the fire department shall be required in every subdivision. 
(b)  Whenever a trunk line sewer is to be installed, the city council shall establish by resolution the metes and bounds of the area it is intended to serve. 
(c)  Any person desiring to tie a lateral sewer into a trunk line sewer shall pay to the city the cost of installing the trunk line sewer, according to the ratio the area of the district to be served by the lateral sewer bears to the area established to be served by the trunk line sewer. Any cost of installation to be paid under the provisions of this subsection shall be deposited with the city before any installation is commenced. 
(d)  The cost of installation of lateral storm and sanitary sewers shall be paid by the subdivider. 
(e)  The cost of trunk line storm and sanitary sewers shall be paid by the subdivider or, if the land is unplatted, by the owner thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 29-60) 
Sec. 86-192. - Sewer and water installations on nonconforming lots. 
    Public sewer or water service shall not be provided for any dwelling or other structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of this article, except that such service may be installed in any structure when deemed necessary by the health department for the protection of the public health. 
(Code 1974, § 29-61) 
Secs. 86-193-86-210. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Lots and Blocks 

Sec. 86-211. - Building lines. 
    Building lines shall conform to the requirements of chapter 110, pertaining to zoning, and the master thoroughfare plan as provided by Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 29-63) 
Sec. 86-212. - Residential blocks. 
    Residential blocks shall not be less than 220 feet wide. Residential blocks shall not be less than 660 feet or more than 1,200 feet long. Where the blocks are more than 800 feet long, and the planning commission finds additional cross access desirable for the public welfare, a ten-foot crosswalk shall be provided near the center of the block. 
(Code 1974, § 29-64) 
Sec. 86-213. - Business, commercial and industrial blocks. 
    Business, commercial and industrial blocks shall not be less than 340 feet wide or less than 340 feet long. Where blocks are more than 340 feet long, a ten-foot crosswalk shall be provided near the center of the block. 
(Code 1974, § 29-65) 
Sec. 86-214. - Size of residential lots. 
    No lot classified as residential shall be platted that is less than 50 feet in width and less than 6,000 square feet in area; provided, however, that the lot sizes of any plat shall conform to the lot area as established by chapter 110 for the zoning district in which the lots are located. 
(Code 1974, § 29-66) 
Sec. 86-215. - Manner of measuring wedge-shaped lots. 
    Where it may be necessary to plat wedge-shaped lots in order to effect the best lot arrangement of a parcel of land, the lot width shall be measured at the front building line when the front lot line is narrower than the rear lot line. When the rear line of a wedge-shaped lot is narrower than the front lot line, the lot width shall be measured on a line 35 feet from and parallel to the rear property line. 
(Code 1974, § 29-67) 
Sec. 86-216. - Size of business or commercial lots. 
    No lot or parcel classified as business or commercial shall be platted that is less than 40 feet in width or less than 6,800 square feet in area. The area of the lot or parcel shall be sufficient in size as to provide an area for off-street parking equal to three times the size of the first floor area of the building, exclusive of aisles and drives, and the off-street parking shall be located within a distance of 300 feet from the building. Alleys shall be dedicated as required by the master plan or as approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1974, § 29-68) 
Sec. 86-217. - Side lot lines. 
    All side lot lines should be at right angles to straight street lines, or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation from this rule will give a better street and lot plan. 
(Code 1974, § 29-70) 
Sec. 86-218. - Lots with double frontage. 
    Lots with double frontage shall be discouraged insofar as possible, but, if provided, the lots must have sufficient depth so that a reasonable front yard may be provided on both street frontages to protect similar frontages on adjacent lots in each direction. 
(Code 1974, § 29-71) 
Sec. 86-219. - Corner lots. 
    Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the maintenance of building lines on both front and side. In normal cases, the width required will not be less than the amount of the established building lines on the side street, plus the irreducible buildable width and such side yard requirements as are provided for in chapter 110, pertaining to zoning. 
(Code 1974, § 29-72) 
Secs. 86-220-86-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DIVISION OF SUBDIVIDED LOTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Further partition or division of property, MCL 560.263. 

Sec. 86-251. - Purpose. 
    This article is enacted to provide for the partitioning or dividing of lots, outlots or other parcels of land in existing recorded plats into not more than four parts. 
(Code 1974, § 29-102) 
Sec. 86-252. - Procedure; conformance with zoning regulations. 
    Upon the filing of a petition, by the owners of all interest therein, with the city council, platted lots, outlots, or parcels of land in existing recorded plats may be partitioned or divided upon resolution of the city council into not more than four parts, each of which shall, in regard to width, depth and area, conform to the terms and provisions of chapter 110, pertaining to zoning. 
(Code 1974, § 29-103) 
Sec. 86-253. - Lots not served by public water and sewer system. 
    Lots, outlots or parcels of land in existing recorded plats not served by public sewer and public water systems shall not be further partitioned or divided unless the resulting lots, outlots or parcels are less than the minimum width and area provided under the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1974, § 29-104) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Lot widths, MCL 560.186. 
Sec. 86-254. - Division when land is to be owned by adjacent landowner. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent the city council from approving the division of any lot, outlot or parcel of land in a case where the owner of the divided parcel owns land immediately adjacent thereto or in a case where there is presented to the city council an executed agreement to sell and convey such divided parcel to the adjoining owner and where the combined width and area of the divided parcel and the adjacent parcel shall, as a single parcel, conform to the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 29-105) 
Chapter 90 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation, ch. IX. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-2(3); any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes no codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-12(13); any ordinance granting a tax exemption for specific property saved from repeal, § 1-12(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-161 et seq. 
State Law reference- General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 

Sec. 90-1. - Certain housing projects denied tax exemption. 
    The tax exemption established in section 15a(1) of Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1415a(1)) shall not apply to all or any class of housing projects within the city to which such subsection (1) applies. 
(Code 1974, § 17-8; Ord. No. 370, § 1, 12-3-1973) 
State Law reference- Authority to so provide, MCL 125.1415a(5). 
Chapter 94 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-12(15)a; any ordinance ordering, requiring or authorizing the erection or installation of traffic control signs, signals devices or markings saved from repeal, § 1-12(15)b; taxicabs, § 22-361 et seq.; motor vehicle noise, § 38-161 et seq.; transportation of explosives, § 42-291 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 58; placing handbills in vehicles, § 66-445; obstructing traffic, § 70-115; causing litter to fall into path of or hit vehicle, § 74-147; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; off-street parking requirements, § 110-673; off-street parking space lay-out, standards, construction and maintenance, § 110-674; vehicle storage, app. A, § A-10. 
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610; Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, MCL 480.11 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
Sec. 94-2. - Interpretation. 
    In the event of a conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.), the Michigan Vehicle Code shall control. In the event of conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.), the Michigan Vehicle Code shall control. 
Sec. 94-3. - Vehicle Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to 1999 P.A. 258, 259 and 260, there is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, the Michigan Vehicle Code (MVC), 2012 edition, being 1949 P.A. 300, MCL 257.1 through 257.923, as amended from time to time, including but not limited to MCL 257.625(1)(c) and the penalties associated therewith. An official copy of such code is on file in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted by reference as fully set forth herein, save and except for those provisions thereof which are hereinafter amended or deleted and save and except that if any of the provisions of such codes conflict with any other ordinance of the city, the other provision of the traffic code as amended, or the ordinance of the city, as the case may be, shall control. 
(Ord. No. 677, § 1, 11-15-2004; Ord. No. 742, § 1, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 762, § 1, 5-7-2012) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt Michigan Vehicle Code by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 94-4. - Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to 1999 P.A. 258, 259 and 260, there is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, the Michigan Vehicle Code (MVC), 2005 edition, being 1949 P.A. 300, MCL 257.1-257.923, as amended from time to time. An official copy of such code is on file in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted by reference as fully set forth herein, save and except for those provisions thereof which are hereinafter amended or deleted and save and except that if any of the provisions of such codes conflict with any other ordinance of the city, the other provision of the traffic code as amended, or the ordinance of the city, as the case may be, shall control. 
(b)  References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Trenton. 
(c)  The following definitions and procedures formerly applied to the 1979 Edition of the Uniform Traffic Code, shall continue in force and effect without reference to specific sections of the 1979 Edition of the Uniform Traffic Code which is hereby repealed: 
R 28.1140 (Rule 140). Permit for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. No person shall back a vehicle to the curb for purposes of loading or unloading merchandise, materials or passengers without first securing a special permit issued by the city for that purpose. The traffic engineer may authorize the clerk to issue special permits to permit the backing of vehicles to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. A permit may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle. A permit shall grant to such person the privileges which are stated in the permit and which are authorized in this code. A permit must be visibly displayed in the front window of the backed vehicle. The fee for the issuance of such a permit shall be as established by the city council. 
Prior ordinances to remain in effect. All intersection stops and yield right-of-way requirements, regulations on stopping, standing or parking, prima facie speed limits, one-way streets, roadways and alleys, crosswalks, restricted turns, through streets, play streets, angle parking zones, all-night parking restrictions, curb loading zones, public carrier stands, parking meter zones and spaces, weight restrictions, no passing zones, and traffic control devices heretofore established and effective on the effective date of this code shall be deemed established hereunder and shall remain effective until otherwise rescinded or modified. A list of traffic ordinances which are saved from repeal may be found on file in the office of the city clerk, namely, section 3 of Ordinance No. 371-44. 
Parking permits in front of residence. Upon certain conditions hereinafter set forth, parking permits shall be issued to any resident by the chief of police, granting the resident permission to park an automobile in a restricted parking space on the street directly in front of such resident's home, provided such home is not located in a commercial building of any kind. Such resident shall make application to the chief of police setting forth all relevant information as required by the chief of police. Based upon such application, the chief of police shall have authority to grant such parking permit, which shall be in the form of a suitable sticker stating the name of the holder, his address, and the date of issuance and signed by the chief of police. The holder shall then attach such sticker to the windshield of his automobile; provided, however, that such permit shall not grant the holder any privilege to park in any area where or when parking is prohibited, and provided further that no permit shall be issued to anyone residing in a multiple dwelling except in the discretion of the chief of police with regard to the number of residential units and the available space for parking fronting such residence. Under no circumstances shall more than one permit be granted to each dwelling unit. 
Restrictions on trucks and commercial vehicles upon use of streets. No person shall operate or stop, stand or park any truck or commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess of 20,000 pounds in the following designated areas except for local delivery and buses: all portions of the northbound and southbound lanes of West Jefferson Avenue between King Road and Van Horn Road. 
"Local delivery" is defined, for purposes of this section, to mean a delivery or pickup of materials, manufactured products, goods, wares or merchandise from or to any residential or business establishment located within the weight restricted area. 
Ice cream trucks, stopping for, special equipment requirements. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Ice cream truck" means every motor vehicle in which ice cream, ice milk, frozen dairy products or ice flavored with syrup is carried for purposes of retail sale on the streets of the city. 
(2)  "Vend" or "vending" means offering ice cream, ice milk, frozen dairy products or ice flavored with syrup for sale from a motor vehicle on the streets of the city. 
(b)  Drivers to stop for ice cream trucks. 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking from either direction an ice cream truck stopped on the street shall stop before reaching the truck when the flashing lights and stop signal arm described in subsection (c)(2) are in use. After stopping, a driver may proceed past such truck at a reasonable and prudent speed, not exceeding 15 miles per hour, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian who crosses the roadway to or from the ice cream truck. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle on a street with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing an ice cream truck on a different roadway. 
(c)  Equipment requirements for ice cream trucks. In addition to other equipment required by law, every ice cream truck shall be equipped with: 
(1)  Signal lamps mounted at the same level and as high and as widely spaced laterally as practicable. These lamps shall be five to seven inches in diameter and shall display two alternately flashing amber lights on the front of the vehicle and two alternately flashing red lights on the rear of the vehicle, both lights visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight upon a straight level street. 
(2)  A stop signal arm that can be extended horizontally from the left side of the truck duplicating the design size and specifications shown in subsection (4). This arm shall be red and white in color and contain two alternately flashing lights three to five inches in diameter visible at 300 feet to the front and rear in normal sunlight upon a straight level highway. The color of the two lights facing to the front shall be amber and the two lights facing to the rear shall be red. The bottom of the signal arm shall be between 40 and 48 inches above the highway. 
(3)  A convex mirror mounted on the front so the driver in his normal seating position can see the area in front of the truck obscured by the hood. 
(4)  The stop signal arm required by subsection (c)(2) shall be as follows: 


Stop Signal 
(5)  Ice cream vendors shall have until January 1, 1977, to comply with the equipment requirements of this section. 
(d)  Use of special lights and stop arm on ice cream trucks. 
(1)  The driver of an ice cream truck stopped on the streets for the purpose of vending shall actuate the special flashing lights and extend the stop signal arm required by subsection (c)(2). 
(2)  These lights and the stop signal arm shall not be used when the truck is in motion or at any time the truck is stopped for a purpose other than vending. 
(e)  Inspection required. Every ice cream truck shall be inspected by the police department once each year prior to its use in this city for the purpose of retail sales of frozen dairy products. The police department shall inspect each ice cream truck to determine whether it complies with this section and other state and local laws. 
(f)  Vending restrictions. 
(1)  A person shall not vend on main thoroughfares or in the central business district on streets where the speed limit exceeds 25 miles per hour or other areas of the city where sale is already prohibited by local ordinance. 
(2)  A person shall not vend within 500 feet of any property used as a school from one hour before the regular school day to one hour after the regular school day, provided this subsection shall not apply on days when school is not attended by children or on school property when vending has been approved in writing by the principal. 
(3)  A person shall vend only when the ice cream truck is lawfully parked or stopped. 
(4)  A person shall vend only from the side of the truck away from moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb or edge of the street. 
(5)  A person shall not vend to a person standing in the roadway. 
(6)  A person shall not stop on the left side of a one-way street to vend. 
(g)  Backing restricted. The driver of an ice cream truck shall not back the truck to make or attempt a sale. 
(h)  Unauthorized riders prohibited. 
(1)  The driver of an ice cream truck shall not permit any unauthorized person to ride in or on the vehicle. 
(2)  A person shall not ride in or on an ice cream truck unless employed by its owner or unless authorized in writing to do so by the owner or police department. 
Parking motorcycles on residential streets restricted. A motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall not be operated on residential streets after 12:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m. of each day; unless while taking the shortest and most direct route to or from the driver's residence from the nearest state trunkline. 
Speed limit of motorcycles on residential streets. The speed limit on all residential streets for motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be 25 miles per hour. 
Obedience to angle parking signs or markings. Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs, and within the designated space for one vehicle, so indicated by the markings. 
Restricted parking for certain trucks and buses. No person shall park any truck or bus weighing more than 5,000 pounds or measuring more than 30 feet in length, or any truck having a trailer or semitrailer attached, or permit any such truck or any trailer or semitrailer, whether coupled or not, to stand upon any part of any street or alley of the city for a period exceeding four hours, except for the purpose of loading or unloading, the making of emergency repairs, or at the direction or permission of the police department. 
Parking restricted during rubbish collection and snow removal. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Snow removal; penalty for violation; enforcement. It shall be unlawful to park, leave unattended or fail to remove any motor vehicle or trailer on any public street, highway or alleyway, or cause such vehicle or trailer to remain parked, after a snow fall and/or drifting snow of four inches or more, prior to the removal by city plowing of such street. All vehicles and/or trailers found to be in violation of this subsection shall be ticketed and the owner, if possible, notified to remove the vehicle from the public street, highway or alleyway. In addition, the vehicle and/or trailer may be removed from the public street, highway or alleyway at the expense of the vehicle owner. Such expense shall include all towing and storage charges attached to the vehicle. Enforcement of this subsection shall be under the direction of the police department personnel. 
(c)  Notification of restrictions. The director of the public services or his designee shall cause notification to be given to all person residing and those doing business in the area of the restrictions and penalties set forth by this section. Notification shall be made once by mail within a 90-day period from October 15, 1978, and three times by publication in the official city newspaper within the 90-day period. 
(d)  Exemption. A person may obtain a hardship permit from the police department by completing an application provided therefor, and signing an affidavit indicating that the residence does not have off-street parking, or off-street parking in inadequate by reason of his physical condition. 
(e)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all public streets, highways or alleyways located within the boundaries of the city. 
Stopping, standing and parking between property and curblines. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in that portion of the highway located between the property lot line or curb or edge of roadway, except where that area is designated as permitted parking and standing. 
(Code 1974, §§ 21-15-21-17; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 677, § 1, 11-15-2004; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 1-3-2006) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt Uniform Traffic Code by reference, MCL 257.951. 
Sec. 94-5. - Driving across sidewalk or pedestrian right-of-way into business premises. 
(a)  No person, while driving a motor vehicle, shall cross any sidewalk or pedestrian right-of-way for the purpose of gaining access to any business premises unless such person or the occupant of the motor vehicle does so for the purpose of transacting business on the premises. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "transaction of business" shall mean that one of the purposes of any person in entering a business premises in a vehicle shall be with the intent of engaging in a transaction with the proprietor of the business premises which is normally incidental to the nature of the business for which the public is invited and for which the premises is licensed. It shall be presumed that the entry upon such premises by any pedestrian or any person in the motor vehicle, without actually engaging in a business transaction, shall constitute prima facie evidence of violation of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 21-4) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Sec. 94-6. - Abandoned or junked vehicles on private property. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this subsection: 
    Dismantled vehicle and partially dismantled vehicle mean a vehicle from which some part which is ordinarily a major component of such vehicle has been removed or is missing. 
    Nonoperating vehicle means a vehicle which, by reason of dismantling, disrepair or other cause, is incapable of being propelled under its own power. 
    Unlicensed vehicle means a vehicle which is not equipped or displayed with a current year registration plate as required under the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
    Vehicle means a wheeled vehicle which is self-propelled or intended to be self-propelled. 
(b)  No person shall abandon any vehicle or leave any vehicle on any private property within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. Violations of the provisions of this subsection are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(c)  In the event of unique hardship arising from literal enforcement of this section, an owner of a vehicle may store or park on the owner's premises one unlicensed vehicle if the vehicle is operable and registered in the owner's name and such owner secures a permit to store or park such vehicle from the chief of police or his designee. Such permit shall be issued upon a further showing that doing so will not endanger public health or safety. Such permit shall state the reason for exemption, the conditions of the permit and the period of the permit. At any time that the chief of police or his designee determines the permit holder is in violation of the conditions of the permit, he shall notify the permit holder by written notice of the violation and such permit holder shall have 48 hours to comply with this section. Failure to comply with such notice shall be a violation of this section. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(22), 21-83, 21-85, 21-90) 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, MCL 257.252a et seq. 
Sec. 94-7. - Penalties; violation. 
(a)  Any provision of this chapter, including the Uniform Traffic Code adopted and amended herein, which describes an act or omission which constitutes a civil infraction under the terms of the Michigan Vehicle Code, shall be processed as a civil infraction and any person found to have committed a civil infraction may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00 and costs, unless provided otherwise by section 907 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.907). 
(b)  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, including the Motor Vehicle Code and the Uniform Traffic Code, adopted and amended herein, not constituting a civil infraction as herein provided, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment of not more than 93 days, or both. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, violations of MCL 257.625(1)(c) shall be punishable by one or more of the following: 
(1)  Community service for not more than 360 hours. 
(2)  Imprisonment for not more than 180 days. 
(3)  A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 2, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 664, § 2, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 742, § 1, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 762, § 1, 5-7-2012) 
Sec. 94-8. - Unlicensed vehicles on public property. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle, nor shall a vehicle's registered owner permit his or her vehicle to be parked, upon any public street or highway, unless there is attached to, and displayed on, the vehicle a current and valid registration plate issued for that vehicle. 
(b)  Display of a current registration plate shall not be required upon any damaged or disabled vehicle in the street, for not more than 72 hours, solely for the purpose of facilitating its removal by a licensed wrecking service, as evidenced by written contract, only if parked in front of the owner's residence and, if advance notice of the parking is provided to the police department. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction of not more than $50.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 10-16-2006) 
Sec. 94-9. - Required insurance. 
    Pursuant to 1956 P.A. 218, as amended, there is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, those provisions of the Michigan Insurance Code requiring the owner or registrant of any motor vehicle or motorcycle, which is required to be registered in the State of Michigan, to maintain security for payment of benefits under personal protection insurance, property protection insurance, and residual liability insurance in accordance with MCL 500.3102 through 500.3103, as amended from time to time. An official copy of such code is on file in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted by reference as fully set forth herein, save and except for those provisions thereof which are hereinafter amended or deleted. 
(Ord. No. 779, § 1, 12-2-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 779, § 1, adopted December 2, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as § 54-8. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 54-9. 
Sec. 94-10. - Texting or emailing by operator from moving vehicle. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not read, manually type, or send a text message on a wireless two-way communication device that is located in the person's hand or in the persons' lap, including a wireless telephone used in cellular telephone service or personal communication service, while operating a motor vehicle that is moving on a highway or street in this state. 
(b)  As used in this subsection, a wireless two-way communication device does not include a global position or navigation system that is affixed to the motor vehicle 
(c)  Subsection (a) does not apply to an individual who is using a device described in subsection (a) to do any of the following: 
(1)  Report a traffic accident, medical emergency, or serious road hazard to authorities. 
(2)  Report a situation in which the person believes his or her personal safety is in jeopardy. 
(3)  Report or avert the perpetration or potential perpetration of a criminal act against the individuals or another person. 
(4)  Carry out official duties as a police offer, law enforcement official, member of a paid or volunteer fire department, or operator of an emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 6-7-2010 
Sec. 94-11. - Penalties. 
    An individual who violates section 94-10 is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be ordered to pay a civil fine as follows: 
(1)  For a first violation, $100.00. 
(2)  For a second or subsequent violation, $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 1, 6-7-2010 
Secs. 94-12-94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BICYCLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of bicycles and toy vehicles, MCL 257.656 et seq; authority to regulate bicycles, MCL 257.606(1)(i). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-31. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  Any person 16 years of age and under who violates any of the provisions of this article relating to the vehicle traffic laws or the bicycle safe riding rules and regulations and the official police instructions for the safe operation of a bicycle shall be, for the first offense, reprimanded in writing by the police department, addressed to the parents or guardian of the offender, stating the nature of the violation and a warning that a repetition of the violation, or any other violation, must be prevented by the parents or guardian or the offender's registration certificate will be suspended for a period of time at the discretion of the police department and during that period of time the offender cannot ride his bicycle on the streets, highways, pathways and other public places. On the second offense the offender will be summoned to appear at police headquarters with his bicycle, accompanied by a parent or guardian, and, after a hearing on the violation, the offender's bicycle may be impounded for a period of time not to exceed 30 days at the discretion of the police department or its representative with the approval, if possible, of the parent or guardian. On the third offense, the offender may be referred to the juvenile court authorities in accordance with those procedures. It is ordained that no violation of this article relating to the vehicle traffic laws or the safe bicycle riding rules and the official instructions for the safe operation of a bicycle, as prescribed in this article, shall be considered a criminal offense or made a matter of a court record where the offender is 16 years of age or under. 
(b)  Any person over 16 years of age shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by the payment of a fine not to exceed $100.00, or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1974, § 21-74) 
Sec. 94-32. - Operational rules. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle shall at all times operate the bicycle with due regard for the safety of other persons and vehicles lawfully upon the streets, highways, pathways and public places, as well as for his own safety, and shall at all times and under all conditions yield the right-of-way to pedestrians on the streets, highways, pathways, sidewalks, and public places and on the crosswalks. 
(b)  Every person operating a bicycle shall comply with all vehicle traffic laws and all vehicle traffic signs and signals erected for the regulation of traffic, including bike trail signs, except where such laws, by their nature, do not apply to bicycles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon the streets, highways, pathways, sidewalks and public places of the city during the period of sunset to sunrise unless such bicycle is equipped with light safety equipment as provided by section 94-4 adopting and amending the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle upon the streets, highways, pathways, sidewalks and public places of the city that is not equipped with adequate brakes. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of all persons operating a bicycle to ride single file, in a straight line and as near the righthand curb as possible, on all main thoroughfares and in central business sections, and when riding on other streets persons operating a bicycle must not ride more than two abreast, unless otherwise specifically designated on bike trails, routes or pathways. 
(f)  Before turning or changing the direction of any bicycle upon any street, highway, pathway or public place, it shall be the duty of the bicycle rider to give a signal, by the extension of the hand, to indicate the direction in which it is the intention to proceed. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle upon any street, highway, pathway or public place to attach himself to any other moving vehicle. 
(Code 1974, § 21-73) 
Secs. 94-33-94-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 94-51. - Registration and identification tag required. 
    No person who resides within the city shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless such bicycle has been registered and a registration identification tag is attached thereto as provided in this division. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, § 2-306(a)(1), 21-63) 
Sec. 94-52. - Application. 
    Application for a bicycle registration and registration identification tag shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be made to the police department of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 21-64) 
Sec. 94-53. - Fee. 
    The registration fees required by this division shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 21-65) 
Sec. 94-54. - Identification tag not to be issued to persons not entitled to possession of bicycle. 
    The police department shall not issue any registration identification tag for any bicycle where there are reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner of, or entitled to the possession of, such bicycle. 
(Code 1974, § 21-66) 
Sec. 94-55. - Inspection of bicycle prior to registration. 
    The police officer assigned such responsibility may inspect each bicycle before registering the bicycle, and may refuse a registration for any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Code 1974, § 21-67) 
Sec. 94-56. - Records. 
    The police department shall keep a record of the number of each bicycle registration, the date registered, the name and address of the person to whom it was registered, and the number on the frame of the bicycle, and a record of all bicycle registration fees collected by him. The police department may require owners to place identification numbers on the frames of bicycles, which the city may designate. 
(Code 1974, § 21-68) 
Sec. 94-57. - Issuance of tag; affixing to bicycle. 
(a)  The police department, upon registering a bicycle, shall also issue a registration identification tag bearing the registration number assigned to the bicycle and the name of the city. 
(b)  The police department shall cause the registration identification tag to be affixed to the frame of the bicycle for which issued in such position as to be plainly visible. 
(Code 1974, § 21-69) 
Sec. 94-58. - Removal of tag. 
    No person shall remove a registration identification tag from a bicycle except upon a transfer of ownership or in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 21-70) 
Sec. 94-59. - Transfer of tag. 
    Upon the sale or other transfer of ownership of a registered bicycle, the person transferring the bicycle shall have the registration identification tag assigned to the transferee. 
(Code 1974, § 21-71) 
Sec. 94-60. - Registration and equipment requirements for bicycle rental agencies. 
    A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is registered and a registration identification tag is attached thereto as provided in this division, and the bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required by the Uniform Traffic Code adopted by section 94-4. 
(Code 1974, § 21-72) 
Secs. 94-61-94-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SNOWMOBILES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Snowmobiles, MCL 324.82101 et seq.; local regulation of snowmobiles, MCL 324.82124. 

Sec. 94-81. - Authority to adopt restrictions on operation on public property. 
    The city council may, by resolution, prohibit the operation of snowmobiles within the right-of-way of the public roads or streets or other city property when in its opinion the public safety and welfare so requires. 
(Code 1974, § 21-42) 
Sec. 94-82. - Special programs and events; designation of park areas for use of snowmobiles. 
    Notwithstanding the prohibitions of this article, the director of parks and recreation shall have the authority to supervise and regulate events or programs in connection with events conducted by the parks and recreation department in which snowmobiles are used. The director of parks and recreation shall have the authority to designate city park areas that he shall deem available for the use of snowmobiles. 
(Code 1974, § 21-41) 
Secs. 94-83-94-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SHOPPING CENTER TRAFFIC AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parking area means an area near or contiguous to a shopping center and used by the public as the means of access to and egress from the stores and business establishments at the shopping center and for the free parking of motor vehicles of patrons of the shopping center. 
    Shopping center means a minimum area of three acres of land on which there is located one or more stores or business establishments and where there is provided a parking area. 
(Code 1974, § 21-116) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-112. - Authority to regulate traffic and parking. 
    The city council may, upon the request of either the owner or the person in charge of the general operation and control of the parking area of a shopping center, by ordinance: 
(1)  Order stop signs, yield signs or other traffic control devices erected at specified entrance or exit locations to a shopping center or at any intersection in the parking area. 
(2)  Regulate traffic in the parking area, including regulation by means of traffic control signals. 
(3)  Prohibit or regulate the turning of vehicles or specified types of vehicles at intersections or other designated locations in the parking area. 
(4)  Regulate the crossing of any roadway in the parking area by pedestrians. 
(5)  Designate any separate roadway, drive or lane in the parking area for one-way traffic. 
(6)  Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified areas of the parking area. 
(7)  Designate safety zones, loading zones and other restricted areas in the shopping center. 
(8)  Provide for the removal and storage of vehicles parking or abandoned in the parking area during snowstorms, floods, fires or other public emergencies, or found unattended in the parking area, where they constitute an obstruction to traffic or where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, and for the payment of reasonable charges for such removal and storage by the owner or operator of any such vehicle. 
(9)  Adopt such additional reasonable rules with respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the users of the shopping center. 
(Code 1974, § 21-117) 
Sec. 94-113. - Authority to adopt rules and regulations for specific parking lots. 
    The police chief shall have the authority to adopt such additional reasonable rules and regulations with respect to traffic and parking in the West Grange Shopping Center, Trafford Square Shopping Center, and Fort-King Plaza Shopping Center parking areas as local conditions may require for the safety and convenience of the public and users of the shopping centers. 
(Code 1974, § 21-128) 
Secs. 94-114-94-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEST GRANGE SHOPPING CENTER, TRAFFORD SQUARE SHOPPING CENTER AND FORT-KING PLAZA SHOPPING CENTER 

Sec. 94-131. - Scope; enforcement. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to the West Grange Shopping Center, Trafford Square Shopping Center and Fort-King Plaza Shopping Center areas and shall be enforced by the police department. 
(Code 1974, § 21-123) 
Sec. 94-132. - Installation of traffic control devices. 
    The police chief shall install, at the owners' expense, necessary stop signs, yield signs or other traffic control devices at all entrance or exit locations, and at any intersection, in the parking area of the West Grange Shopping Center, Trafford Square Shopping Center and Fort-King Plaza Shopping Center. 
(Code 1974, § 21-124) 
Sec. 94-133. - Installation of signs regulating parking. 
    The police chief shall install, at the owners' expense, necessary signs to prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified areas of the West Grange Shopping Center, Trafford Square Shopping Center and Fort-King Plaza Shopping Center parking areas. 
(Code 1974, § 21-125) 
Sec. 94-134. - Designation of safety zones, loading zones and other restricted areas. 
    The police chief shall install, at the owners' expense, appropriate signs to designate safety zones, loading zones and other restricted areas in the West Grange Shopping Center, Trafford Square Shopping Center and Fort-King Plaza Shopping Center parking areas. 
(Code 1974, § 21-126) 
Sec. 94-135. - Removal of abandoned and illegally parked vehicles. 
    The police chief shall have the authority to provide for the removal and storage of vehicles parked or abandoned in the West Grange Shopping Center, Trafford Square Shopping Center and Fort-King Plaza Shopping Center parking areas during snowstorms, floods, fires or other public emergencies or found unattended in the parking areas where they constitute an obstruction to traffic or where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, and to provide for the payment of reasonable charges for such removal and storage by the owner or operator of any such vehicle. 
(Code 1974, § 21-127) 
Secs. 94-136-94-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY 

Sec. 94-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bus means any motor vehicle designed for carrying 16 or more passengers, including the driver. The term "bus" does not include a school bus, a bus defined and certificated under the Motor Bus Transportation Act (MCL 474.101 et seq.), or a bus operated by a public transit agency operating under any of the following: 
(1)  A county, city, township, or village as provided by law, or other authority incorporated under Public Act No. 55 of 1963 (MCL 124.351 et seq.). 
(2)  An authority incorporated under the Metropolitan Transportation Authorities Act of 1967 (MCL 124.401 et seq.), or that operates a transportation service pursuant to an interlocal agreement under the Urban Cooperation Act of 1967 (MCL 124.501 et seq.). 
(3)  A contract entered into pursuant to Public Act No. 8 of 1967 (Ex. Sess.) (MCL 124.531 et seq.), or Public Act No. 35 of 1951 (MCL 124.1 et seq.). 
(4)  An authority incorporated under the Public Transportation Authority Act (MCL 124.451 et seq.), or a nonprofit corporation organized under the Nonprofit Corporation Act (MCL 450.2101 et seq.) that provides transportation services. 
(5)  An authority financing public improvements to transportation systems under the Revenue Bond Act of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.). 
    Commercial motor vehicle means any self-propelled or towed vehicle designed or used on public highways to transport passengers or property, except for a bus exempted from the definition of same, if the vehicle is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Has either a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross weight or gross combination weight rating or an actual gross combination weight of 10,001 or more pounds. 
(2)  Is designed for carrying 16 or more passengers, including the driver. 
(3)  Is used in the transportation of hazardous materials in a quantity that requires the vehicle to be marked or placarded pursuant to 49 CFR parts 100 to 180. 
    Gross combination weight and GCW mean the combined weight of a combination of vehicles and any load on those vehicles. 
    Gross weight, gross vehicle weight and GVW mean the combined weight of a motor vehicle and any load on that vehicle. 
    Hazardous material vehicle inspection or repair facility means a commercial enterprise that performs inspections, certification, testing, or repairs to commercial motor vehicles transporting hazardous materials as required by 49 CFR parts 100 to 180 and includes motor carriers that perform the inspections, certification, testing, or repairs to vehicles owned or leased by the motor carrier. 
    Motor carrier means a carrier of passengers or property in a commercial motor vehicle and includes a person who owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle or that assigns employees to operate the vehicle. The term "motor carrier" includes a motor carrier's agents, officers, and representatives, as well as employees responsible for hiring, supervising, training, assigning, or dispatching of drivers and employees concerned with the installation, inspection, and maintenance of motor vehicle equipment and accessories. 
(Code 1974, § 21-161) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-162. - Penalty; authority to stop and inspect vehicles. 
(a)  Any driver or operator who violates this article or a rule promulgated under the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.), or any owner or user of any truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or any officer or agent of any individual, partnership, corporation, or association or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court, which is the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate or drive any truck, truck tractor, or trailer in violation of this article or a rule promulgated under such act is responsible for a civil infraction for each violation. 
(b)  A peace officer or an officer of the motor carrier division of the department of state police, upon reasonable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is being operated in violation of this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to such act may stop the motor vehicle and inspect the motor vehicle. If a violation is found, the officer may issue a notice to appear for that violation. 
(Code 1974, § 21-165) 
Sec. 94-163. - Prosecution of violations. 
    When this article or a rule promulgated under the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.) has been violated, the offense may be prosecuted in any county, city or jurisdiction in or through which the motor vehicle, driver or operator implicated was situated or passed when the offense was committed. 
(Code 1974, § 21-164) 
Sec. 94-164. - Qualifications of drivers. 
    A person shall not drive, and an individual, partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not employ, engage, hire, or contract for hire any person to operate, drive, or maintain, any bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles, unless the person meets the qualifications as set forth by the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.) and the department of state police under the authority of such act. 
(Code 1974, § 21-162) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 480.12a. 
Sec. 94-165. - Standards for vehicles. 
    A person shall not operate any truck, truck tractor, or trailer or permit any person to drive any bus, truck, or truck tractor, or certain other motor vehicles, which does not meet driver or operator safety standards, and safety standards for equipment and devices on buses, trucks, truck tractors, or trailers, or certain other motor vehicles, and the loading and unloading thereof as set forth in the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.) and rules promulgated by the department of state police. 
(Code 1974, § 21-162) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 480.12b. 
Sec. 94-166. - Standards for facilities. 
    A person shall not operate or maintain any facility used in connection with the transportation of persons or property by any bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer which facility does not meet safety standards for the operation and maintenance of such facility as set forth in Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.) or rules promulgated by the department of state police. 
(Code 1974, § 21-162) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 480.12c. 
Chapter 98 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Utilities, ch. XII. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; department of public works, § 2-131 et seq.; water treatment installations for swimming pools, § 18-279; community development, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; utility franchises, § 50-31 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 54; manufactured homes, ch. 62; posing advertisement or other notices on utility poles, § 66-4; solid waste, ch. 74; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 86; sewers, water mains and fire hydrants, § 86-191 et seq.; lots not served by public water and sewer system, § 86-253; electrical wires near trees and shrubs in public places, § 102-46; operations by utility companies, § 102-50; water distribution and tapping, app. A, § A-7; electrical permits and inspections, app. A, § A-77. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 98-1-98-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Water supply cross connection control, § 18-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-31. - Adoption of regulations for operation and control. 
    The city council shall adopt such regulations as it deems necessary for the operation and control of the city waterworks system. 
(Code 1974, § 33-16) 
Sec. 98-32. - Right of entry of inspectors; authority to require repair of defective pipes and fixtures. 
    The city inspectors or employees shall have power and authority at all reasonable hours to enter upon any premises where water is furnished from the city waterworks system, for the purpose of reading meters or the inspection of all pipes and fixtures connected with the city waterworks system, and they shall have authority to require any defective pipes or fixtures to be repaired, removed or replaced where the pipes or fixtures are not in compliance with the provisions of the regulations pertaining to the city waterworks system, and any person refusing or neglecting to make such repairs when so ordered shall be deemed guilty of violation of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 33-26) 
Sec. 98-33. - Restricted use of water during emergencies. 
(a)  Under emergency conditions, as determined by the mayor and with notification to the public by posting at the city offices, cable telecast or publication in a newspaper of general circulation, the sprinkling of lawns or landscaping, and all other outdoor water use of a non-essential type, may be banned, limited, or restricted in a manner determined to be essential for the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare by the mayor or his designee. No person, unless specifically authorized by the city, shall utilize water services from the city in contravention of such ban, limitation, or restriction as may be imposed pursuant to this subsection. 
(b)  Whenever the mayor or his designee receives notification from the Detroit water and sewerage department, in conjunction with the water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality, that the supply or pressure demand for water cannot be accommodated and general welfare is likely to be endangered, or conditions within the water system of the city are likely to endanger the general welfare of the city, the mayor or his designee may declare that a state of emergency exists and prescribe the following emergency regulations which shall apply in the city for all properties connected to the city water system: Sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall only be allowed for properties with even-numbered addresses on even-numbered dates within a month and for properties with odd-numbered addresses on odd-numbered dates within a month. 
(c)  Whenever the mayor or his designee receives notification from the Detroit water and sewerage department, in conjunction with the drinking water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality, that provisions in subsection (b) of this section are not sufficient, or conditions within the water system of the city are likely to endanger the general welfare of the city, the mayor or his designee may impose the following emergency regulation in the city for all properties connected to the city water system: Sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall not be allowed. 
(d)  The city and the Detroit water and sewerage department may, within 24 hours of notification, cause these regulations to be posted at the city office and publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts by the stations within normal operating range covering the city, and may cause such announcement to be further declared in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. The regulations shall become effective immediately after notice of enforcement of such regulations as posted at the city offices. Upon notification from the Detroit water and sewerage department, in conjunction with the drinking water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality, that the emergency regulations are no longer necessary, the city may cause a public announcement lifting the water restrictions. 
(e)  Any individual or entity violating any provisions of this section shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction and will be responsible to pay a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(Code 1974, § 33-17) 
Sec. 98-34. - Disconnection of water service; reconnection fees. 
(a)  Any premises may be disconnected from the distribution pipes of the city waterworks system and the supply of water withheld from such premises upon violation by the owner or occupant of the premises of any provision of this article or of the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(b)  Whenever water is turned off from any premises because of any violation of this article, it shall not be turned on again until the owner or occupant has deposited with the city treasurer's office the sum established by the city council. 
(c)  Any premises which is known to be vacant and having a past due water balance, or has no heat or electrical service, may have the supply of water withheld or suspended by the city in order to reduce or eliminate water losses incurred by freezing and breakage, or damage to the structure on the premises. The controller's office will advise the water department of any of its invoices returned by the US Postal Service as "undeliverable" or marked "vacant", for action. Water service shall not be restored to the premises until such time as all invoices due and owing have been paid in full. 
(d)  Any premises, occupied or vacant, in which the plumbing is damaged and in need of repair such that is causing un-metered water loss, or damage to premises; or is non-compliant with the city's plumbing code so as to adversely affect public health, including those involving back flow or cross connections, may have the supply of water withheld or suspended by the city. 
(e)  Any premises which exhibits meter tampering, theft of water, or for which access to inspect and/or test the meter or plumbing is denied to water department personnel or their agents, may have the supply of water withheld or suspended. 
(f)  Any non-residential premises for which water payments are more than 30 days billing cycles in arrears, may have the supply of water withheld or suspended by the city, provided a notice is mailed no less than 21 days before the suspension of service and a copy of the notice is conspicuously posted on the property no less than seven days before the suspension of service. 
(Code 1974, § 33-22; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 794, § 1, 11-19-2018) 
Sec. 98-35. - Use of fire hydrants. 
    No person, except members of the fire department, engineering and building department, or parks and recreation department, shall use any fireplug, except in the case of emergency, without first securing permission from the fire department for such use, and paying or agreeing to pay for the water used. In no case shall any wrench other than a regulation hydrant wrench be used on any fire hydrant. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(32), 33-18) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 
Sec. 98-36. - Tampering with waterworks system. 
    No unauthorized person shall tap any water main or distribution pipe of the waterworks system or insert therein any corporation cock, stopcock or any other fixture or appliance or alter or disturb any service pipe, corporation stop, curb stop, gate valve, hydrant, water meter or other attachment being part of or being attached to the city waterworks system. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(32), 33-19) 
State Law reference- Tampering with utility property, MCL 750.383a. 
Sec. 98-37. - Unauthorized use of water; waste of water. 
    The owner or occupant of any building or premises entitled to the use of water from the city waterworks system shall not supply water to any other person except upon written permission of the water department, nor shall be permit the unnecessary waste of water. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(32), 33-20) 
Sec. 98-38. - Unauthorized persons turning water on and off. 
    No person, other than personnel of the city waterworks system, shall turn the water from any main or distribution pipe into any service pipe or open or close any valves or stopcocks which are part of the city waterworks system. 
(Code 1974, § 33-21) 
Sec. 98-39. - City not liable for failure or deficiency in water supply. 
    The city shall not be liable for any failure or deficiency in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting off the water to make necessary repairs or connections, or for any other cause. 
(Code 1974, § 33-23) 
Sec. 98-40. - Meters required; location of meters. 
    Water meters and outside reading devices of the type approved by the water department shall be installed upon any premises supplied with water, and the location of the devices shall be determined and approved by the city engineering and building department. 
(Code 1974, § 33-24) 
Sec. 98-41. - Tampering with meters; liability for damage to meters. 
(a)  No person shall tamper with, remove or interfere with the reading or any water meter or outside reading device. 
(b)  Any damage to any water meter or outside reading device resulting from the failure of the owner or occupant to properly protect the meter or device shall be assessed against such owner or occupant. 
(c)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(32), 33-25) 
Secs. 98-42-98-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 98-61. - Permit. 
(a)  No person shall install any water service pipe or connect or disconnect any such service pipe with or from the mains or distribution pipes of the city waterworks system, or with or from any other service pipe now or hereafter connected with the city waterworks system, or make repairs, additions to or alterations of any such service pipe, tap, or stopcock or any other fixture or attachment connected with any such service pipe, without first procuring a permit therefor from the city engineering and building department. 
(b)  Application for a permit required by this division shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk. 
(Code 1974, §§ 33-32, 33-33) 
Sec. 98-62. - Portion of work to be performed by applicant. 
    Applicants for water service shall furnish, lay and install all that portion of the service not provided by the city at their own expense, subject, however, to supervision and inspection by the city and compliance with the conditions of the permit issued by the city engineering and building department. 
(Code 1974, § 33-34) 
Sec. 98-63. - Installation of service pipes. 
    All service pipes connecting with the distribution mains of the city waterworks system, from the city main to the stop and waste inside the building, shall be laid under the supervision of the city engineering and building department and in accordance with the regulations governing the city waterworks system. 
(Code 1974, § 33-35) 
Sec. 98-64. - Tapping fee; cost of meters over certain size; ownership of meters. 
(a)  Upon filing an application for a permit to connect with any water main or distribution pipe of the city waterworks system, there shall be paid such tapping fee as shall be prescribed by the regulations governing the city waterworks system. The fees shall include all the costs of tapping the main, installing the corporation cock, furnishing and laying the service pipe to the property line, and installing the stopcock and shutoff box. 
(b)  Included in the tapping fee shall be a one-inch meter and fitting and outside reading device. All meters over inch shall be furnished by the city to the property owner and shall be installed at the expense of the property owner, except that he shall receive a credit in the amount of the then-established cost of installing a one-inch meter. All such materials shall be and remain the property of the city waterworks system. 
(Code 1974, § 33-36) 
Sec. 98-65. - Connection of multiple users; service to more than one lot. 
    In all cases where water service is intended to supply more than one shop, store or building, it shall be the duty of the person making such service connection, or causing the connection to be made, to install a branch with a stopcock for each branch outside the line of the premises to be supplied. The stopcock shall be suitably protected and marked so as to be easily located. In no case shall one service supply more than one lot, unless occupied by a single building covering more than one lot used for a single industry or enterprise. 
(Code 1974, § 33-37) 
Sec. 98-66. - Connections for fire sprinkler systems. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any establishment in which a fire sprinkler system is required will be permitted to make connection with the city water system at his own expense upon filing an application for a permit and paying such tapping fees as prescribed by the city council. The connection shall be made in accordance with specifications of the engineering and building department and shall comply with NFPA 13, NFPA 13D, and NFPA 13R, 1991 edition, or the latest adopted edition thereof. 
(b)  Fire sprinkler service lines shall have a bypass meter installed. The city water department shall furnish up to and including a one-inch meter. 
(Code 1974, § 33-38) 
Sec. 98-67. - Cross connections. 
(a)  The City of Trenton adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city and as approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(c)  A representative of the building or water department of the city shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connection. 
(d)  The city shall discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists and take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(e)  All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested upon installation to be sure that the device is working properly. Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified by city and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals approved by the city shall be qualified to perform such testing. That individual(s) shall certify the results of his/her testing. 
(f)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state and city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING 
(g)  This section shall supplement, not supersede the state plumbing code and where in conflict, the state code shall control. 
(Ord. No. 682, § 1, 1-3-2005) 
Secs. 98-68-98-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 98-91. - Rates to be established by council. 
    The rates to be charged consumers of water shall be as established by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1974, § 33-44) 
Charter reference- Utility rates, § 13.3. 
State Law reference- Rates, MCL 141.129, 141.141. 
Sec. 98-92. - Penalty for nonpayment. 
    All water charges that are not paid on time shall be deemed delinquent, to which there shall be added and collected a penalty of ten percent. An additional penalty of 40 percent and a charge as established by the city council shall be levied per account for placing delinquent water bills for more than six months on the tax roll. 
(Code 1974, § 33-45) 
Sec. 98-93. - Discontinuance of service for nonpayment; collection by suit. 
    Whenever any water charges, rates, assessments or rentals are delinquent, the water service to the building, premises, lot, parcel of land or portion thereof may be discontinued, or such water charges, rates, assessments or rentals may be collected by a suit brought in the name of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 33-46) 
Sec. 98-94. - Lien for unpaid charges. 
(a)  The city shall have as security for the collection of any water charges, or any water rates, assessments or rentals, due or to become due, for the use or consumption of water supplied to any building or any premises, lot, parcel of land or portion thereof, a lien upon such building, and upon the premises, lot, parcel of land or portion thereof, upon which such building shall be situated, or to which such water is supplied. The lien shall become effective immediately upon the distribution of the water to the premises or property supplied. All water charges shall be assessed against the premises supplied. The official records of the water department shall constitute notice of the pendency of each lien. 
(b)  The water lien established by this division shall have priority over all other liens, except taxes or special assessments, whether or not such other liens accrued or were recorded prior to the accrual of the water lien. 
(Code 1974, §§ 33-47, 33-48) 
Charter reference- Collection of utility rates, § 13.4. 
State Law reference- Lien for water charges, MCL 141.121, 123.161 et seq. 
Sec. 98-95. - Placement of unpaid charges on tax roll. 
    All unpaid water charges which, upon the first Monday of May of each year, have remained delinquent for a period of three months or more shall be reported by the clerk of the water department to the city council, and the city council may require such charges to be transferred and reassessed upon the city tax roll, in the same manner that unpaid special assessments are transferred and reassessed upon the tax roll. 
(Code 1974, § 33-49) 
Sec. 98-96. - Water lien not to be impaired by discontinuance of service or collection attempts. 
    No discontinuance of water service or any attempt to collect water charges, rates, assessments or rentals by any process shall in any way be deemed to invalidate or waive any water lien upon the premises. 
(Code 1974, § 33-50) 
Secs. 98-97-98-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY 

Sec. 98-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Secondary water supplies and emergency water sources mean: 
(1)  Surface waters from rivers, lakes, ponds, lagoons and reservoirs. 
(2)  Deep and shallow well waters. 
(3)  Any supply of water which has been stored, held or reserved after being used for industrial purposes. 
(4)  Cooling water or water which has in any way been treated or processed or has been subjected or exposed to any contamination of a bacteriological or chemical nature. 
(5)  Water from any source other than the city water supply. 
(Code 1974, § 33-56) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-122. - Connections between city water and secondary water supplies prohibited. 
    No physical connection shall be maintained between lines carrying city water and pipes, pumps or tanks supplying water from any secondary source. 
(Code 1974, § 33-57) 
Sec. 98-123. - Water supply for drinking fountains, lavatories and similar fixtures. 
    All drinking fountains, lavatories, slop sinks, baths, wash trays or racks, or other fixtures or devices where persons come in close contact with water shall be taken from the city water supply, when feasible, but shall in all cases be supplied in accordance with state law. Piping and valves shall be so arranged that the supply to such fixtures may be shut off in order to facilitate the quick checking-up of the water supply to any one fixture. 
(Code 1974, § 33-58) 
Sec. 98-124. - Protection of city water lines from backflow. 
    Where dual water supplies are necessary or desired, lines carrying city water must be protected against backflow of polluted water by an atmosphere gap of not less than six inches. This may be accomplished through an elevated tank with or without a booster pump, or an open cistern with a booster pump. In every case the inlet to the tank, from the line carrying city water, shall discharge at least six inches above the maximum high water level of the tank or cistern. 
(Code 1974, § 33-59) 
Sec. 98-125. - Checks and valves required when secondary water supply is used. 
    Every city water service connection to establishments using a secondary water supply for any purpose whatsoever, or which employ standby intakes or other supplies for emergency uses, shall be protected by a special arrangement of valves and checks as provided in this division. 
(Code 1974, § 33-60) 
Sec. 98-126. - Specifications for checks and valves. 
(a)  The valve combination for protecting all service connections shall consist of two bronze mounted gate valves and two bronze mounted checkvalves so arranged that checks may be tested for leakage by the use of pressure gauges. The gate valves shall be bronze mounted and provided with bronze stem with indicator. The checkvalve shall be of the swing check type having seats at an angle with the vertical of not less than 20 degrees. All wearing parts shall be of bronze and so designed as to be readily replaceable or capable of being refinished. These shall include the seat rings, disk rings, stem nuts, hinge pin and hinge pin bushings. All drain valves and test valves shall be of bronze, not less than one-half inch in size, and of such pattern as will stand repeated opening and closing without excessive wear or tendency to leakage. All piping between mains and drain and test valves shall be of brass. 
(b)  The valves required by subsection (a) of this section shall be located in a well-drained room or pit of sufficient size to permit a person to stand erect and to have convenient access to the valves for inspection, testing and repair purposes. 
(Code 1974, § 33-61) 
Sec. 98-127. - Marking of exposed city lines when dual supplies exist. 
    In every instance where dual water supplies exist, all exposed piping carrying city water shall be uniformly painted a distinguishing bright blue color and so maintained that each pipe may be readily traced in its entirety by such color. In instances where the bright blue color conflicts with already well-established systems of painting in a particular plant, the engineering and building department may allow the use of another color of equal brightness and distinction. 
(Code 1974, § 33-62) 
Sec. 98-128. - Superintendent to be notified of existence, installation and alteration of dual or secondary systems. 
    All persons maintaining dual or secondary water supplies or sources shall notify the superintendent of the water department of the existence thereof. The superintendent of the water department shall be notified in writing of all alterations, additions or changes made to existing secondary supplies, and of the installation of all new secondary or dual water supplies or sources. 
(Code 1974, § 33-63) 
Sec. 98-129. - Submission of plans of piping. 
    Detailed plans of all underground or unexposed piping, both for the city supply and secondary water supply, shall be furnished to the engineering and building department and corrections shall be made thereto as soon as alterations are made. 
(Code 1974, § 33-64) 
Sec. 98-130. - Posting of warning signs at openings in secondary systems. 
(a)  All openings in the secondary system from which water from that supply may be obtained shall have at all times a metal sign prominently posted bearing the following warning: 
Warning-Unsafe Water-Do Not Drink 
(Name of owner) 
By order of the City of Trenton 
(b)  The sign required by subsection (a) of this section shall be at least eight inches by ten inches in size, prominently lettered in contrasting colors, with no letters less than one inch in height. Signs shall be furnished and maintained by the person owning the secondary supply and must be approved by the superintendent of the water department. 
(Code 1974, § 33-65) 
DIVISION 5. - GROUND WELLS 

Sec. 98-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contaminated groundwater means groundwater in which concentrations of released hazardous substances or regulated substances are present in excess of the generic residential drinking water cleanup criteria established by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality pursuant to Part 201 (Environmental Remediation) of the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act ("NREPA"), MCL 324.20101 et seq. or part 213 (Leaking Underground Storage Tanks) of the NREPA, MCL 324.21301 et seq. 
    Release means a release as defined in Part 201 of the NREPA or Part 213 of the NREPA, as applicable to the circumstances. 
    Well means a human-made opening in the surface of the earth for the purpose of removing groundwater through nonmechanical or mechanical means for any purpose other than a public emergency or conducting response activities pursuant to the NREPA, the Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, 42 USC § 9601 et seq., the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC § 6901 et seq., or other applicable statute. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 2, 5-1-2006) 
Sec. 98-132. - Prohibition of wells and groundwater use. 
    Except as provided in section 98-133, no person or legal entity shall install or allow, permit, or provide for the installation or use of a well on any property located within the city and in which such person or entity has an ownership, leasehold, possessory, or other interest. Except as provided in section 98-133, no person or legal entity shall use any groundwater from any property located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 2, 5-1-2006) 
Sec. 98-133. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in section 98-132 shall be deemed to prohibit the use of wells for: 
(1)  Dewatering performed in connection with construction and demolition or utility maintenance and construction activities, provided that: 
a.  The use of the dewatering well will not result in unacceptable exposure to contaminated groundwater, cross-contamination between saturated zones or undesirable hydrogeological effects on contaminated groundwater plumes; and 
b.  The water generated by such dewatering activities is properly handled and discharged in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. Any exacerbation of contamination caused by the use of dewatering wells under this exception shall be the responsibility of the person operating the dewatering well as provided under Part 201 of the NREPA. 
(2)  Groundwater monitoring and/or remediation undertaken in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations or as set forth in section 98-131(c). 
(3)  Secondary water supplies, as defined in section 91-121(2), utilizing well water in existence on the date of adoption of this amendatory ordinance [May 1, 2006]. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 2, 5-1-2006) 
Sec. 98-134. - Notification of lapsing, modification, or revocation. 
    Pursuant to Section 20120b(5) of Part 201 of the NREPA, MCL 324.20120b(5), the City of Trenton shall notify the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or its successor agency, at least 30 days prior to any lapsing, modification, or revocation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 2, 5-1-2006) 
Secs. 98-135-98-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accidental discharge means an unintentional slug discharge. 
    Act and the Act mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Administrator means the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, or his designee. 
    Agency, as referenced in section 98-302(c)(4), means the city engineer or his designated representative. 
    Approval authority means the state department of environmental quality. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means an authorized representative (defined by 40 CFR 403.12(1)) of an industrial user that may be: 
(1)  A responsible corporate officer (i.e., president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function) if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or a proprietorship, respectively; or 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (1) or (2) of this definition if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 98-242 and also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter). 
    Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises to the public sewer. 
    Bypass means the diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Categorical standards means the national categorical pretreatment standards. 
    CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations as issued by the United States government. References to CFR shall be in accordance with the latest revisions unless specifically noted otherwise. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) is a measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). 
    Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. The demand for any given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact, and temperature. 
    City means the City of Trenton, Michigan, or the City Council of Trenton, Michigan. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm sewer, or as an industrial sewer and a storm sewer. 
    Compatible pollutants means pollutants that can be effectively removed by the POTW treatment system to within acceptable levels for the POTW residuals and receiving stream and do not contribute to the operational upsets of or interference with the POTW. This includes, but is not limited to, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), suspended solids (SS), phosphorous (TP), fats, oils and grease (FOG), pH, fecal coliform and other pathogenic organisms. 
    Control authority means the city engineer. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Drainlayer means a person who installs sanitary or storm drains and sewers, and sewer leads on private or public property. 
    Environmental Protection Agency and EPA mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Garbage means waste foodstuffs or table wastes, of vegetable or animal origin, together with other incidental admixtures, and wastes from the domestic or commercial handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis over a period of time not more than 15 minutes without regard to the flow of the waste stream. 
    Hazardous waste means a hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR 261. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not compatible (see Compatible pollutant ) and/or is not amenable to treatment, or wastes which may adversely affect the treatment process, the effluent, or sludge disposal practices or cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
    Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    Industrial wastes means the waste material resulting from industrial or manufacturing processes, trades or businesses, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Infiltration means any water entering a sewer system and service connections from the ground through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joint connections, or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from inflow. 
    Inflow means the water discharged into a sewer system and service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard, and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catchbasins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash water or drainage. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both (i) inhibits or disrupts the POTW its treatment processes or operation, or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and (ii) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Municipal sewage works means facilities owned, operated and maintained by the city, including storm and sanitary sewers, the POTW treatment plant, manholes, catchbasins, retention basins, interceptors, pumping stations, etc. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard means any federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit and NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    National pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to industrial users and includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means any source, from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source, if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that the conditions of CFR 403.3(k) are met. 
    Nondomestic user means an industry, commercial establishment, or other entity that discharges wastewater for publicly owned treatment works other than, or in addition to, sanitary sewage. 
    Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities and other effort required to operate and maintain the wastewater transportation and treatment system consistent with ensuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement. 
    Pass-through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    PERM means the Program for Effective Residuals Management set forth by the city to effectively track and dispose effectively of residuals (sludge, ash, grit, grease, and rags) resulting from the treatment of wastewater. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any of the various chemicals, substances, and refuse materials, such as solid waste, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes, which impair the purity of the water and soil. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of wastewater. 
    Pretreatment means the treatment of wastewater before introduction into a publicly owned sewer system, including the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants or pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the municipal sewage works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). Also, effective equalization by the use of holding tanks, settling basins or other means prior to introduction into the POTW can be used as one form or part of a pretreatment. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national categorical pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, the term "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    Replacement means the replacement in whole or in part of any equipment, appurtenances and accessories in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations. 
    Sanitary sewage means water-carried waste from toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities used for household purposes. 
    Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who: 
(1)  Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; 
(2)  Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(3)  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; 
(4)  Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act and its rules; or 
(5)  Is found by the city, the state department of environmental quality, or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have a reasonable potential for adversely affecting, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, the wastewater treatment system, its operations, the quality of the sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system unless the industrial user is determined not to be a significant industrial user in accordance with 40 CFR 403.3(t)(2). 
    Significant noncompliance means a violation which meets one or more of the following criteria specified in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii)(A)(B)(C). 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, as set forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii)(A), defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1). 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, as set forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii)(B), defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit, as set forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii)(C), (daily maximum or longer-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public). 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under paragraph CFR 403.8(f)(vi)(B) and section 98-301 herein, to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which may include a violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Sludge means any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste generated from a municipal, commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility. 
    Slug means any discharge from an industrial user of water, sewage or industrial waste of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Standard Methods means the current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Foundation, or Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Superintendent means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic substances means any substance, whether gaseous, liquid, or solid, which, when discharged to a public sewer in sufficient concentrations, may be hazardous to sewer maintenance and personnel, tend to interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to human beings or animals, inhibit aquatic life, or create a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from a sewage treatment plant. The term also includes any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a), or which appears in Michigan's Critical Materials List. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1974, §§ 33-1, 33-77(a); Ord. No. 723, § 1, 3-1-2010; Ord. No. 736, § 1, 6-7-2010) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-172. - Abbreviations. 
    For purposes of this article, the following abbreviations shall have the meaning designated in this section: 
BMP Best management practices BOD Biochemical oxygen demand CFR Code of Federal Regulations COD Chemical oxygen demand EPA Environmental Protection Agency l Liter mg Milligrams mg/l Milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System POTW Publicly owned treatment works SIC Standard Industrial Classification SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. USC United States Code TSS Total suspended solids  
(Code 1974, § 33-77(b); Ord. No. 736, § 1, 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 98-173. - Penalties. 
    Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city council or who failed to comply with any provision of this article and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this article, other than those designated as municipal civil infractions, shall be fined a minimum amount of $500.00 or for the amount of time and actual costs incurred by the city for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued under this article. 
(Code 1974, § 33-181) 
Sec. 98-174. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR part 403). The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Set guidelines for new or existing sewers that carry wastewater and/or stormwater that eventually discharge into the city treatment plant or any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge. 
(3)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere in harmful quantities or concentrations, or otherwise be incompatible with the system. 
(4)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system. 
(5)  Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the city's wastewater system. 
(6)  Set penalties, responsibilities and duties of users of the system and authority of the city to enforce such responsibilities and duties if these guidelines are not met. 
(b)  This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the city's wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users. It authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this article while not preempting existing customers' capacity requirements. 
(Code 1974, § 33-76(a), (b)) 
Sec. 98-175. - Enforcement officers. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city engineer or his authorized representative shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Authority to certify reports shall be granted in writing by the mayor of the city pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(m). 
(Code 1974, § 33-76(c); Ord. No. 723, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 98-176. - Authority of health official to abate nuisances. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as limiting in any manner the powers of the duly authorized health official, and, if any unsanitary condition exists, such condition is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 33-78) 
Sec. 98-177. - Notice of violation. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Code 1974, § 33-85) 
Sec. 98-178. - Failure to cease violation. 
    Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 98-177 shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in section 1-8 unless covered in other parts of this article specifically. 
(Code 1974, § 33-86) 
Sec. 98-179. - Liability for costs incurred by city due to violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1974, § 33-87) 
Sec. 98-180. - Tampering with property of sewage works. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the municipal sewage works. 
(Code 1974, § 33-79) 
State Law reference- Tampering with utility property, MCL 750.383. 
Sec. 98-181. - Connection of sources of unpolluted water to sanitary sewers. 
(a)  The city council deems it to be in the best interests of the public health and welfare of the residents of the community to attempt to decrease the flow of surface runoff and other unpolluted water into the sanitary sewers of the city in order to eliminate combined sewer overflows and the flooding of basements. It is a part of this program to specifically provide for the disconnection of all surface drains, including but not limited to yard grates, perforated manhole covers, and pipes carrying surface drainage from paved areas and unpaved areas, and roof drain downspouts, to the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  No person shall hereafter permit or cause uncontaminated water from any source to be directly connected by conduit or otherwise to a drain connected with the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
(c)  All stormwater runoff from roofs, paved areas, yards, courts, and courtyards shall be detained on-site and conveyed underground to a separate storm sewer or pavement gutter directly accessible to the site. If no storm sewer or pavement gutter is available, stormwater runoff may be disposed of on the site away from the building, and in such a way so as to not create a nuisance or health/safety hazard on the building site or adjacent property. In no case shall storm drainage be permitted to enter any facilities connected directly or indirectly to sanitary sewers. 
(d)  Foundation drains shall be connected into any separate storm sewer or public drain directly accessible to the site, or drainage may be disposed of on the site away from the building in such a way as to not create a health/safety hazard or nuisance on the building site, pavement gutter, or property adjacent to the site. A storm sewer beneath or across a pavement abutting a site is considered directly accessible to the site for subsoil drainage. Foundation drainage may in no case be permitted to be ejected onto any surface exposed to outside air, including pavement gutters. 
(e)  The city engineer shall give written notice to the property owners as shown on the last assessment roll of the city, directing them to disconnect all surface drains, drainage, or drainage systems that intercept surface runoff from the sewer system. The property owner shall be given a reasonable time to comply with the city engineer's directive, but such time shall not exceed 45 days from the date of mailing of the notice. Where NPDES or stormwater permits would be required for industrial and/or commercial users, a reasonable time schedule for compliance shall be allotted. If the property owner neglects or refuses to follow the written directive of the city engineer, then a final five-day certified notice shall be mailed by the city engineer directing compliance with the previous notice. If the property owner then neglects or refuses to comply, the city inspectors or employees shall have the power and authority, at all reasonable hours, to enter upon the premises for the purpose of disconnecting the surface drains or drainage systems and to assess the costs thereof against the property pursuant to the provisions of the Charter. Any person refusing or neglecting to make such disconnection, when so directed by the city engineer's office after due notice, shall be deemed guilty of violation of this section and liable to prosecution therefor. 
(Code 1974, § 33-80) 
Sec. 98-182. - Privies and septic tanks. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1974, § 33-81) 
Sec. 98-183. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity required in the plumbing code adopted by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1974, § 33-82) 
Sec. 98-184. - Special agreements for acceptance of industrial waste. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby conventional or compatible pollutants up to levels which are within the treatment capacity of the POTW may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. This section does not provide for exceeding any national pretreatment standard. 
(Code 1974, § 33-83) 
Sec. 98-185. - Approval of sewers required prior to covering. 
    No person shall cover any sewer until the engineering and building department approves, in writing, the work as having been completed in compliance with state law, the provisions of this Code, and all rules and regulations of the engineering and building department. 
(Code 1974, § 33-84) 
Sec. 98-186. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or a wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1974, § 33-182) 
Secs. 98-187-98-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS AND DRAINLAYING 

Sec. 98-211. - General requirements. 
(a)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, are hereby required at their expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so. 
(b)  The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the engineering and building department. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(c)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(d)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer. 
(Code 1974, § 33-101) 
Sec. 98-212. - Permit required; compliance with applicable regulations; separate building sewer required by each structure. 
    No person shall establish or make any connection with any city sewer or sewer pipe, or install any drainage pipe, or cause such work to be done, unless he complies with the provisions of this Code, the state laws and all lawful regulations, and unless he first procures a permit as provided in this division. Every home or structure shall have a separate building sewer connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1974, § 33-102) 
Sec. 98-213. - Application for permit; payment of charges. 
    Application for a permit required by this division shall be made to the engineering and building department in such form and detail as it may prescribe, accompanied with the payment of such charges as may be determined from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 33-103) 
Sec. 98-214. - Uniformity of charges. 
    Tapping charges shall be uniform to all property owners on streets of equal width irrespective of the location of the lateral sewers in the streets. 
(Code 1974, § 33-104) 
Sec. 98-215. - Drainlayers. 
(a)  License required. No person shall engage in the trade or business or drainlaying in the city unless he first shall have obtained a license. There shall be a licensed drainlayer present at all times while work is being performed. 
(b)  Application for license. Application for such license shall be made upon proper forms and submitted to the engineering and building department for approval, with the current fees. 
(c)  License qualifications. The applicant shall submit to an examination by the engineering and building department to determine the ability and qualifications of the applicant as a drainlayer. 
(d)  Issuance of license; bond and insurance. Any applicant who shall have successfully passed such examination with a score of 70 percent and filed with the engineering and building department a bond in the sum of $2,000.00 with a one-year maintenance clause and paid his license fee, and also has a certificate of insurance that complies with chapter 18, article III, shall be entitled to engage in the business of drainlaying in the city. 
(e)  Expiration of license. A drainlayer's license shall expire on December 31 of each given year. No work may be performed on an expired license. 
(f)  Specifications for work. All drainage work must be installed according to the city specifications, a copy of which is on file in the engineering office. 
(g)  Suspension of license. Any licensed drainlayer who refuses to comply with this section or the rules and regulations established shall have his license suspended, thereby debarring him from performing any drainlaying in the city. Every drainlayer shall be responsible for the violations of those in his charge. 
(Code 1974, § 33-105) 
Sec. 98-216. - Inspection of work. 
    All work done pursuant to any permit issued under this division shall be inspected by the engineering and building department, and the inspector shall have access to the premises for this purpose at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1974, § 33-106) 
Sec. 98-217. - Sewer user fee. 
    If the city, at its cost, develops, constructs installs or acquires a sewer main or tributary line, or a portion thereof, to be available for the general use of properties abutting the line, the city may assess such title owners of such properties who subsequently tap into, utilize or otherwise benefit from the installation of the line a one-time user or connection fee approximating the owner's pro rata share of the cost of such line as determined by the city engineer. Such fee may, upon approval of the city, be payable in installments not to exceed ten years and shall be placed as a lien on the benefited property. Such fee shall be in addition to any tapping fees assessed and as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 33-107) 
Secs. 98-218-98-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 98-241. - Adopted. 
    Part 23 of the Michigan Administrative Code, R323.2301 to R323.2317, promulgated and amended from time to time by the state department of environmental quality, is hereby adopted by reference, including the prohibition on affirmative defenses in any action brought against a nondomestic user alleging a violation of section 98-242(a)(1), (3)d, (14) and (15). 
(Code 1974, § 33-120) 
Sec. 98-242. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of the nature and quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 (i.e., hydrogen sulfide, oxides of nitrogen and sulphur dioxide). 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, fly ash, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5, or higher than 9.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. Where a permittee continuously measures the pH of such wastewater within the range set forth in the applicable effluent limitations guidelines, excursions from the range are permitted subject to the following limitations: 
a.  The total time during which the pH values are outside the required range of pH values shall not exceed seven hours in any calendar month. 
b.  No individual excursions from the range of pH values shall exceed 60 minutes. 
c.  For the purpose of this section, an excursion is an unintentional and temporary incident in which pH value of discharge wastewater exceeds the range set forth in the applicable effluent limitations guideline. 
d.  In no case shall any discharge have a pH less than 5. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, or the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance which will result in a pass-through or cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or conditions of the Program for Effective Residuals Management (PERM) or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit or is less than 32 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(10)  Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause a pass-through or interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain a concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than three times the allowable limits under this article. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(13)  Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through. 
(14)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(15)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points designated by the city engineer. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $1,000.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(39), 33-121) 
Sec. 98-243. - Applicability of national categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  Generally. All nondomestic users subject to national pretreatment standards shall be subject to the rules, regulations, and requirements of 40 CFR part 403. 
(b)  Applicability of new standards; standards adopted. Upon the promulgation of categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The city shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12, as amended. The national categorical standards found in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated into this article and made a part of this article. 
(c)  Deadlines for compliance. 
(1)  Existing sources shall comply with categorical pretreatment standards within the compliance time specified in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. 
(2)  Direct dischargers with NPDES permits modified or reissued to provide a variance pursuant to section 301(i)(2) of the Act shall be required to meet compliance dates set in any applicable categorical pretreatment standard. 
(3)  Existing sources which become industrial users subsequent to promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be considered existing industrial users except where such sources meet the definition of a new source as defined in 40 CFR part 403, section 403.3(m). 
(4)  New sources shall install and have in operating condition and shall start up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(d)  Calculation of equivalent mass and concentration limits. 
(1)  When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the control authority may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. 
(2)  Equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(3) and 403.6(c)(4) shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of section 307(d) of the Act. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. 
(e)  Net/gross calculation. Any industrial user may seek an adjustment in the categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water. The control authority may allow a credit in accordance with 40 CFR part 403, section 403.15. 
(Code 1974, § 33-122; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 98-244. - Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by national pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. For purposes of this section, the term "consistent removal" shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR part 403, section 403.7(b). The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR part 403, section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Code 1974, § 33-123) 
Sec. 98-245. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
(a)  Pursuant to 40CFR 403.8, the POTW shall develop and enforce user specific limits to implement the prohibitions listed in section 98-242. The POTW shall continue to develop these limits as necessary and effectively enforce such limits. Additional limits shall be developed as necessary in accordance with 40CFR403.5(c) utilizing EPA protocols. 
    In accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c), the limits listed below shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purpose of section 307(d) of the act. 
LOCAL LIMITS 
Pollutant Maximum For Any One Day 
(mg/l) Arsenic 0.345 Barium 20.78 BOD 5 User specific Boron 40.84 Cadmium 0.115 Chromium 3.45 Copper 0.703 Cyanide (Total) 0.125 Grease and oil 70.0 Hexavalent chrome 2.03 Lead 0.802 Mercury Non-detectable Nickel 1.552 Phosphorus User specific Selenium 0.075 Silver 3.751 Suspended solids User specific Zinc 2.82  
    There shall be no detectable amounts of mercury discharge to the city sanitary sewer. Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA method 245.1. The level of detection developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR 136 shall not exceed 0.2 ug/L for mercury unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference. 
(b)  A user who discharges wastewaters containing conventional or compatible pollutants in excess of Trenton's domestic background concentration limits listed below shall enter into a special agreement in accordance with section 98-184. These limits are pretreatment standards for all users except those with user specific limits for Ammonia-N, BOD, TSS, or phosphorus. Any violation of these limits will be subject to enforcement in accordance with the approved enforcement respondent plan. 
DOMESTIC BACKGROUND/MAHL LIMITS 
Pollutant Domestic Background 
Average Level 
(mg/l) Maximum Allowable Headworks Loading 
(lbs./day) Ammonia-N 17.27 670 BOD 140.0 11,987 Phosphorous 2.02 112 T.S.S. 65.0 8,914  
Should a user at or below background concentration limits request to discharge a particular pollutant above the listed background concentration limit, the city may approve and accommodate such request only after the user has been included in the user specific allocation process defined in the city's "Procedure for Allocation of Special Alternative Limits"; the new limits are adjusted, approved and public noticed by the approval authority (DEQ), and new allocations are established into the appropriate wastewater contribution permits. 
(c)  The POTW may establish BMPs as a narrative local limit to implement the general and specific prohibitions set forth in section 98-242, general discharge prohibitions. BMPs may be used instead of numerical limits where determination of compliance with numerical limits is infeasible, or as a supplement to numeric limits as appropriate to meet the requirements of the Act. 
(d)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $1,000.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(40), 33-124; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 3-1-2010; Ord. No. 736, § 1, 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 98-246. - Applicability of state requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Code 1974, § 33-125) 
Sec. 98-247. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 98-174. 
(Code 1974, § 33-126) 
Sec. 98-248. - Accidental and slug discharges. 
(a)  Protection. Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental and/or slug discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed slug control plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi)(A-D), shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing industrial users shall complete such a plan by May 1, 1986. No industrial user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to inform the authority immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings by the user. Where such information is given orally, a written follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the discharger with the authority within five days. 
(b)  Written notice. The report shall specify: 
(1)  A description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on a discharger's compliance status. 
(2)  The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur. 
(3)  All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance. 
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a slug discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  Penalty. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $1,000.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(41), 33-127; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 98-249. - Dilution of discharge. 
(a)  No user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with either the pretreatment standards contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. The city may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or discharge limitations. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $1,000.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(42), 33-128) 
Secs. 98-250-98-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FEES AND ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 98-271. - Purpose; establishment of fees and charges. 
    It is the purpose of this division to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established in this article. The applicable charges or fees shall be as established by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 33-141) 
Sec. 98-272. - Types of fees and charges. 
    The city may adopt charges and fees which may include: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program. 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures. 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction. 
(4)  Fees for permit applications. 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals. 
(6)  Fees for applying for removal credits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7. 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this article. 
(8)  Fees in accordance with special agreements negotiated under section 98-184. 
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Code 1974, § 33-142) 
Sec. 98-273. - General requirements for wastewater dischargers. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit to any sanitary sewers and natural outlets within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, and/or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the city engineer in accordance with the provisions of this article. If the city engineer determines the waste is not in compliance with this article, through data from the discharger's reports or through surveillance by the city's personnel, the dischargers may be required to provide routine monitoring data on a frequency appropriate for the character and quantity of the wastewater. The discharger may be required to enter into a contract with the city to treat the wastewater with provisions for pretreatment and/or where permitted a surcharge for specific conventional or compatible pollutant removals. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby conventional or compatible pollutants up to levels which are within the treatment capacity of the POTW may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1974, § 33-143) 
Sec. 98-274. - Wastewater contribution permit. 
(a)  Required. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Application. Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city, accompanied by the current fee. Unpermitted existing users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. Permitted existing users, at the city engineer's or his designee's discretion, shall submit an application 180 days prior to the permitted expiration date. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and location (if different from the address). 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those mentioned in division 3 of this article, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR part 136, as amended. 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variation if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection a of this subsection shall exceed nine months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city engineer, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city engineer. 
(10)  Hours of operation of the plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system. 
(11)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require submittal of additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this section. 
(c)  Compliance with national categorical pretreatment standards. Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the timeframe prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by subsection (b) of this section, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, a user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the city engineer within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsections (b)(8) and (9) of this section. 
(d)  Duration. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in division 3 of this article are modified or other just cause exists. 
(2)  The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(3)  A wastewater contribution permit's effective date shall continue beyond its expiration date where the permittee has filed a timely application for permit reissuance but the city, through no fault on the part of the permittee, has not reissued the permit at the time of expiration. 
(e)  Transfer. Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater contribution permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. A copy of the existing permit shall be furnished to the new owner. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(f)  Conditions. Wastewater contribution permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer. 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule. 
(6)  Compliance schedules. 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access thereto. 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges. 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
The maximum duration of a wastewater contribution permit shall be five years. Civil and criminal penalties shall not exceed such penalties as established by the state legislature. 
(g)  Enforcement of conditions. Wastewater contribution permit conditions are specifically and independently enforceable regardless of whether they are expressly required by or set out in this article. The city will enforce the permit conditions in accordance with the enforcement, penalties, and other requirements of this article. 
(h)  Penalty. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $1,000.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(43), 33-144) 
Sec. 98-275. - Reporting requirements for industrial users subject to national pretreatment standards. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring report. 
(1)  Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination, whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standard and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to a POTW shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR part 403, section 403.12(b). 
(2)  At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR part 403, section 403.12(b). New sources shall also include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(3)  Industrial users shall report any changes to information in the baseline monitoring report to the POTW within 60 days (Michigan Administrative Code R323.2303(3)). 
(b)  Compliance date report. 
(1)  Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city engineer a report containing the information listed in 40 CFR part 403, section 403.12(b)(4)-(6). 
(c)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the city engineer during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the city engineer, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow. At the discretion of the city engineer, and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the city engineer may agree to alter the months during which these reports are to be submitted. 
(2)  The city engineer may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (c)(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the city engineer, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. 
(d)  Certification statement; report to be signed by authorized representative. Any industrial user submitting a report required by this section shall include the following certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR part 403, section 403.6(a)(2)(ii): 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
The report shall be signed by an authorized representative (corporate officer, general partner, proprietor, or duly authorized representative as noted in 40 CFR part 403, section 403.12(1)). 
(e)  Penalty. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $1,000.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(44), 33-145; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 98-276. - Reporting requirements for all industrial users. 
(a)  Significant noncategorical industrial users will submit to the city engineer at least once every six months (on dates specified by the city engineer) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the city engineer. 
(b)  The city has the authority to require appropriate reporting from nonsignificant industrial users. Reporting requirements will be determined on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  All reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report. 
(d)  All industrial users shall notify the city engineer, the EPA Region V Waste Management Division Director, and the state department of natural resources in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Reporting requirements shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(e)  All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge (Michigan Administrative Code R323.2310(9)), or changes that occur at the facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge, pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi). These changes could include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  The listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under subsection (d) of this section and 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(2)  Groundwaters purged for remedial action programs. 
(3)  Groundwaters containing pollutants that infiltrate into the sewers. 
(f)  All nondomestic user reports shall contain a certification statement and shall be signed by an authorized representative as required by section 98-275(d). 
(g)  All industrial users shall notify the city engineer in writing within ten days of knowing or having reason to believe that any activity or change has occurred or will occur which would result in the discharge of: 
(1)  Conventional or compatible pollutants in excess of domestic background levels listed in section 98-245(b) on a 30-day average basis. 
(2)  Conventional or compatible pollutants at levels greater than four times the domestic background levels listed in section 98-245(b) on a daily maximum basis. 
The notification requirements of this subsection shall not apply to industrial users who have entered into a special agreement in accordance with section 98-184. 
(Code 1974, § 33-146; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 98-277. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The city may require to be provided and operated, at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises; but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within a reasonable time period specified by the city. 
(Code 1974, § 33-147) 
Sec. 98-278. - Inspections. 
    The city may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. The city will inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once a year. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to parts of the premises associated with the discharge for the purposes of inspection, wastewater sampling, records examination, or copying of records or in the performance of any of their duties. The city shall have the right to set upon the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations in such manner as will not interfere with the user's operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the user's premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with the user's security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Code 1974, § 33-148) 
Sec. 98-279. - Sampling and analysis. 
(a)  The sampling and analysis may be performed by the city in lieu of the industrial user. Where the POTW performs the required sampling and analysis in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12 in lieu of the industrial user, the user will not be required to submit the compliance certification required under 40 CFR part 403, section 403.12(b), (d), (e) and (h). In addition, where the POTW itself collects all the information required for the report, including flow data, the industrial user will not be required to submit the report. 
(b)  If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city engineer within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city engineer within 30 days after becoming aware of the initial violation in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(g)(2), (3) and (4), unless the POTW samples the user's discharge and/or the industrial user self-monitors and reports to the POTW on a monthly or more frequent basis (monthly, biweekly, weekly, daily, etc.). 
(c)  All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedure approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the administrator determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties approved by the administrator. 
(d)  If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city engineer, using the procedures prescribed in this section, the results of that monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  The POTW shall have authority to permit composite or grab sampling in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3). Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city. 
(Code 1974, § 33-149; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 98-280. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or state department of natural resources upon request. 
(Code 1974, § 33-150) 
Sec. 98-281. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public or government contractors but shall be made available to government agencies upon written request by the agencies for uses related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, the state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; however, such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  Information accepted by the city, state, or EPA as confidential in accordance with 40 CFR 403.14 shall be treated in accordance with 40 CFR part 2 (Public Information). 
(Code 1974, § 33-151) 
Sec. 98-282. - Records retention. 
    All dischargers subject to this article shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge and shall maintain records in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(o), including documentation associated with best management practices. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the director pursuant to this article shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(Code 1974, § 33-152; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 3-1-2010) 
Secs. 98-283-98-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 98-301. - Harmful contributions. 
(a)  The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, causes interference to the POTW, or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(Code 1974, § 33-161) 
Sec. 98-302. - Upsets. 
(a)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset. 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures. 
(3)  The user submitted the following information to the POTW and city engineer within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance. 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue. 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In the usual exercise of prosecutorial discretion, agency enforcement personnel should review any claims that noncompliance was caused by an upset. No determination made in the course of the review constitutes final agency action subject to judicial review. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(5)  The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, is lost, or fails. 
(6)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(Code 1974, § 33-162) 
Sec. 98-303. - Bypasses. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "bypass" means the diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. Bypassing is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass unless: 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. 
(2)  There was no feasible alternative to the bypass. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent bypass which occurred during periods of equipment downtime or preventable maintenance. 
(3)  The industrial user submitted proper notice of the bypass. 
(b)  The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the control authority, if possible at least ten days before the date of bypass. 
(d)  An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an anticipated bypass that exceeds pretreatment limits to the POTW and city engineer within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission as described in 40 CFR part 403, section 403.17(c), shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. 
(e)  An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment limits to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions listed in subsections (a) through (d) of this section. 
(Code 1974, § 33-163) 
Sec. 98-304. - Revocation of discharge permit. 
    Any user who violates any of the following conditions, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this division: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge. 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(Code 1974, § 33-164) 
Sec. 98-305. - Notice of violation; publication of names of users in significant noncompliance. 
(a)  Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, a wastewater contribution permit, or any prohibition, limitations or requirements contained therein, the city may serve upon such a person a certified written notice stating the nature of the violation, return receipt requested. Within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user, in writing, stating the nature of the alleged violation. Additional enforcement action may be taken against the user upon issuance of the notice of violation. 
(b)  The city shall annually publish in the largest daily newspaper a list of the industrial users which were in significant noncompliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at any time during the previous 12 months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users during the same 12 months. 
(c)  An industrial user is considered to be in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the criteria listed in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii). 
(Code 1974, § 33-165) 
Sec. 98-306. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, and the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on an authorized representative of the corporation. 
(b)  The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or the city's environmental advisory board to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. 
(2)  Take the evidence. 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations, to the city council for action thereon. 
(c)  After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, and devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Code 1974, § 33-166) 
Sec. 98-307. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharging sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system is in violation of any provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate private legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate court that has jurisdiction. 
(Code 1974, § 33-167) 
Sec. 98-308. - Right of appeal. 
    Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the authority on any matter covered by this article and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply if such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of performance or compliance with this article or deals with a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject. Receipt of a discharger's request shall stay all enforcement proceedings pending receipt of the written reply. Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to this article may be taken in accordance with local and state law. 
(Code 1974, § 33-168) 
Sec. 98-309. - Fraud and false statements. 
    The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained under this article shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The provisions of 18 USC 1001 relating to fraud and false statements. 
(2)  The provisions of section 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation or certification. 
(3)  The provisions of section 309(c)(6) of the Act regarding responsible corporate officers. 
(Code 1974, § 33-169) 
Sec. 98-310. - Public availability of adopted codes and standards. 
    Any and all codes, rules, or standards adopted in this article through incorporation by reference shall be available to the public for inspection or purchase through the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1974, § 33-170) 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 98-311-98-319. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 98-320. - Assumption of obligations. 
(a)  Developers/owners, successors and assigns of any development project in the city requiring construction of a private stormwater management system shall be required to enter into an agreement with the city for maintenance of such stormwater management system, as a condition of obtaining a permit. 
(b)  Developers/owners, successor and assigns of any development project in the city requiring construction of a private stormwater management system that connects to a Wayne County System shall be required to enter into an agreement with the city for maintenance of such stormwater management system as may be required of the city by Wayne County in order to secure a permit from the County of Wayne to construct, operate, use and/or maintain stormwater management system within Wayne County's jurisdiction. 
(c)  The agreements shall require the developers/owners, their successors and assigns to: 
(1)  Forever maintain and repair the stormwater management system and in the event of a default, grant to the city, its contractors, employees, and agents the right to enter onto the property and repair and maintain the stormwater management system at the cost of the developers/owners, successors and assigns. Prior to undertaking the repair or maintenance of the system, the city shall, when practical, serve notice upon the developer/owner or its successors or assigns, of the city's intent to undertake the repair except where such repair constitutes an emergency. 
(2)  Reimburse the city for such costs which shall be payable within 30 days of the invoice and shall constitute a lien upon the property. 
(3)  Release, indemnify and hold harmless the city for any claims, expenses, damages, costs, liabilities or assessments arising out of the city's assumption of jurisdiction to maintain or repair the stormwater management system for Wayne County and for the county's assessments; as well as provide proof of public liability coverage with the city named as an additional insured. 
(4)  The developer/owner, successors and assigns, shall grant to the city, its agents, employees or contractors, an easement upon the property for purposes of inspection, installation, repair and maintenance of the stormwater sewer system. 
(d)  Such agreements shall run with the land and be recorded with the Wayne County Register of Deeds and be binding upon the parties, their successors, assigns and subsequent owners. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 1, 3-21-2005) 
Secs. 98-321-98-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 98-401. - Authority. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended; Part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act of 1994 ("Part 31"), MCL 324.3101 et seq., as amended; the General Permit "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Jurisdictional Stormwater Discharge" as described in National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System General Permit No. MIS049000 and mandated by certificate of coverage No. MIS040038, issued by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment pursuant to Part 31; Act 288 of 1967 (Subdivision Control Act), MCL 560.101 et seq., as amended by the Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq.; Act 283 of 1909 (County Road Law), MCL 224.1 et seq., as amended; Act 40 of 1056 (Drain Code, MCL 280.1 et seq., as amended; and Act 96 of 1987 (Mobile Home Commission Act), MCL 125.2301 et seq., as amended; the Charter County Law, MCL 45.515 et seq., and the current Wayne County Stormwater Management program. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-402. - Purpose. 
    Prevention of pollution from stormwater runoff and the protection of the quality of water of the State of Michigan are of utmost importance to the people of the City of Trenton. It is the purpose of this article and any rules promulgated pursuant to this article: 
(1)  To protect the environment against pollution and other effects from stormwater runoff, and to protect the public health and safety; 
(2)  To provide for implementation of a stormwater management program in the City of Trenton and administrative rules to manage and prevent flooding, streambank erosion, pollution, and other effects from the stormwater runoff; 
(3)  To establish standards and criteria for the design and construction of stormwater management systems subject to the requirements of this article; 
(4)  To establish best management practices for the design, construction, maintenance and operation of stormwater management systems subject to the requirements of this article; 
(5)  To provide for the issuance of stormwater construction approvals for construction activities subject to the requirements of this article; 
(6)  To provide for the long-term preservation and maintenance of stormwater management systems subject to the requirements of this article; 
(7)  To authorize the inspection of stormwater management systems subject to the requirements of this article; and 
(8)  To provide for the administration, implementation and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-403. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "City of Trenton Stormwater Maintenance Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-404. - Administration. 
    This article shall be administered by the city engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-405. - Effective date. 
    The stormwater management ordinance shall become effective upon approval by the city council. In the event that a development has received final site plan approval prior to the effective date of this article, then this article shall not apply unless such approval expires prior to the commencement of construction. In the event a development has received preliminary site plan approval prior to the effective date of this article, the review required under this article shall proceed, and there shall be compliance with the terms of the article to the extent feasible without redesigning the development so as to reduce the number, size and density of buildings. In the case of a phased development in which one or more phases have been constructed prior to the effective date of this article, then this article shall apply to those phases for which stormwater facilities have not been constructed and approved. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-406. - State and administrative rules. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided in this article, the provisions of this article shall control over less stringent rules of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment (MDNRE), unless contrary to law. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-407. - No waiver or other obligations. 
    Nothing in this article or any rule promulgated pursuant to this article shall be construed to reduce, abate, alter, modify, amend, or affect any duty or obligation to preserve and protect the environment, including the watershed and other waters of the state; to control soil erosion and sedimentation; to protect wetlands; or to prevent air, water or other pollution. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-408. - Incorporation by reference. 
    Rules, regulations, other regulatory standards or statutory provisions incorporated or adopted by reference in this article or any rules promulgated to this article shall have the same force and effect given to any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 98-409, 98-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 98-411. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person responsible for regulated construction activity on a development site who is seeking to obtain stormwater construction approval. 
    Construction activity means human-made activity, including without limitation, clearing, grading, excavating, construction and paving, that results in an earth change or disturbance in the existing cover or topography of the land, including any modification or alteration of a site or the "footprint" of a building that results in an earth change or disturbance in the existing cover or topography of the land. 
    Conveyance means any structure or other means of safely conveying stormwater and stormwater runoff with in a stormwater management system, including without limitation a watercourse, close conduit, culvert or bridge. 
    City means the City of Trenton. 
    City engineer means the City of Trenton City Engineer or its designee. 
    County drains are open or closed drain within the jurisdiction of Wayne County established pursuant to the Michigan Drain Code of 1956, MCL 280.1 et seq., as amended. 
    Development site means the property on which regulated construction activity will occur or is occurring or has occurred. 
    Enforcement agency means any enforcement agency, including, but not limited to, the City of Trenton, the County of Wayne, the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, or any court of competent jurisdiction of the State of Michigan or the United States of America. 
    Maintenance means any inspection, cleaning, and/or repairs required to be completed by the property owner on the on-site storm drainage systems. 
    Person or property owner means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity recognized by city records and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent and shall include tenants or occupants of a parcel, structure, or vehicle. 
    Regulated construction activity means construction activity that is subject to the provisions of this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to this article. 
    Storm drainage system means any facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural or human made or altered drainage channels, rivers, creeks, wetlands, or other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater construction approval means an approval issued pursuant to this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article. 
    Stormwater management program consists of ordinances, orders, rules, regulations, and other mechanisms that provide for the management of stormwater and stormwater runoff to prevent flooding and to ensure the restoration and/or protection of surface waters in the city. The regulations promulgated under this article, and activities mandated by the certificate of coverage issued by the MDNRE to the city pursuant to the general permit "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Jurisdictional Stormwater Discharge" (general permit No. MIS049000). 
    Stormwater management system means any structure, feature or appurtenance subject to this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to this article that is designed to collect, detain, retain, treat, or convey stormwater or stormwater runoff, including without limitation buffer strips, swales, gutters, catch basins, closed conduits, detention systems, pretreatment systems, wetlands, pavement, unpaved surfaces, structures, watercourses, or surface waters. 
    Stormwater runoff means the excess portion of precipitation that does not infiltrate the ground, but "runs off" and reaches a conveyance, surface water, or watercourse. 
    Surface water means a body of water, including without limitation seasonal and intermittent waters, in which the surface of the water is exposed to the atmosphere, including without limitation lakes, open detention basins, forebays, watercourses, bio-retention areas, retention basins, wetlands, and impoundments. 
    Watercourse means an open conduit, either naturally or artificially created, that periodically or continuously conveys water, including without limitation, rivers, streams, vegetated swales, open channels, and open drains. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 98-412-98-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 98-421. - General. 
    This article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article shall apply to all of the following: 
(1)  Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff into or around new or existing road rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city, county, state; 
(2)  Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff into or around county drains; 
(3)  Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff in projects that are subject to the requirements of Act 288 of 1967 (Subdivision Control Act), MCL 560.101 et seq., as amended; 
(4)  Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff from projects that are subject to Act 96 of 1987 (Mobile Home Commission Act), MCL 125.2301 et seq., as amended; 
(5)  Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff into, on or through property owned by the city; 
(6)  Construction activity that impacts new or existing storm sewer systems owned, operated, or controlled by the city; and 
(7)  Construction activity that occurs within and impacts or may impact water quality or water resources in watersheds or sub-watersheds included in the certificate of coverage issued by the MDNRE to the city pursuant to the general permit "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Jurisdictional Stormwater Discharge" (general permit No. MIS049000). 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 98-422-98-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STORMWATER CONSTRUCTION APPROVALS 

Sec. 98-431. - General requirements. 
    It shall be a violation of this article to engage in regulated construction activity except in accordance with this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article, and pursuant to a valid stormwater construction approval issued by the city. A stormwater construction approval shall be issued in a form and manner approved by the city, and may be incorporated into a construction permit or other approval issued under or required by another ordinance, statute or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-432. - Application for stormwater construction approval. 
(a)  Applicants shall submit a written application for a stormwater construction approval to the city. The application shall be made in a form and manner approved by the city, and shall include all information and documentation required by the city pursuant to this article or rules promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(b)  All proposed modifications to a stormwater management system that has received a stormwater construction approval issued by the city shall be submitted to the city in writing, together with all information and all supporting documentation required by the city pursuant to this article or rules promulgated pursuant to this article to support the proposed modification. A person shall not commence regulated construction activity associated with a proposed modification without the approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-433. - Financial assurance for regulated construction activity. 
(a)  The city may require an applicant to provide financial assurance for regulated construction activity. 
(b)  Financial assurance provided pursuant to this section shall be in the form of a performance bond, cash deposit, or unconditional irrevocable letter of credit. The city may accept, with prior approval, an equivalent instrument as financial assurance for regulated construction activity. 
(c)  The city may establish the form and amount of financial assurance to be provided; the events, circumstances, or occurrences that will cause the city to release the financial assurance mechanism; and other requirements for financial assurance to satisfy the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 98-434-98-440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DESIGN AND CONTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 98-441. - General. 
(a)  Except as provided below, stormwater management systems shall be designed in accordance with the minimum requirements for performance and design that are set forth in this article and in rules promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The city encourages the development and use of innovative stormwater management system designs and construction techniques, including without limitation the use of non-structural practices to reduce stormwater runoff and/or its water quality impacts, to achieve the flood control and water quality objectives of the ordinance and the rules promulgated hereunder. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision in this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, the city may require stormwater management systems to satisfy performance and/or design standards more stringent than the minimum requirements for performance and design set forth in this article and in rules promulgated pursuant to this article when necessary to address unique flood control or water resources protection issues at a development site, on adjacent properties, or downstream of a development site. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-442. - Requirements for design of stormwater management systems. 
(a)  Selecting and designing stormwater management systems to meet the requirements of this article and the rules promulgated pursuant to this article shall be the responsibility of the applicant or its designee, subject to the approval of the city pursuant to this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article. The city may deny a stormwater construction approval for a system design that is not in compliance with these requirements. 
(b)  In designing a stormwater management system, the applicant shall consider all relevant and appropriate factors, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  The public health, safety, welfare, and the environment; 
(2)  The inconvenience caused by stormwater runoff on the subject property; 
(3)  The long-term impact of regulated construction activity on stormwater runoff on, from and beyond the property; 
(4)  The natural drainage pattern of the land; 
(5)  The impact of the regulated construction activity on the affected watershed(s); 
(6)  The effect of complete upstream development on the subject property as determined by applicable master plans and/or stormwater plans; and 
(7)  The extent of downstream improvements necessary for proper stormwater drainage. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 98-443-98-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FEES FOR STORMWATER CONSTRUCTION APPROVALS 

Sec. 98-451. - Fees. 
    The city's department of engineering may recommend to the city council a written schedule to be adopted by the city to establish a fee system for administering and implementing the stormwater management program. The fee system may include fees for application submittal and review, project overview, compliance inspections, and any other task or service performed by the city to administer or implement the requirements of this article or rules promulgated hereunder. Fees may be refundable or nonrefundable, as determined appropriate by the city department, and may include charges for time and materials utilized by the city in implementing and administering the requirements of this article or rules promulgated pursuant to this article. The schedule of fees may be adopted by resolution of the city council and adjusted from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 98-452-98-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 98-461. - Demonstration of long-term maintenance. 
    The applicant for a stormwater construction approval shall demonstrate to the city in the application or during the application review process, as determined appropriate by the city, that the stormwater management system shall be maintained in perpetuity. This demonstration shall be made in the manner specified in rules promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-462. - Scope of long-term maintenance. 
    For purposes of this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article, long-term maintenance shall include site monitoring and preventative maintenance activities necessary to ensure that a stormwater management system functions properly as designed; remedial actions necessary to repair, modify, or reconstruct the system in the event the system does not function properly as designed at any time; notification to subsequent owners of limitations or restrictions on the property; actions necessary to enforce the terms of restrictive covenants or other instruments applicable to the property pursuant to this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article; and such other actions as may be set forth in rules promulgated hereto. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 98-463-98-470. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF INSPECTORS 

Sec. 98-471. - Authority. 
    Upon presentation of proper credentials and identification, and after stating the authority and purpose of the inspection, city inspectors shall be promptly permitted to enter and inspect a development site. The inspection shall be for the purpose of investigating the development site, stormwater management systems, or components of stormwater management systems, to determine compliance or non-compliance with this article, rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, and/or stormwater construction approvals issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-472. - Duties of inspectors. 
    While entering and performing an inspection on private property pursuant to section 98-471 above, a city inspector shall observe and comply with all safety rules applicable to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 98-473-98-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 98-481. - General. 
    All persons are encouraged to cooperate with the city to ensure that the requirements of this article, rules promulgated pursuant to this article, and stormwater construction approvals issued hereunder are satisfied. Whenever possible, the city shall attempt to enter into voluntary agreements to resolve violations of this article, rules promulgated pursuant to this article, and stormwater construction approvals issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-482. - Investigations, informal conferences and voluntary agreements. 
(a)  If the city believes that a violation of this article, a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, or a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder may have occurred or exists, the city shall make a prompt investigation. If, after this investigation, the city determines that a violation has occurred or exists, the city shall attempt to enter into a voluntary agreement to resolve or correct the violation. An informal conference may be requested by the city or by any other person to facilitate a voluntary agreement. 
(b)  If a voluntary agreement cannot be reached, the city shall take appropriate enforcement action pursuant to this article and other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-483. - Notification of violation. 
(a)  If a voluntary agreement pursuant to section 98-482 can not be reached, the city shall issue written notice of a violation to the person or persons alleged to have caused or contributed to a violation of this article, a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, and/or an approval issued hereunder. A written notice of violation shall include a statement of facts upon which the violation is based. 
(b)  Within 14 days of the receipt of a written notice of violation, the alleged violator shall submit to the city an explanation of the violation and a plan for correcting the violation to comply with this article, rules promulgated pursuant to this article, and/or stormwater construction approvals issued hereunder. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any previous violation not addressed by the plan or future violation. 
(c)  Within 14 days of the receipt of a written response to a notice of violation, the city shall determine whether the response resolves and/or corrects the alleged violation. If the city determines that the response resolves and/or corrects the violation, then the plan for correcting the violation shall be incorporated into a consent agreement pursuant to section 98-484. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-484. - Consent agreement. 
(a)  A consent agreement may be entered into at any time by and between the city and the person or persons alleged to have caused or contributed to the violation. The consent agreement shall be mutually acceptable to both the city and the recipient(s) and shall reflect the recipient's agreement to assume responsibility for and correct violations of this article, rules promulgated pursuant to this article, and approvals issued hereunder. 
(b)  The consent agreement shall contain a short statement of facts, describe the actions necessary to correct the noncompliance, contain a compliance schedule, and be signed by all parties. The agreement may contain a monetary or other relief as agreed to by the parties for the noncompliance, including without limitation, amounts necessary to compensate the city for costs incurred investigating, administering and/or enforcing this article or rules promulgated hereto. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-485. - Administrative compliance orders. 
(a)  If the city determines that violation of this article, a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, or a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder has occurred or exists, the city may issue an administrative compliance order pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 98-487, the city may issue an administrative compliance order in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The city determines that a person has violated a consent agreement entered into with the city; or 
(2)  a.  The city determines that a person has violated or continues to violate this article, a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, or a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder, and 
b.  The city has attempted to resolve the violation pursuant to sections 98-482 and 98-484 but no voluntary agreement or consent agreement has been entered into. 
(c)  The administrative compliance order shall contain a statement of facts upon which the order is based, a description or the actions that must be taken to correct the noncompliance, a compliance schedule, and other requirements as might be reasonably necessary to address the noncompliance. Administrative compliance orders also may contain administrative fines and penalties, and such other monetary relief for the noncompliance, including without limitation amounts necessary to compensate the city for costs incurred investigating, administering, and enforcing this article or rules promulgated hereto. 
(d)  Within 28 days of being issued an administrative compliance order, the person or persons receiving the order may appeal the issuance of the order pursuant to division 10 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-486. - Imminent and substantial injury orders. 
(a)  The city may issue an administrative order without attempting to resolve a violation by using the enforcement procedures described in sections 98-482 and 98-484 if the city finds that a violation of this article, a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, or a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder constitutes or causes, or will constitute or cause, a substantial injury to the public health, safety, welfare, or the environment, and it is prejudicial to the interests of the people of the city to delay action. 
(b)  Administrative orders issued pursuant to this section 98-485 shall contain a statement of facts upon which the order is based, and notification to the person that it must immediately take action to discontinue, abate, correct, or otherwise address the imminent and substantial injury caused or likely to be caused by the noncompliance. 
(c)  Within seven days, the city shall provide the person an opportunity to be heard and to present any proof that the noncompliance does not or will not constitute imminent and substantial injury to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment. 
(d)  An order issued pursuant to this section 98-485 is effective on issuance and shall remain in effect for a period of not more than seven days, unless the city brings an action to restrain the alleged noncompliance pursuant to section 98-486 or 98-487 before the expiration of that period. If the city brings such an action within the seven day period, the order issued by the city shall remain in effect for an additional seven days or such other period as is authorized by the court in which the action is brought. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 99-487 - Municipal civil infractions. 
(a)  Violation; municipal civil infraction. Except as provided by this section, a person who violates any provision of this article or rules promulgated hereunder, including without limitation any notice, order, stormwater construction approval, agreement, decision, or determination promulgated, issued, made, or entered by the city under this article or rules promulgated hereunder, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of no less than $1,000.00 per day and not more than $5,000.00 per day for each infraction, plus costs and other sanctions. 
(b)  Repeat offenses; increased fines. 
(1)  Increased fines may be imposed for repeat offenses. As used in this section, "repeat offenses" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal or civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of this article or rule promulgated hereunder (a) that is committed by a person within any twelve (12) month period and (b) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. 
(2)  The increased fine for a repeat offense under this section shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense that is a first repeat offense shall be not less than $2,500.00, plus costs. 
b.  The fine for any offense that is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $5,000.00, plus costs. 
(c)  Amount of fines. 
(1)  Municipal civil infraction citations. Subject to the minimum fine amounts specified in subsections 98-487(a) and (b), the following factors shall be considered in determining the amount of a municipal civil infraction fine following the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation for a violation of this article or rules promulgated pursuant to this article: 
a.  The type, nature, gravity, magnitude, severity, frequency, duration, preventability, potential and actual effect, cause (including whether negligent or intentional) and economic benefit to the violator (such as delayed or avoided costs or competitive advantage) of the violation; 
b.  The violator's recalcitrance, cooperation or efforts to comply; 
c.  The violator's compliance history (regardless whether prior enforcement proceedings were commenced); 
d.  The economic impacts of the fine on the violator; and 
e.  Such other factors as justice may require. 
A violator shall bear the burden of demonstrating the presence and degree of any mitigating factors to be considered in determining the amount of a fine. However, mitigating factors shall not be considered unless it is determined that the violator has made all good faith efforts to correct and terminate all violations. 
(2)  Municipal civil infraction notices; schedule of fines. Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the amount of a municipal civil infraction fine due in response to the issuance of a municipal civil infraction notice for a violation as provided by section 98-483(a) shall be according to the following schedule: 
First offense: $1,000.00 
Second offense: $2,000.00 
Third offense: $3,000.00 
For any fine not paid in full within 30 days of the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice, the fine amount due shall automatically be double the amounts listed immediately above. A copy of this schedule shall be posted at the city engineering department. 
(d)  Authorized city officials. The following persons are authorized city officials for purposes of issuing municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in district court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the Trenton Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau) for violations under this article: The director of the department of public works; the city engineer, and their respective designees and authorized representatives. 
(e)  Procedures. Except as otherwise provided by this section, the procedures for municipal civil infraction actions shall be as set forth in chapter 2, article 8 (municipal civil infractions) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Trenton. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-488. - Civil actions. 
    The city, by and through the city attorney, may bring a civil action in the name of the city to enforce the provisions of this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article. Nothing in this article shall preclude the city from instituting an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in Wayne County Circuit Court to restrain, correct, or abate a violation of this article, a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this article, or a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder; or to stop an illegal act; or to abate a nuisance; or to prevent pollution or flooding. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-489. - Criminal penalties; imprisonment. 
    Any person who: 
(1)  At the time of violation knew or should have known that a violation of this article, or any notice, order, stormwater construction approval, or decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the city under this article; 
(2)  Intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or certification in any application for, or form pertaining to, a stormwater construction approval, or any other correspondence or communication, written or oral, with the city regarding matters regulated by this article; or 
(3)  Commits any other act that is punishable under state law by imprisonment for more than 90 days; shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-490. - Separate offenses. 
    Each act of violation, and each day or portion of a day that a violation of this article, rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, stormwater construction approval, order, notice, or determination issued, made or entered into under this article is permitted to exist or occur, constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 98-491-98-493. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - APPEAL 

Sec. 98-494. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person whose legal rights duties, or privileges are determined by the city pursuant to this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, and who is aggrieved by the city's determination made pursuant to section 98-485, may appeal to the stormwater appeals board for relief of that grievance. An appeal shall be made according to the procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  The stormwater appeals board shall consist of the director of the department of public works; the city administrator; and the city engineer; or their designees. Meetings of the stormwater appeals board shall be in person and shall be open to all interested parties. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 98-495. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  An appeal shall be in writing, shall be addressed to the stormwater appeals board c/o the engineering department, and shall be received within 20 days of the determination that is the subject of the appeal. The appeal shall be made in triplicate, shall set forth the specific act or matter complained of and in dispute, and shall include all documentation that supports the appellant's position. The appellant may be required to post a deposit at the time of filing to cover the costs of processing the appeal. 
(b)  Within 30 days of receipt of written appeal, the engineering department shall acknowledge such recipient in writing, and shall set a day and time for an appellant hearing to be conducted in accordance with subsection (d). If appropriate, the engineering department may schedule a conciliation meeting with the appellant in accordance with subsection (c). 
(c)  Conciliation meeting. 
(1)  The purpose of a conciliation meeting is to attempt to resolve the matter before an appeal is forwarded to the stormwater appeals board. If a conciliation meeting is held, it shall occur as soon as practicable, at the mutual convenience of the parties. Conciliation meetings shall be open to all interested parties and their representatives. 
(2)  After a conciliation meeting, if the appellant or the engineering department determines that an appeal cannot be resolved through a conciliation meeting, the parties shall so inform the stormwater appeals board in writing, and the appellate hearing scheduled pursuant to subsection (b) shall be conducted in accordance with subsection (d). Additional conciliation meetings shall not be necessary. 
(3)  If the engineering department and the appellant agree that the subject of the appeal has been satisfactorily resolved through the conciliation meeting process or otherwise, the agreement shall be incorporated into a consent agreement pursuant to section 98-484. 
(d)  Hearing procedure. 
(1)  A notice shall be sent to the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing. The notice shall include (a) a statement of the date, time, place, and nature of the hearing; (b) a statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing will be held; (c) a reference to the particular sections of this article involved in the appeal; (d) brief summary of the specific act or matter complained of and in dispute. 
(2)  At the hearing, the stormwater appeals board shall receive testimony and evidence provided by the appellant, the city, and/or others as the stormwater appeals board deems necessary. During the hearing, the stormwater appeals board shall not be bound strictly by the rules of evidence that would apply in a court, but shall have the authority to receive such evidence as deemed relevant and material. The stormwater appeals board may give the evidence as is received such weight and probative value as, in the board's discretion, is deemed proper. 
(3)  Within 30 days after the hearing, the stormwater appeals board shall render a decision in writing. This 30-day period may be extended for good cause. The decision shall include a brief summary of the specific act or matter complained of, the nature of the testimony and evidence received, and a decision as to whether the board affirmed, rescinded, or modified the decision or action at issue. 
(4)  The decision of the stormwater appeals board shall be final and enforceable at law. A person aggrieved by a final decision of the stormwater appeals board may seek judicial review of the decision by the Wayne County Circuit Court. A petition for judicial review shall be filed not later than 60 days following the receipt of the final decision of the stormwater appeals board. An aggrieved person shall exhaust all administrative remedies provided in this chapter before seeking judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 98-496-98-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND STORMWATER CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 98-501. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-502. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following shall mean: 
    Authorized enforcement agency (AEA): City of Trenton City Engineer or its designees to enforce this article. 
    Best management practices (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Hazardous materials: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge: Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 98-506 of this article. 
    Illicit connections: An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b) (14). 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit: A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-stormwater discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Storm drainage system: Municipal-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP): A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Wastewater: The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-503. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all water entering the municipal storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the authorized enforcement agency. The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the city engineer to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-504. - Reserved. 
Sec. 98-505. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-506. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibitions of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than uncontaminated stormwater. 
    The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the municipal storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal storm drain system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the municipal storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying wastewater to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-507. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the state. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
    A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-508. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-509. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be annually calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7)  If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-510. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The authorized enforcement agency will adopt requirements identifying best management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the municipal storm drain system, or waters of the state. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the maximum extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-511. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-512. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal storm drain system, or water of the state said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies, Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment (MDNRE), and the Wayne County Department of Environment of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile, or electronic mail no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-513. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of an assessment to recover all reasonable administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
    If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the authorized enforcement agency or its contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-514. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the municipal authority or his/her designee shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-515. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not be corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 21 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the authorized enforcement agency or its designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-516. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 21 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in cash or by note in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 31st day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-517. - Injunctive relief 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-518. - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, water course cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-519. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-520. - Criminal prosecution. 
    Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $500.00 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 93 days. The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 98-521. - Remedies non-exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 743, § 1, 11-15-2010) 
Chapter 102 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Community development, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; manufactured homes, ch. 62; parks and recreation, ch. 70; damaging property or trees, § 70-121; tree limbs, brush, grass clippings and leaves, § 74-46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 86; waterways, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 102-1-102-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Highway includes all the land lying between the property lines on either side of all public streets, boulevards and alleys. 
    Park means any public park having an individual name. 
    Public place means all grounds, other than parks, owned by the city. 
    Trees and shrubs means all woody vegetation. 
(Code 1974, § 31-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-32. - Violations. 
    Unless otherwise designated as a municipal civil infraction, any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or any lawful order issued in pursuance of the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of any penalty for a violation of this article shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of the city to collect the costs of removal of any tree in accordance with the provisions of this article and the Charter, where it is necessary for the city to remove such tree in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 31-36) 
Sec. 102-33. - Rights of property owners. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit a public hearing or the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the city. 
(Code 1974, § 31-17) 
Sec. 102-34. - General duties of city engineer. 
    The city engineer shall cause the provisions of this article to be enforced and shall discharge any and all duties that may be required of him by the provisions of this article or by the city council. 
(Code 1974, § 31-18) 
Sec. 102-35. - Powers and duties of city engineer regarding trees and shrubs on public property. 
    The city engineer, under the direction of the city council, shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Direct, regulate and control the purchase, planting, insect and disease control, fertilizing, mulching and removal of all trees and shrubs growing in any public highway, parkway, park or other public area of the city as promptly as financial and labor conditions permit. 
(2)  Direct the maintenance and culture of turf areas, both established and newly seeded, that belong to the city. 
(Code 1974, § 31-19) 
Sec. 102-36. - Coordination of work between departments. 
    The city engineer shall coordinate the work of the supervisor of the miscellaneous section of the engineering and building department and the director of the department of parks and recreation in the routine maintenance and care of the trees, shrubs and turf areas under their respective controls so as to have a uniform program under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 31-20) 
Sec. 102-37. - Interference with city engineer. 
    No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the city engineer or any of his assistants in the execution or enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1974, § 31-21) 
Sec. 102-38. - Certain varieties prohibited in public places. 
    No willow (Salix, all varieties, except horticultural varieties), poplar (Populus spp.), soft (silver) maple (Acer saccharinum), box elder (Acer negundo), tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissimus), wild chestnut (Castanea spp.), American elm (Ulnus americana), or other trees, shrubs and vines determined to be undesirable by the city engineer shall hereafter be planted in the public highways, parks or public places in the city. 
(Code 1974, § 31-22) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Sec. 102-39. - Distance of trees from intersections; trimming of shrubs near intersections. 
    No tree shall be planted nearer to the intersection of two or more streets than 15 feet from the nearest street line bounding such intersection. All shrubs planted within this area shall be trimmed to a height of not more than three feet above the curb. 
(Code 1974, § 31-23) 
Sec. 102-40. - Location of trees planted in parkways. 
    There shall be a minimum distance of 40 feet between trees planted in any parkway. No tree shall be planted in the parkway between the sidewalk and the curb less than three feet from the curb or sidewalk lines. However, where the parkway is less than six feet but not less than four feet in width, a tree may be planted midway between the curb and the sidewalk. Any exceptions to this section shall be determined by the city engineer. 
(Code 1974, § 31-24) 
Sec. 102-41. - Minimum size of trees planted in parkways. 
    No tree shall be planted in any parkway or between any sidewalk and curb which is less than 11/4 inches in diameter six inches above the ground. 
(Code 1974, § 31-25) 
Sec. 102-42. - Fastening materials to trees in public places. 
    No person shall fasten any sign, wire, rope or other material to or around or run any wire or rope through any trees or shrubs in any highway, park or public place of the city, except by written permit granted by the city engineer. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(30), 31-26) 
Sec. 102-43. - Placing materials on public property which impede growth. 
    No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any highway, park or public place of the city any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which will impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree or shrub growing therein, except by written permit granted by the city engineer. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(30), 31-27) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Sec. 102-44. - Injuring trees or shrubs in public places. 
    No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, or set fire or permit any fire to burn where such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree or shrub, in any highway, park or public place of the city. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(30), 31-28) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Destruction of trees and shrubs, MCL 750.382. 
Sec. 102-45. - Gas leaks near trees and shrubs in public places. 
    No person shall knowingly permit any leak to exist in any gas pipe or main within the root zone of any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(Code 1974, § 31-29) 
Sec. 102-46. - Toxic chemicals near trees and shrubs in public places. 
    No person shall permit any toxic chemical, either solid or liquid, to seep, drain or be emptied on or about any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(Code 1974, § 31-30) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 98. 
Sec. 102-47. - Electrical wires near trees and shrubs in public places. 
    No person shall knowingly permit any wire designed to carry electric current to come in contact with any tree or shrub located in any public place, unless protected by approved methods, and no person shall attach any electrical insulation to any tree. 
(Code 1974, § 31-31) 
Sec. 102-48. - Authority to require temporary disconnection of electricity during pruning or removal operations. 
    Whenever the city engineer determines it to be necessary, in order to prune or remove any tree or shrub in any highway, park or public place of the city, or for any other reason to temporarily protect such tree or shrub, he may move or cut off the electricity from any service wire. He shall serve written notice to the owner of the wire to protect, move or cut off the electricity from such wire. The owner shall comply with such order within 24 hours after service of the notice. 
(Code 1974, § 31-32) 
Sec. 102-49. - Excavating or laying driveways near trees and shrubs in public places. 
    No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches or lay any driveway within a radius of five feet from any tree or shrub located on public property without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer. 
(Code 1974, § 31-33) 
Sec. 102-50. - Operations by utility companies. 
(a)  All permits issued for the installation of public utilities shall be certified by the city engineer. 
(b)  When a permit is given by the city engineer to a telephone, telegraph, electric power or other public service corporation or utility to trim trees, or perform other operations affecting public trees or shrubs, the amount of such trimming or extent of the other operations shall be limited by the actual necessities of the service of the company and such work shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner and according to specifications outlined by the city engineer. 
(c)  The city engineer may assign an inspector to supervise the work and the cost of such service shall be charged to the public corporation or utility at cost. 
(Code 1974, § 31-34) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 98. 
Sec. 102-51. - Trees and shrubs overhanging public property. 
(a)  Any tree or shrub or part thereof growing upon private property but overhanging or interfering with the use of any highway, park or public place of the city that in the opinion of the city engineer endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  The owner shall be notified in writing of the existence of the nuisance and given a reasonable time for its correction or removal. If not corrected or removed within the time allotted, the city engineer shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed, and the cost shall be assessed against the property as provided by law. 
(c)  Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(31), 31-35) 
Secs. 102-52-102-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANTING OR REMOVAL PERMIT 

Sec. 102-71. - Required. 
    No person shall plant, move, spray, fertilize, brace, trim, do surgery work, cut above or below ground, cut any branch or root therefrom or otherwise disturb any tree or shrub in any highway, park or public place of the city without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer. 
(Code 1974, § 31-42) 
Sec. 102-72. - Standards for issuance. 
    The city engineer may issue a permit required by this division if, in his judgment, the desired work is necessary and the proposed method of workmanship is of a satisfactory nature. 
(Code 1974, § 31-43) 
Sec. 102-73. - Contents. 
    Every permit issued pursuant to this division shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the work to be done. 
(2)  The species or variety and the size and location of the trees or shrubs. 
(3)  The method of planting. 
(4)  The method of supporting the trees or shrubs. 
(5)  The method of trimming the trees or shrubs. 
(6)  A definite date of expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1974, § 31-44) 
Sec. 102-74. - Violations. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to this division may be declared void if its terms are violated. 
(Code 1974, § 31-45) 
Sec. 102-75. - Compliance with division. 
    Any person receiving a permit pursuant to this division shall abide by the specifications and standards of practice adopted by this division. 
(Code 1974, § 31-46) 
Sec. 102-76. - Replacement of removed trees and shrubs. 
    As a condition to any permit to remove any tree or shrub, the city engineer may require that the permittee plant a tree or shrub in place of the one removed. Whenever any such tree has been destroyed or removed pursuant to any such conditional permit, it shall be a violation of this Code for the permittee to fail, refuse or neglect to plant another tree or shrub of the type, size and at the location specified in the permit, within six months or within the next planting season, from the date of the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1974, § 31-47) 
Secs. 102-77-102-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISEASED TREES 

Sec. 102-101. - Applicability of state law. 
    Regulation No. 613 of the state department of agriculture declares elm trees and wood infected by Dutch elm disease to be a public nuisance. In connection with other public acts of the state, this regulation provides the framework for municipal control of diseased trees on private as well as public property. 
(Code 1974, § 31-53) 
Sec. 102-102. - Enforcement powers and right of entry of city engineer; interference with city engineer. 
(a)  The city engineer is charged with the enforcement of this division and, to that end, he may enter upon private property at all daylight hours for the purpose of inspecting trees thereon, and may remove such specimens as are required for purposes of analysis to determine whether or not the trees are infected. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the city engineer from entering on private property for the purpose of carrying out his duties under this division, or to interfere with the city engineer in his lawful performance of his duties under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1974, § 31-54) 
Sec. 102-103. - Diseased trees declared nuisance; removal and burning required. 
(a)  All species and varieties of elm, zelkova and planera affected with the Dutch elm disease (Ceratostomella ulmi), as determined by laboratory analysis, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Trees or parts thereof of elm, zelkova or planera in a dead or dying condition which may serve as a breeding place for the European elm bark beetle (Scolytus multistriatus) are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(c)  Trees coming within the terms of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be removed and burned within ten days following notification of the discovery of the infection or decay. It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner of property on which the tree is situated, to possess or keep such a tree after the expiration of ten days following notification of the discovery of such infection or decay. 
(Code 1974, § 31-55) 
Sec. 102-104. - Notice to remove. 
(a)  If trees on private property are found to be infected, the city engineer shall give to the owner of the premises where such trees are situated written notice of the existence of such disease, and require the removal and burning of such trees within a period of ten days following such notice. The removal and burning of the trees shall be under the direction and supervision of the city engineer. The notice shall also notify the owner of the premises that, unless the trees are removed and burned within ten days, the city will proceed with the removal and burning of such tree, and assess the cost thereof against the property in accordance with the provisions of the Charter. 
(b)  Service of such notice required by subsection (a) of this section shall be by personal service where the owner of the premises is a resident of the city. Where the owner is a nonresident of the city, the notice shall be served by registered mail, addressed to the owner at his last known address as shown on the records in the office of the city assessor, and by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1974, §§ 31-56, 31-57) 
Sec. 102-105. - Option of property owner to remove or have city remove trees. 
    After notice as provided for in section 102-104, it shall thereupon become the duty of the owner of any premises upon which a diseased tree is found to cause such tree to be removed and burned under the direction and supervision of the city engineer, or, in lieu thereof, to request that the removal and burning be done by the city engineer. 
(Code 1974, § 31-58) 
Sec. 102-106. - Collection of costs when trees removed by city. 
    If the city shall remove and burn any tree pursuant to this division, all expenses incurred in connection therewith shall be reported to the city council, for assessment against the lands upon which the tree was situated, in accordance with the provisions of chapter XI of the Charter. 
(Code 1974, § 31-59) 
Sec. 102-107. - Diseased trees on public lands. 
    Diseased trees on public lands within the city shall be removed at city expense. 
(Code 1974, § 31-60) 
Secs. 102-108-102-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOXIOUS WEEDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq. 

Sec. 102-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Noxious and poisonous weeds includes Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (Ambrosia elatior L.) and poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (Toxicodendron vernix), milkweed, ox-eye daisies, goldenrod, and burdock. 
(Code 1974, § 31-71) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Noxious weeds defined, MCL 247.62. 
Sec. 102-142. - Duty of property owners to cut weeds and grass. 
    It shall be the duty of every person who owns any land within the corporate limits of the city to cut, destroy and remove from such land all noxious and poisonous weeds growing thereon and dead grass and brush thereon, at least three times in each year, once before June 1, once before July 15 and once before September 1, to prevent such dead grass and brush from becoming a fire hazard. 
(Code 1974, § 31-72) 
Sec. 102-143. - Special requirements for improved land. 
    It shall be unlawful for an owner of land where 25 percent of the frontage on one side of a block is permanently improved to permit weeds standing more than 12 inches in height which are in such a location and condition as to be a nuisance and to constitute a menace to the public health, safety and welfare: 
(1)  To remain upon such land. 
(2)  To remain upon any portion of the sidewalk, street or area between the property line of such land and the curb of the street adjacent to such land. 
(3)  To remain between the property line of such land and a line in the street adjacent thereto having no curb, which line is parallel to the property line and is ten feet distant therefrom. 
(4)  To remain between the property line and the middle of an alley or easement adjacent to the property line of such land. 
(Code 1974, § 31-73) 
Sec. 102-144. - Special requirements for vacant unplatted property. 
    Noxious weeds, grass and brush located on vacant unplatted property or acreage shall be removed or cut 150 feet from any occupied lot or any established street or alley lines. 
(Code 1974, § 31-74) 
Sec. 102-145. - Notice to cut weeds and destroy grass. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk, before May 15 and August 15 of each year, to post three printed notices, one each in three conspicuous places within the city, and to publish a notice, once a week for two successive weeks, in a newspaper published and circulated within the city, giving notice of the provisions of this article. The notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
To any owner of lands situated within the City of Trenton, County of Wayne and State of Michigan: 
Notice is hereby given that all noxious weeds growing and all dead grass and brush on any land within the City of Trenton, County of Wayne and State of Michigan, must be cut down, destroyed and removed on or before the _____ day of ________, 20___, to prevent such weeds from going to seed or to blossom, as the case may be, and to prevent such dead grass and brush from becoming a fire hazard. 
Failure to comply with this notice on or before the above-mentioned date shall make any party so failing liable for the costs of cutting, destroying and removing said noxious weeds and dead grass and brush by said city, said cost to be levied and collected against said lands in the same manner as prescribed by the City Charter and City Code. 
(Code 1974, § 31-75) 
Sec. 102-146. - Cutting and removal by city upon failure to comply with notice. 
    Should any owner fail to conform with the provisions of this article within the time established in the notice under section 102-145, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to cause all of such noxious and poisonous weeds and dead grass, brush and green underbrush to be cut, destroyed and removed. 
(Code 1974, § 31-76) 
Sec. 102-147. - Account of expenses incurred by city to be kept by city engineer. 
    The city engineer shall keep an accurate account of the expenses incurred in doing any work pursuant to section 102-146, with respect to each parcel of land entered upon therefor, and shall make a sworn statement of the account and deliver the statement and account to the city clerk. 
(Code 1974, § 31-77) 
Sec. 102-148. - Contents of statement of expenses. 
    A sworn statement of the city engineer pursuant to this article shall give the date when weeds, dead grass, brush and green underbrush were cut, destroyed and removed, the owner and a description of the lands involved and the cost of labor. 
(Code 1974, § 31-78) 
Sec. 102-149. - Submission of accounts to city council; audit; payment. 
    The city clerk shall present all accounts for work done by the city under this article to the city council not later than the third Thursday in December of each year in which such labor is performed. The city council shall audit the accounts and, if correct, allow such accounts and order the accounts paid from the general fund. 
(Code 1974, § 31-79) 
Sec. 102-150. - Certification of accounts to city assessor; collection. 
    When any accounts have been audited, allowed and paid as provided in section 102-149, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to certify them forthwith to the city assessor. All expenditures represented by such accounts shall be levied on the land on which such expenditures were made and shall be a lien on the property and shall be collected in the same manner as prescribed by the Charter and this Code. 
(Code 1974, § 31-80) 
Chapter 106 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Community development, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 62; parks and recreation, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 86; vegetation, ch. 102; zoning, ch. 110; WM waterfront marina district, § 110-491 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 106-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vehicle includes but is not limited to any automobiles, trailers, boat trailers, boats, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, bicycles or other means of transportation. 
(Code 1974, § 8-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-2. - Interfering with streets while launching or hauling out boats. 
    No person launching or hauling out for use boats or watercraft shall obstruct or interfere at the ingress or egress to or from any of the public streets at their junction with the Detroit River within the city. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1974, §§ 2-306(a)(6), 8-2) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Secs. 106-3-106-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PORT COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-401 et seq. 

Sec. 106-31. - Continued. 
    The Advisory Port of Trenton Commission heretofore created is hereby continued. 
(Code 1974, § 8-21) 
Sec. 106-32. - Composition. 
    The port commission shall be composed of seven members, who shall be electors and residents of the city. 
(Code 1974, § 8-22) 
Sec. 106-33. - Term of office of members. 
    The terms of the office of the members of the port commission shall be three years. The terms of office in each instance shall begin on July 6 of each year. 
(Code 1974, § 8-23) 
Sec. 106-34. - Compensation of members. 
    Any member of the port commission who shall attend a duly called meeting of the commission shall be compensated as provided in section 2-401. 
(Code 1974, § 8-24) 
Sec. 106-35. - Commission to act in advisory capacity. 
    The port commission shall be purely advisory. 
(Code 1974, § 8-25) 
Sec. 106-36. - Officers. 
    The port commission shall elect a president and vice-president and secretary. 
(Code 1974, § 8-26) 
Sec. 106-37. - Meetings and rules of procedure; record of proceedings; quorum. 
    The port commission shall designate the time and place of its meetings. It shall adopt its own rules of parliamentary procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. Four persons shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1974, § 8-27) 
Sec. 106-38. - Reports. 
    A monthly report shall be made to the city council to report the progress of the port commission. 
(Code 1974, § 8-28) 
Sec. 106-39. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the port commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  Conduct investigations and make analysis of existing waterfront facilities and needs and water pollution abatement and make recommendations to the city council concerning such matters. 
(2)  Coordinate and aid in the work of the various city departments in the acquisition, construction and maintenance of waterfront facilities. 
(3)  Request such assistance as may reasonably be necessary from other departments in the performance of its duties described in this article. 
(4)  Perform such other duties as the city council may prescribe relating to facilities for the mooring or storage of watercraft. 
(Code 1974, § 8-29) 
Secs. 106-40-106-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL BOAT RAMPS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 106-61-106-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT FOR USE 

Sec. 106-81. - Required. 
    No person shall enter from land or water any portion of any municipal boat ramp, whether such ramp shall be owned, leased or licensed by or to the city, unless and until he shall have obtained a permit from the department of parks and recreation allowing him the use of the ramp and the permit is properly displayed. 
(Code 1974, § 8-4) 
Sec. 106-82. - Fee. 
    Each applicant for a municipal boat ramp permit shall pay the fee established by the city council to the police department upon issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1974, § 8-5) 
Sec. 106-83. - Term. 
    The permit required by this division shall be effective from the date of issuance through the last day of December of the year of issuance, but shall become void before such date if the person to whom the permit is issued shall dispose of or transfer title to the vehicle covered by the permit. No permit shall be effective longer than one year, and permits shall be issued on strictly an annual basis. 
(Code 1974, § 8-6) 
Sec. 106-84. - Revocation. 
    Any permit issued by the department of parks and recreation pursuant to this division may be revoked upon conviction of the permittee, a guest of the permittee, or a person using the permittee's vehicle of profanity, obscenity, carousal or disorderly conduct while on or adjacent to any municipally owned boat ramp. 
(Code 1974, § 8-7) 
Sec. 106-85. - Authority to tow and impound vehicles not displaying permit. 
(a)  Any tow vehicle and trailer parked upon any portion of a municipally owned boat ramp without displaying a proper permit may be towed away and impounded by the police department, and the owner thereof shall be guilty of illegal parking and shall be liable for any and all costs of towing and storage which the police department might incur in carrying out the terms of this section. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, any tow vehicle and trailer parked upon any portion of a municipally owned boat ramp without displaying a proper permit shall be deemed to have been parked there by the owner thereof. 
(Code 1974, § 8-8) 
Sec. 106-86. - Cash bond when vehicle is impounded. 
    The police department is hereby empowered and authorized to impound any tow vehicle and trailer violating the provisions of section 106-85 until the owner or operator thereof shall post a cash bond in the amount of $100.00 for each vehicle impounded. 
(Code 1974, § 8-9) 
Secs. 106-87-106-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATERCRAFT AND MARINE SAFETY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Water safety, MCL 324.80101 et seq.; local water safety regulations, MCL 324.80113. 

Sec. 106-111. - Adoption of state law. 
    Sections 80101-80104, 80122-80124, 80126, 80140, 80141, 80144-80153, 80155, and 80164-80173 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.80101-324.80104, 324.80122-324.80124, 324.80126, 324.80140, 324.80141, 324.80144-324.80153, 324.80155, 324.80164-324.80173) are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1974, § 8-31) 
Sec. 106-112. - Violations; penalty. 
    Unless otherwise designated as a civil infraction under part 801 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.80101 et seq.), any violation thereof shall be considered a misdemeanor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, violations of sections 80146 and 80148 of such act (MCL 324.80146, 324.80148) shall constitute a civil infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(Code 1974, § 8-32) 
Sec. 106-113. - Prohibited behavior while operating boats or watercraft. 
    No person, while using or operating any boats or watercraft, shall make any loud, boisterous, unnecessary noise, or drink and expose intoxicating liquor, or throw, scatter or deposit any bottles, cans, containers, garbage, rubbish or other animal or organic matter into the Detroit River, the public streets or private property within the city. 
(Code 1974, § 8-3) 
Sec. 106-114. - Speed limit. 
(a)  All words and phrases used in this section shall be construed and have the same meanings as those words and phrases defined in part 801 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.80101 et seq.). 
(b)  Slow, no-wake speed for vessels is established as follows: 
(1)  On the waters of the Detroit River, within the corporate limits of the City of Trenton, Wayne County, Town 4 South, Range 11 East, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow, no-wake speed when within 1,000 feet of any shore, dock or pierhead. This rule applies only to vessels used for recreational purposes. 
(2)  On the waters of all artificial and natural channels and canals within the corporate limits of the City of Trenton, Wayne County, Town 4 South, Range 11 East, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow, no-wake speed. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a civil infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(Code 1974, § 8-10) 
Sec. 106-115. - Operation of personal watercraft. 
(a)  In this section: 
    Personal watercraft means a vessel that meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Uses a motor-driven propeller or internal combustion engine powering a water jet pump as its primary source of propulsion. 
(2)  Is designed without an open load carrying area that would retain water. 
(3)  Is designed to be operated by one or more persons positioned on, rather than within the confines of, the hull. 
    Slow, no-wake speed means the use of a vessel at a very slow speed so that the resulting wake or wash is minimal. 
(b)  A person who operates a personal watercraft or a person who is being towed by a personal watercraft on a water sled, kite, surfboard, parachute, tube, water ski or similar equipment on the waters of this state shall maintain a distance of not less than 100 feet from a dock, raft, or buoy or occupied bathing or swimming area, a person in the water or on the water in a personal flotation device or a vessel moored, anchored, drifting or sitting in dead water. 
(c)  A person who operates a personal watercraft or a person who is being towed by personal watercraft on a water sled, kite, surfboard, parachute, tube, water ski or similar equipment on the waters of this state shall maintain a distance of not less than 200 feet from a submerged diver, a vessel engaged in underwater diving activities or a flotation device displaying the international diving insignia. 
(d)  Except when travelling at slow, no-wake speed perpendicular to the shoreline, a person who operates a personal watercraft on that portion of the Detroit River within the jurisdiction of the city shall maintain a distance of 200 feet from the shoreline. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. In addition, a person who violates this section may be required to participate in and complete a boating safety course. 
(Code 1974, §§ 8-33-8-35) 
Chapter 110 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 705, § 1, adopted Feb. 20, 2007, repealed Ch. 110, which pertained to zoning and was originally derived from Ord. No. 368, adopted Aug. 20, 1973. For the complete derivation of former Ch. 110, see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. Section 1 of Ord. No. 705 enacted a new zoning code included herein as Ch. 110. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance rezoning property or amending the zoning map saved from repeal, § 1-12(16); compliance with zoning regulations for dances and dancehalls, § 10-73; zoning requirements for dog and cat kennels, § 14-173; fences, § 18-111 et seq.; swimming pools, § 18-221 et seq.; community development, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 86; conformance with zoning requirements for off-street parking facilities, § 86-146; vegetation, ch. 102; waterways, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Zoning, MCL 125.581 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE 

Sec. 110-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Trenton Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(100), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-2-110-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 110-21. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1)  The particular shall control the general. 
(2)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(3)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  The words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)  A "building" or "structure" includes the whole or any part thereof. 
(6)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." 
(7)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(8)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunctions "and," "or," "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly or, in any combination. 
c.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
(9)  Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning assigned to them in the Webster's Standard Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(200), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-22. - Compliance required. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, altered or maintained, and no new use or change of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, shall be made or maintained except in conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(201), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-23. - Interpretation. 
    In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirement, or in some instances, the maximum permitted limitation adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, or general welfare. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance, or with any rule, regulation or permit previously adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises. However, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by an existing ordinance, code or law, or by a rule, regulation or permit, the standards of this chapter shall prevail and control. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(202), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-24. - Vested rights. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested right in the continuation of any particular use, use district or zoning classification, or any permissible activity therein, and such use, use district or zoning classification or activity is hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(203), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-25. - Changes and amendments. 
    The Trenton City Council may, from time to time, and on the recommendation of the Trenton Planning Commission, or on its own initiation or on petition, amend, supplement, change or modify the zoning district boundaries or the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the authority and procedure set forth in the Unified Zoning Act 110 of the Michigan Public Acts of 2006. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(204), 2-20-2007) 
State Law reference- Amendment procedure, MCL 125.584. 
Sec. 110-26. - Submittal limitation. 
    When a petition to change or modify a zoning district boundary, or to change or modify any provision of this chapter, shall have been denied by city council, one year, commencing on the date of denial, shall pass before the same petition may again be presented for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(205), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-27. - Conflict of laws. 
    Whenever this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by any other law or ordinance, the standards of this chapter shall govern. Whenever any other law, code or ordinance shall impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, such other law, code or ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(206), 2-20-2007) 
State Law reference- Conflicts between zoning and other ordinances, MCL 125.586. 
Sec. 110-28. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them. 
    Accessory use or accessory: A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and (except in the case of accessory off-street parking or loading spaces) located on the same zoning lot with the principal use to which it is related. 
    When "accessory" is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as "accessory use." An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers and private vehicle garages; 
(2)  Swimming pools and tennis courts for the use of the occupants of a residence, and their guests; 
(3)  Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room, or similar accessory building or other structure; 
(4)  A newsstand primarily for the use of the occupants of a building, when the newsstand is located on the same premises with the building; 
(5)  Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock and which is directly used in connection with a business use on the premises, unless such accessory storage is specifically prohibited as set forth in the regulations of the zoning lot on which the principal use is located; 
(6)  Storage of goods and materials used in the manufacture of a product made on the same premises, unless such storage is specifically prohibited as set forth in the regulations of the zoning lot on which the principal use is located; 
(7)  Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, on the same premises as the use it is intended to serve, except as otherwise permitted in the P-1 Vehicle Parking District as set forth in this chapter; 
(8)  Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as but not limited to: offices of an industrial or commercial use located on the same premises with the principal use; 
(9)  Accessory off-street loading and unloading on the same premises as the principal use; and 
(10)  Accessory signs located on the same premises as the principal use. 
    Accessory building: A subordinate building or a part of the main building, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land. 
    Adolescent: For the purpose of this chapter shall mean a male or female human being less than 18 years of age and shall have the same meaning as a "minor child" as defined in 722.111, section 1.(k), of the Child Care Organizations Act 116 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1973, as amended. 
    Adult: For the purposes of this chapter, shall mean a male or female human being 18 years of age or older, as defined in 400.703, section 3.(1), (a) of the Adult Foster Care Licensing Act 218 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1979, as amended. 
    Adult foster care family home: See Foster care family home. 
    Adult foster care small group home: See Foster care group home (small). 
    Adult foster care large group home: See Foster care group home (large). 
    Adult oriented use: Adult oriented use shall include the following uses as herein defined: 
(1)  Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other audio visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and 
b.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as adult bookstore or adult video store. 
Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
a.  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
b.  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; and 
c.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
a.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; and 
b.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; and 
c.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
(5)  Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
(7)  Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
(8)  Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
(9)  Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business. 
b.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business. 
c.  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
d.  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
(10)  Permittee and/or licensee means a person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license. 
(11)  Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
(12)  Nudity or a state of nudity means the appearance of a human bare buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or full female breast. 
(13)  Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
(14)  Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
(15)  Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
a.  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; and 
b.  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude. 
(16)  Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
(17)  Specified anatomical areas means the male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals. 
(18)  Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts. 
b.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy. 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated. 
d.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections a. through c. above. 
(19)  Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor areas exist on the date of enactment. 
(20)  Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business. 
b.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means. 
c.  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
    Alley: Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations: A change, addition, or modification in construction or type of occupancy, any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Apartment: A room or suite of rooms used as a dwelling for one family which has cooking facilities and sanitary facilities located therein. 
    Apartments: The dwelling units in a multiple dwelling building as defined herein: 
(1)  Efficiency apartment means a dwelling unit containing not less than 450 square feet of floor area, and consisting of not more than one room in addition to the kitchen-dining and necessary sanitary facilities. 
(2)  One-bedroom unit means a dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at least 600 square feet per unit, and containing not more than one bedroom in addition to kitchen, dining, and living room, and necessary sanitary facilities. 
(3)  Two-bedroom unit means a dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at least 800 square feet per unit, and containing not more than two bedrooms in addition to kitchen, dining, and living room, and necessary sanitary facilities. 
(4)  Three- or more bedroom unit means a dwelling unit wherein each bedroom in addition to the two-bedroom unit, shall provide an additional area of 200 square feet to the minimum floor area of 800 square feet for each additional bedroom. 
    Apartment building: A building or a portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Apartment hotel: A building designed for or containing both dwelling units and individual guest rooms or suites of rooms, which building may include accessory uses such as cigar store, coffee shop, etc., when such uses are accessible only from the lobby. 
    Arcade: Any establishment or place of business containing five or more mechanical amusement devices. See definition of a mechanical amusement device. 
    Arcade adult: See Adult oriented use. 
    Automobile repair garage: See Motor vehicle repair. 
    Automobile service center: A building or premises used primarily for the sale and installation of automobile accessories, such as tires, batteries, radios, air conditioners and mufflers, plus such services as brake adjustment, and wheel alignment and balancing; but excluding any mechanical repairs, collision work, undercoating or painting. The sale of gasoline shall be incidental to the above enumerated activities. 
    Basement: That portion of a building between the floor and ceiling which is partly below and partly above ground level, but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is more than a vertical distance from grade to ceiling. A basement shall not be considered as a story except in an approved soil sheltered structure. 

Cellar, Basement and Story 
    Block : The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest such streets or railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the city. 
    Boarding house : See Rooming house. 
    Board of zoning appeals : See Zoning board of appeals and adjustments. 
    Brick : See Face brick. 
    Building : Any structure either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. Also, a structure erected on site, including a manufactured building brought to the site. 
    Building, accessory : See Accessory. 
    Building area : The space remaining on a property for building purposes after compliance with minimum building setback requirements and any applicable lot area coverage limitations. 
    Building height : For a principal use, the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. For an accessory building, the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs and to the ridge line for mansard, gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall. 

Building Height 
    Building line: A line formed by the face of the buildings, and for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 

Building Line 
    Building, main or principal: A building in which is conducted the principal purpose of the land on which it is situated. 
    Building, one-family: See Dwelling, single-family. 
    Building, two-family: See Dwelling, two-family. 
    Building, multiple-family: See Apartment building. 
    Cellar: See Basement. 
    Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used solely for burial of the human dead and dedicated for such purpose. 
    Cemetery, pet: Land use or intended to be used solely for burial of nonhuman dead and dedicated to such purpose. 
    Child: See Adolescent. 
    Church: A building used principally for religious worship, but the word church shall not include or mean an undertaker's chapel or funeral building. 
    City: The City of Trenton, Wayne County, Michigan. 
    Clinic: An establishment where human patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists or similar professions. 
    Club, lodge or fraternity: An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, public and private service, patriotic, or the like. 
    Conditional land use: A use of land which requires compliance with certain development or location conditions as set forth for the use in the various zoning districts of the ordinance. 
    Commercial, retail: An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of goods or materials to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
    Commercial, wholesale: An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retail commercial establishments, to industrial, institutional, or professional business uses, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such individuals or establishments. 
    Commission: See Planning commission. 
    Condominium: A form of ownership, which, for the purposes of this chapter, is applied to the following terms as defined herein: 

Condominium Terminology 
(1)  Condominium Act means Act 59 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1978, as amended. 
(2)  Common elements mean the portions of the condominium project other than the condominium. 
(3)  Condominium bylaws mean the required set of bylaws for the condominium project attached to the master deed. 
(4)  Condominium site plan means a scale drawing of a site, including a survey, utility layouts, floor plans and elevation sections, as appropriate, showing existing and proposed structures, improvements, parking, etc., as it is to be erected on the site. 
(5)  Condominium unit means that portion of the project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed. 
(6)  Consolidating master deed means the final amended master deed for a contractible condominium project and expandable condominium project, or a condominium project containing convertible land, or convertible space which final amended master deed fully describes the condominium project as completed. 
(7)  Contractible condominium means a condominium project from which any portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn pursuant to express provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with this chapter and the Condominium Act. 
(8)  Conversion condominium means a condominium project containing condominium units, some or all of which were occupied before the establishment of the condominium project. 
(9)  Convertible area means a unit or a portion of the common elements of the condominium project referred to in the condominium documents within which additional condominium units, or general or limited common elements may be created pursuant to express provision in the condominium documents and in accordance with this chapter and the Condominium Act. 
(10)  Co-owner means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, or other legal entity or combination thereof, who owns a condominium unit within the condominium project. Co-owner may include a land contract lender if the condominium documents or the land contract so provides. 
(11)  Expandable condominium means a condominium project to which additional land may be added pursuant to express provision in the condominium documents and in accordance with this chapter and the Condominium Act. 
(12)  Limited common elements means a portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners. 
(13)  Master deed means the condominium document recording the condominium project as approved by the city, to which is attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference, the approved bylaws for the project and the approved condominium subdivision plan for the project. 
    Convalescent or nursing home: A home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, wherein two or more persons are cared for. Said home shall conform and qualify for license under state law even though state law has different size regulations. 
    Day care: Means the provision of care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day. For the purposes of this chapter, day care shall include the following: 
(1)  Day care center means a facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more minor child or adult as defined in this chapter for care for periods of less than 24 hours a day and where the parents, guardians, family member, or court appointed fiduciary or care giver is not immediately available to the child or adult. A child care center may also be known as a day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group or drop-in-center, but does not include a Sunday School, Vacation Bible School, or a religious instructional class conducted by a religious organization. 
(2)  Day care, family home, means a private home in which one but not more than six minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, including a home that gives care to all unrelated minor children for more than four weeks during a calendar year, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
(3)  Day care, group home, means a private home in which more than six but not more than 12 minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption, but including a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
    Density: The number of families residing on, or dwelling units developed on, an acre of land. As used in this chapter, all densities are stated in families per net acre, that is, per acre of land devoted to residential use, exclusive of land in streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, schoolyards, or other public lands and open spaces. 
    Derrick: Any portable framework, tower mast, and/or structure which is required or used in connection with drilling or re-working a well for the production of oil or gas. 
    Development: The construction of a new building or other structure on a lot, the relocation of an existing building on another lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    District: The various portions of the City of Trenton within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Drilling pad: The area of surface operations surrounding the surface location of a well or wells. Such area shall not include an access road to the drilling pad. 
    Drive-in: See Restaurant, drive-in. 
    Drive-through: A business establishment designed and intended to provide a driveway approach and temporary motor vehicle standing space or stacking space where customers receive service while in their motor vehicles. 
    Dwelling: A place or unit of residence, an abode, a place of continued living. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Dwelling efficiency: See Apartments. 
    Dwelling, manufactured: A dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed, assembled, and finished off the premises upon which it is intended to be located. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family: See Apartments. 
    Dwelling, one-family: A building designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, site-built: A dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed, assembled, and finished on the premises which are intended to serve as its final location. Site-built dwelling units shall include dwelling units constructed of pre-cut materials, and panel walls, roof and floor sections when such sections require substantial assembly and finishing on the premises which are intended to serve as its final location. 
    Dwelling, two-family: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
    Earth berm: See Landscaping. 
    Earth berm, obscuring: See Landscaping. 
    Earth tone colors: Whenever the term, earth tone colors, is applied to any standard or standards in this chapter, such colors shall be limited to various muted shades of brown, beige, orange, and red color tones. Other possible earth tone colors such as brighter shades of red, orange, and any shade of blue or green shall not be considered as earth tone colors for the purposes of their application to the earth tone color requirements of this code. 
    Easement or corridor: For the purposes of this chapter, an easement or corridor shall mean the area within which a public transmission line is located, either above or below ground. The term corridor shall apply when the designated area within which the transmission line is located is owned in fee interest by a utility company. 
    Elderly housing: See Housing for the elderly. 
    Engineer: The city engineer for the City of Trenton or the city engineer's authorized representative. 
    Erected: Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction. Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, collections, communication, supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment in connection therewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service to the city such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare. Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and the applicable standards of this chapter and other ordinances of the City of Trenton. 
    Excavation: Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Exception: A use permitted only after review of an application by the board of zoning appeals or legislative body or a modification in the standards of this chapter specifically permitted after review by the board of zoning appeals, planning commission or legislative body; such review being necessary because the provisions of this chapter covering conditions precedent or subsequent are not precise enough to cover all applications without interpretation and such review and exception is provided for by this chapter. An exception is not a variance. 
    Face brick: Face brick means whenever face brick is called for as an exterior building wall material for a building, the brick shall consist of kiln-baked clay or shale masonry units the thickness of which shall not be less than three inches deep, measured from the front face of the unit to the rear face of the unit (necessary if city wishes to regulate building materials). 
    Family: A single individual or a number of individuals domiciled together whose relationship is of a continuing, nontransient, domestic character and who are cooking and living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. This shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for anticipated limited duration of school terms or other similar determinable period. 
    Fast food restaurant: See Restaurant (fast food). 
    Fence: See Chapter 9, Article V, Fences, section 9-86, Definitions, definition (e), Fences, in the City Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
    Floor area, gross: The area of a building measured to the exterior face of all exterior walls. 

Usable Floor Area 
    Floor area, useable, residential: The sum of the horizontal area of the first story measured to the interior face of exterior walls; plus, similarly measured, that area of all other stories having more than 84 inches of headroom which may be made useable for human habitation; but excluding the floor area of basements, attics, attached or unattached garages, breeze ways, unenclosed porches and accessory buildings (also, see Story and Story, half, and Basement. 
    Floor area, useable, nonresidential: The sum of the horizontal area of the first story measured to the interior face of exterior walls; plus, similarly measured, that area of all other stories, including mezzanines, which may be made fit for occupancy, including the floor area of all accessory buildings measured similarly and the floor area of basements when used or activities related to the principal use, but excluding storage, furnace and utility rooms. Parking space located within a building shall not be considered useable floor space. 
    Floor, ground: That portion of a building which is partly below grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor. A ground floor shall be counted as a story. 
    Foster care: Means the provision of supervision, personal care and protection in addition to room and board for 24 hours a day five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. For the purpose of this chapter foster care shall include the following: 
(1)  Foster family home: A private home in which one but not more than four minor children who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, shall be given care and supervision for 24 hours a day for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
(2)  Foster care family home: Means a private residence with capacity to receive not more than six adults who shall be provided foster care for five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks. 
(3)  Foster family group home: A private home in which more than four but less than seven minor children who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, shall be provided care for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
(4)  Foster care group home (small): Means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity for not more than 12 adults who are provided foster care. 
(5)  Foster care group home (large): Means an adult foster care facility with the approved capacity for at least 13 but not more than 20 adults who are provided foster care. 
    Gasoline service station: See Motor vehicle service station. 
    Garage, repair: See Motor vehicle repair. 
    Garage, commercial parking: A building or structure which is used by the public for the parking of motor vehicles and for the purposes of this chapter may be the principal use of the property or may be accessory to a principal use. 
    Garage, private: An accessory building or integral portion of a main building designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats, and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building. 
    Grade: The ground elevation established by the city engineer for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of the building. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by computing the average elevation of the ground for each face of the building, and averaging the totals. 

Average Grade 
    Greenbelt, aesthetic: See Landscaping . 
    Greenbelt, obscuring: See Landscaping . 
    Home occupation: A gainful occupation, activity, hobby or profession that is traditionally or customarily carried on entirely within the walls of a residential dwelling and which is carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof. 
    Horizontal drilling:. The drilling of an oil or natural gas well at an angle so that the well runs parallel to the formation containing the oil or gas. 
    Hospital: A building, structure or institution in which sick or injured persons are given medical or surgical treatment and operating under license by the health department and the State of Michigan, and is used for primarily in-patient services, and including such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, central service facilities, and staff offices. 
    Hotel: A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy and within which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial or desk service and bell boy service. A hotel may include a restaurant in cocktail lounge, banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms. 
    Housing for the elderly: A housing unit specifically designed for the needs of an elderly person or persons, and conforming to the requirements of state and federal programs providing housing for the elderly. 
    Hydraulic fracturing or fracking: The process of injecting water, customized fluids, sand, steam, or gas into a gas well under pressure to improve gas recovery. 
    Junk: For the purpose of this chapter, the term junk shall mean any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, signs, product, merchandise with parts missing or scrap metals or other scrap materials that are damaged, deteriorated, or are in a condition which cannot be used for the purpose that the product was manufactured. 
    Junk yard: The term junk yard includes automobile wrecking yards, any area where junk vehicles are stored, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metal or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof except for the normal household refuse which is stored only between regular pickup and disposal of household refuse, provided the same is not left for a period of over 30 days in which case it shall be considered as junk. This definition does not pertain to uses conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
    Kennel, commercial: Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, and/or cats, or other household pets, over six months of age are either permanently or temporarily boarded. Kennel shall also include any lot or premises where household pets are bred or sold. 
    Landscaping: The art or science of placing live planting materials in specific or in specified areas with the intent of improving the appearance of an area, or for the purpose of creating a screen to obscure vision beyond the screen. For the purpose of this chapter, landscaping shall also include the following terms: 
(1)  Buffers for conflicting land use: A device or an area that is used for the purpose of shielding the view of one use of land from another, and for the protection of an adjoining property. A buffering device could include a wall, fence earth berm or landscape planting screen, or an area containing sufficient natural tree cover to serve as a buffer, or an area of sufficient distance to effectuate a buffer, or land containing sufficiently abrupt changes in topography to serve as a buffer. 
(2)  Caliper: The diameter of a tree measured six inches above the root ball up to trees four inches and larger in caliper, and measured 12 inches above the root ball for larger caliper trees. 


Tree Caliper Measurement 
(3)  Earth berm, artistic: An aesthetically designed landscaping feature, which may also serve to create a landscaped swale for the purpose of temporarily detaining stormwater run-off. 
(4)  Earth berm, obscuring: An earthen mound of definite height, length, location and appearance, which is designed and intended to serve as an obscuring device. 
(5)  Greenbelt, aesthetic: A landscaped area or lawn panel in which live landscape planting materials are placed for aesthetic purposes and not for the purpose of screening. 
(6)  Greenbelt, obscuring: A landscaped area of definite width, height and location containing live planting materials of definite spacing or grouping which is designed to serve as an obscuring device. 
(7)  Interior landscaped areas: Includes all landscaped areas between the walls of a building and any off-street parking spaces, service drives or vehicle maneuvering lanes, or loading and unloading areas, that comply with the minimum applicable size (planting area) requirements of this section and which are contained within an imaginary line that squares off the outer limits of an off-street parking lot. 
(8)  Obscure: To make not readily visible, to hide or screen from view. For the purpose of this chapter, obscure shall mean to obscure the view of one use of land from another (see definition of buffers for conflicting land use). 
(9)  Parking lot tree: A large deciduous tree placed within an off-street parking area. 
(10)  Peripheral landscaped areas: Includes all landscaping that lies between any off-street parking spaces, service drives and vehicle maneuvering lanes, or loading and unloading area, and any peripheral property line, or where no parking, service drives and vehicle maneuvering lanes, or loading and unloading areas exist, any landscaped areas lying between any minimum required building setback line and a peripheral property line. 
(11)  Shrubs, large: Shrubs which will be four feet six inches in height or greater at maturity. 
(12)  Shrubs, small: Shrubs that will be less than four feet six inches in height at maturity. 
(13)  Tree, large deciduous: Shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in caliper measured six inches up the tree from the ground. 
(14)  Tree, small deciduous: Shall be a minimum of one and one-half inches in caliper measured six inches up the tree from the ground. 
(15)  Vehicle use area: Includes all off-street parking lots, drive aisles, loading, unloading areas, service drives and landscaped islands. 
    Loading space: See Off-street loading space. 
    Local street: A street of limited continuity which is to be used to gain immediate access to abutting residential properties. 

Interior, Through and Corner Lots 
    Lot: A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 
    Lot area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    Lot, corner: A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage: The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings including accessory buildings. 
    Lot, depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior: Any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot, through (double frontage): Any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required. 
    Lot lines: The property lines bounding the lot as defined herein. 
(1)  Front lot line means in the case of an interior lot abutting upon one public or private street, the front lot line shall mean the line separating such lot from such street right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot the front lot line shall be the narrower of the two frontage lines, except in the case where both street frontages are at equal dimension, the front shall be the one assigned a street address. In the case of a double frontage lot, the front lot line shall be that line separating said lot from that street which is designated as the front street by the owner, with city approval, or the city's board of zoning appeals shall designate the front lot line. 


Rear Lot Line 
(2)  Rear lot line means the lot line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of a lot that is pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line not less than ten feet in length extending across the full width of the lot, with the minimum required rear yard setback being measured from the rear wall of the principal building to said imaginary line. In cases where none of these definitions are applicable the property owner, with city approval, may designate the rear lot line, or the Trenton Zoning Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall designate the rear lot line. 
(3)  Side lot line means any lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is an exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record: A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by municipal or county officials and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    Lot width: The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines. 

Lot Width 
    Lot width, required: For the purpose of this chapter shall be the minimum required horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where the minimum required front setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
    Lot, zoning: A single tract of land which at the time of filing for a building permit is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the zoning district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed in the Wayne County Register of Deeds but may include one or more lots of record. 

Zoning Lot 
    A zoning district line of the zoning lot shall serve as though it is a lot line for the purposes of establishing building setbacks and percent of lot coverage. 
    Main building: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Main use: The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Major thoroughfare: An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate area and the region beyond, and may be designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway freeway, expressway, or equivalent terms on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Marina, private: A water basin providing boat slips for docking or mooring boats and other watercraft with no other boat or boat related facilities or services. 
    Marina, public: A water basin providing boat slips for docking or mooring boats and other watercraft and which may provide boat and boat-related services that may be available by membership only or which may be available to the general public. 
    Master plan: A comprehensive plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public building and all physical development of the city and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Marquee: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature projecting out horizontally from the wall of a building. 
    Mechanical amusement device: See Chapter 5, Article VII, Mechanical Amusement Devices, section 5-127, Definitions, definition (e), Mechanical amusement device, the Trenton Code of Ordinances. 

Basic Structural Terms 
    Mezzanine: An intermediate or fractional story between the floor and ceiling of a full story and occupying not more than one-third of the floor area of the full story. 
    Mixed use: A single building containing more than one type of use, or a single development of more than one building and use, where different land use types are in close proximity, and which are planned of shared vehicle and pedestrian access and parking areas. 
    Mobile home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. Mobile home does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Mobile home park: Any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located. 
    Motel: A series of attached, semi-detached or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle, commercial: Commercial vehicle as defined in the 1995 Michigan Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Villages and Townships means every vehicle which is used for the transportation of passengers for hire or which is constructed or used for the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise. The term also means a motor vehicle which is designated and used for drawing other vehicles and which is not constructed to carry any load thereon, either independently or as any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Motor vehicle service center: A use which is accessory to a designated retail commercial outlet located within a shopping center or which is within a building composed of the same construction material and of the same design as the shopping center, wherein automobile products such as motor oils, lubricants and various automobile mechanical parts that are retailed directly to the public by said retail commercial outlet are installed. 
    Motor vehicle service station (gasoline station): A place where gasoline or other motor fuel and lubricants for operating motor vehicles are offered for sale at retail to the public including sale of accessories, lubricating and light motor service on the premises, but not including collision services such as body, frame or fender straightening or repair, painting or undercoating. 
    Motor vehicle repair (general): The general mechanical repair, including overhaul and reconditioning of motor vehicle engines, transmissions and other mechanical repairs, but not including collision services such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair, painting or undercoating. 
    Motor vehicle repair (major): The general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision services such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair, painting or undercoating. 
    Multiplex: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two, three or four families, living independently of each other with at least one main entrance directly from the outside for each living unit. 
    Municipality: See City . 
    Natural gas compressor station: A facility designed and constructed to compress natural gas originating from a gas well, or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility for delivery of gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline, natural gas processing plant, or underground storage field, including one or more natural gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes, valves, tanks and other equipment. 
    Natural gas processing plant: A facility designed and constructed to remove materials such as ethane, propane, butane, methane and other constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow such natural gas to be of such quality as is required or appropriate for transmission or distribution to commercial markets, but not including facilities or equipment that is designed and constructed primarily to remove water, water vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids from the natural gas. 

Nonconformities 
    Nonconforming building: A building or structure, or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto and that does not conform to the provisions of the ordinance in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use or structure-Class A: A nonconforming use or structure that has been designated to be allowed to be perpetuated and improved under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use or structure-Class B: A nonconforming use or structure that has been designated to be allowed to be perpetuated within the restricted provisions of this chapter. 

    Nonconforming use and building: A use and a building lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this chapter or subsequent amendment thereto which does not conform to the use and height, bulk, placement or/and provisions for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nuisance factors: An offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as but not limited to: (a) noise, (b) dust, (c) smoke, (d) odor, (e) glare, (f) fumes, (g) flashes, (h) vibration, (i) shock waves, (j) heat, (k) electronic or atomic radiation, (l) objectionable effluent, (m) noise of congregation of people, particularly at night, (n) passenger traffic, (o) invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic. 
    Nursery: An area for the growing of plant materials, not offered for sale on the premises. 
    Nursery, commercial: A space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the growing and storage of live trees, shrubs, or plants offered for sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. 
    Nursery school: See Day care. 
    Nursing home: See Convalescent care . 
    Occupancy load: The number of individuals normally occupying a building or part thereof, or for which the existing facilities have been designed. 
    Occupied: Used in any way at the time in question. 
    Off-street loading space: A facility or space specifically intended to permit the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and other vehicles outside of a public right-of-way. 
    Off-street parking lot: A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of motor vehicles out of a public street right-of-way. 
    Oil and gas: Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed methane gas, propane, butane and/or any other products or similar substances that are produced by drilling an oil or gas well. 
    Oil and gas development: The well site preparation, construction, drilling, redrilling, hydraulic fracturing, and/or site restoration associated with an oil or gas well of any depth; water and other fluid storage, impoundment and transportation used for such activities; and the installation and use of all associated equipment, including tanks, meters, and other equipment and structures whether permanent or temporary; and the site preparation, construction, installation, maintenance and repair of oil and gas pipelines and associated equipment and other equipment and activities associated with the exploration for, production and transportation of oil and gas. The definition does not include natural gas compressor stations and natural gas processing plants or facilities performing the equivalent functions. 
    Oil or gas well: A pierced or bored hole drilled or being drilled in the ground for the purpose of, or to be used for, producing, extracting or injecting gas, oil, petroleum or another liquid related to oil or gas production or storage, including brine disposal or being drilled for an exploration for such purposes. 
    Oil or gas well site: The location of facilities, structures, materials and equipment whether temporary or permanent, that are used for or incidental to the preparation, construction, drilling, production or operation of an oil or gas well, or exploration for a potential oil or gas well. 
    Open air business uses: Open air business uses not conducted from a wholly enclosed building, if operated for profit, shall include the following uses: 
(1)  Bicycle, trailer, mobile home, motor vehicle, farm implements, boats or home equipment sale or rental services. 
(2)  Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools, and similar uses. 
(3)  Retail sale of fruit, vegetables, and perishable foods. 
(4)  Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment, and other home garden supplies and equipment. 
(5)  Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf, golf driving range, children's amusement park or similar recreation uses. 
    Open front store: A business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term open front store shall not include automobile repair stations or automobile service stations. 
    Open space: An area of land that remains primarily undeveloped and in its natural state. For the purpose of this chapter, open space may include park lands and park facilities so long as they are provided as a part of an open space area. 
    Open storage (motor vehicle): The outdoor standing or placement of motor vehicles including truck trailers for more than 18 hours, including new or used motor vehicles on display for lease or sale. 
    Open storage (nonresidential): The outdoor standing or placement of any material which is man-made, assembled, fabricated or treated in any manner and which may or may not be used directly in the processing or fabrication of a product manufactured on the premises. 
    Open storage (residential): The outdoor placement or keeping of material which is owned and possessed by the resident occupying the dwelling unit on the premises or by the owner of the premises where open storage is to take place. 
    Out lot: A lot in a subdivision which is restricted from use for building purpose, whether or not deeded to the city, but which is not dedicated as a street or public reservation or public park. 
    Parking: The parking of a motor vehicle for short duration and possessing the element of a vehicle in use, being temporarily parked until it is shortly to be again put into service. The terms temporarily or shortly for the purpose of this definition shall mean and be measured by hours, or at most, up to a maximum of 18 hours. 
    Parking lot: See Off-street parking lot . 
    Parking space: An area of definite length and width, said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of vehicles. 
    Pet: A domesticated animal including, but not limited to, a dog, cat, bird, rodent (including a rabbit), fish, or turtle that is traditionally kept in the home for pleasure rather than for commercial purposes. 
    Planned commercial center: A retail commercial center the size and design of which is generally characterized by more than one use in a group of buildings served by a common parking area, and whose architecture is of a uniform design and appearance. 
    Planning commission: The Trenton Planning Commission. 
    Planned development: A proposed use of the land which requires the submission of a site plan for more than one building or structure to be approved as to requirements of this chapter including special relationships and vehicular and pedestrian circulation. 
    Principal use: See Main use . 
    Property line: The boundary lines that define and identify the extent of a lot, parcel or property by ownership. 
    Public utility: A person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under governmental regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Recreation land: Any public or private owned property that is utilized for recreation activities including such active recreation as camping, swimming, picnicking, hiking, walking, nature study and various organized or unorganized sports, and inactive recreation such as reading, sitting and table games. 
    Recreation vehicles or equipment: For the purpose of this chapter shall include the following: 
(1)  Travel trailer is a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified travel trailer by the manufacturer. 
(2)  Pickup camper is a structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses. 
(3)  Motorized home is a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
(4)  Folding tent trailer is a folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use. 
(5)  Boats and boat trailers shall include boats, floats, ski jets and rafts, plus the normal equipment to transport the same on the highway. 
(6)  Snowmobile and all-terrain vehicle plus the normal equipment to transport the same on the highway. 
(7)  Utility trailer for the purpose of this chapter, a utility trailer shall mean any wheeled vehicle designed and intended to be towed behind another vehicle. 
    Recycling: The process by which waste products are reduced to raw materials and transformed into new and often different products. 
    Recycling center: A facility where previously used products or materials are transformed into new and often different products. For the purposes of this chapter, a recycling center shall be other than a junk yard as defined herein. 
    Recycling center (materials recovery facilities): A facility designed and operated solely for receiving, storing, processing or transferring source separated recyclables materials. 
    Restaurant (drive-in): A business establishment designed to provide a motor vehicle driveway approach, standing space, or parking space where patrons receive food and beverages while in motor vehicles for consumption in motor vehicles while on premises. 
    Restaurant (fast food carry out): A business establishment wherein food is prepared or cooked on the premises to be sold in disposable containers or wrappers to patrons and which is not intended to be consumed on the premises or within a motor vehicle parked or standing on the premises. 
    Restaurant (fast food sit-down): A business establishment in which a patron purchases food or beverages, which may have been previously prepared, and which is served in disposable containers or wrappers and which the patron consumes while seated in the restaurant. 
    Restaurant (sit-down): A business establishment in which a patron purchases food or beverages, which is then prepared after the patrons order, on the premises and which is thereafter served to the patron and is consumed by the patron while seated in the restaurant. 
    Retail commercial: See Commercial, retail . 
    Right-of-way: The right-of-way line shall be the line established by the Road Commission of Wayne County (RCWC), Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT), or the City of Trenton in their right-of-way requirements established for Trenton in the city's adopted master plan. 
    Roadside stands: A roadside stand is a temporary or existing permanent building operated for the purpose of selling only produce raised or produced by the proprietor of the stand or his family on the premises, and its use shall not make into a commercial district land which would otherwise be an agricultural or residential district, nor shall its use be deemed an approved commercial activity. 
    Rooming house: A building other than a hotel where for compensation, meals, or lodging and meals are provided for not more than ten persons in addition to the members of the family occupying the premises. 
    Rooming unit: A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used for living and sleeping but not containing kitchen or eating facilities. 
    Salvage yards: An open area where used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled including but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals. 
    Screen: See Landscaping . 
    Secondary thoroughfare: A street of limited continuity designed and intended to collect and distribute traffic to and from local streets and to and from major thoroughfares. 
    Service establishment: An establishment primarily engaged in providing services to individuals, business, industry, institutions and government establishments; other organizations, including hotels and other lodging places; establishments providing personal business, repair and amusements services; health, legal, engineering, design, communication and other professional services; educational institutions, membership organizations and other like or similar services. 
    Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between any side of the main building and any adjoining property boundaries, such as the front of the building, excluding only the steps, and the front lot line or street right-of-way line. 
    Shoreline: The zone of contact of a body of water with the land or with a man-made barrier. 
    Sign: The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, design or trademarks by which anything is made known such as are used to show an individual, firm, profession, or business, and are visible to the general public. 
    Site plan: A plan showing all salient features of a proposed development so that it may be evaluated in order to determine compliance with the applicable requirements of the Trenton Code of Ordinances, including this chapter. 
    Soil sheltered: The design and creation of living space by means of cut-and-cover construction in the near-surface or shallow soil environment. Such approved construction is exempt from the definition of a basement. 
    Special land use: See Conditional land use . 
    Stacking space: An off-street space in which a motor vehicle may temporarily stand. 
    Storage: See Open storage . 
    Storage well: A well used for and in connection with the underground storage of natural gas, including injection into or withdrawal from an underground storage reservoir for monitoring or observation of reservoir pressure. 
    Story: That part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than 50 percent, by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining ground. 
    Story, half: An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least 200 square feet with a clear height of seven feet six inches. For the purpose of this chapter, the usable floor area is only that area having at least four feet clear height between floor and ceiling. 
    Street, public: A dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street, private: A street which provides the principal means of access to abutting land use, portions of which may be owned and controlled by the abutting property owners and which may or may not be open to public use. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, including parking lots, access drives and parking spaces. 
    Structural alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, stairways, or any change in the width or number of exits, or any substantial change in the roof. 
    Swimming pool: Any structure located above or below grade designed to hold water to a depth greater than 24 inches to be used for swimming. 
    Telecommunications: (See Wireless telecommunications ) 
    Temporary use: The use of land or building or structure permitted with approval from the planning commission to exist for a limited period of time as set forth and regulated in the chapter. 
    Textile recycling and donation bins (bins): A publicly accessible bin or container placed on private property by a private company or on-profit organization with permission of the property owner, for the purpose of collecting donation of items such as textiles, shoes, toys, books, and other non-perishables in order to reuse or recycle these items. 
    Townhouse: A building occupied by three or more families, where each dwelling unit is divided from the one adjacent to it by a party wall extending the full height of the building. Each dwelling unit is capable of individual use and maintenance without trespassing upon adjoining properties and utilities and service facilities are independent for each property. 
    Trailer coach: See Mobile home . 
    Trailer court or park: See Mobile home park . 

Transition Through Zoning 
    Transition: For the purposes of this chapter, the word or term transition, or transitional, shall mean a zoning district, a landscaped area, arrangement of lots, wall or other means which may serve as a district or area of transition, i.e., a buffer zone between various land use districts and/or land use and thoroughfares. 
    Travel trailer park (overnight camping facility): A place utilized for the temporary storage of travel trailers, for camping purposes, where there is no permanent storage of mobile homes for year-round occupancy, and where commercial activity is limited to service the needs of the temporary occupants of the travel trailer park. 
    Use: The principal purpose for which land, or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
    Variance: See Zoning variance . 
    Vehicle dealer: A person, firm, corporation, etc., licensed by the state to sell cars, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, boats and related parts, supplies and services. 
    Veterinary clinic: A place for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick or injured animals, and those in need of medical or minor surgical attention. A veterinary clinic may include customary pens or cages. A veterinary clinic may also be known as veterinary hospital. 
    Video store: A commercial establishment whose principal function is the renting or sale of video materials such as tapes, electronic video disks and any other format capable of transmitting a picture, except those materials that would categorize the use as an adult video store as defined in this chapter. 
    Wall: For the purposes of this chapter, shall mean an outdoor structure consisting of solid masonry, stone, or like materials, but not including wood, and which is designed to retain, screen and/or partition land. A wall so defined is not a fence. 
    Wall, obscuring: A structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, a wall is not a fence. 
    Wholesale commercial: See Commercial, wholesale . 
    Wireless telecommunications: 
(1)  Wireless communication facilities: shall mean and include all structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment buildings and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short wave facilities; ham: amateur radio facilities; satellite dishes; and, governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority. 
(2)  Attached wireless communications facilities: shall mean wireless communication facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles and the like. A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly established shall not be included within this definition. 
(3)  Wireless communication support structures: shall mean structures erected or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopole, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which appear to be something other than a mere support structure. 
(4)  Collocation: shall mean the location by two or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication facilities on a common structure, tower, or building, with the view toward reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas within the community. 


Yards 
    Yards: The open spaces on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and as defined herein: 
(1)  Front yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
(2)  Rear yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard shall be opposite the assigned street frontage. 
(3)  Side yard, exterior: An open space between a main building and the street right-of-way line extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line and the nearest point of the main building. 
(4)  Side yard, interior: An open space between a main building and the interior side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the interior side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 
    Zoning: See Title and preamble . 
    Zoning board of appeals and adjustments: The board of zoning appeals of the City of Trenton, which is also known as the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA). 
    Zoning code: Means ordinance officially adopted and codified herein as of their codified ordinances. 
    Zoning district: See District . 
    Zoning lot: See Lot, zoning . 
    Zoning map: An official map of the City of Trenton which visually depicts by area and identifies by name, various zoning districts throughout the city. 
    Zoning variance: A modification of the literal provisions of the chapter granted when strict enforcement of the chapter would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. 
    The crucial points of variance are undue hardship and unique circumstances applying to the property. A variance is not justified unless both elements are present in the case. The exception differs from the variance in several respects. An exception does not require undue hardship in order to be allowable. The exceptions that are found in this chapter appear as special approval or review by planning commission, legislative body, or board of appeals. These land uses could not be conveniently allocated to one zone or another, or the effects of such uses could not be definitely foreseen as of a given time. The general characteristics of these uses include one or more of the following: 
(1)  They require large areas. 
(2)  They are infrequent. 
(3)  They sometimes create an unusual amount of traffic. 
(4)  They are sometimes obnoxious or hazardous. 
(5)  They are required for public safety and convenience. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(207), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-3, § 1, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 705-4, § 1, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 705-8, § 1, 12-16-2013; Ord. No. 705-10, § 1, 4-20-2015; Ord. No. 705-16, § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 110-29-110-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP 

Sec. 110-51. - Districts established. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Trenton is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
(1)  Residential Districts 
a.  R-1-One-Family Residential District 
b.  R-2-One-Family Residential District 
c.  R-3-One-Family Residential District 
d.  R-4-One-Family Residential District 
e.  MH-Manufactured Housing District 
f.  RT-Two-Family Residential District 
g.  RM-1-Multiple-Family Residential District 
h.  RM-2-Multiple-Family Residential District 
(2)  Business Districts 
a.  OS-1-Office Service District 
b.  B-1-Local Business District 
c.  B-2-Planned Community Business District 
d.  B-3-General Business District 
e.  CBD-Central Business District 
(3)  Industrial Districts 
a.  I-1-Light Industrial District 
b.  I-2-Medium Industrial District 
c.  I-3-Heavy Industrial District 
(4)  Special Districts 
a.  WM-Waterfront Marina District 
b.  P-1-Vehicular Parking District 
c.  PD-Planned Development District, and its overlay districts 
d.  MD-Mixed Use Development District 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(300), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-52. - Zoning district requirements. 
    All buildings and uses permitted in any zoning district shall be subject to the applicable standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(301), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-53. - Zoning district boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map of the City of Trenton, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part thereof. The official zoning map and copies of the map are on file at the office of the building department, which map with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described herein. 
(b)  Parcel numbers 82-54-014-03-0256-000 through 82-54-014-03-0264-000 located in the city, are rezoned from Business B-3 to R-4 Residential, and shall be so designated on the city's official zoning map which is attached hereto and incorporated by reference. 
(c)  Lots 4, 5, 6, & 7, Teifer's Fort Street Subdivision, north side of Theodore Street, described as 24B4 LOT 4, LOT 5, LOT 6, LOT 7 TEIFERS FORT ST. SUB T4S R10E, L55 P73 WCR, are hereby rezoned from RT Two-Family Residential to B-3 General Business. 
(d)  Parcel numbers 54-028-99-0010-701 and 54-028-99-0010-702 located at 5999 Fort St., on the northeast corner of Vreeland Rd and Fort St. in the city, are rezoned from Business B-3 to RM-1 Multiple Family Residential, and shall be so designated on the city's official zoning map which is attached hereto and incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(302), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-12, § 1, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 705-13 § 1, 5-16-16; Ord. No. 705-15, § 1, 9-6-16; Ord. No. 705-20, § 1, 10-2-17; Ord. No. 705-22, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 110-54. - Zoning district boundaries interpreted. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be constructed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines; provided further that lot area and density requirements shall be determined on the basis of the horizontal area within the lot lines and the shoreline of the lot as defined in this chapter. Thus, the subaqueous lands between the shoreline of the lot and the established harbor line shall not be computed in determining lot area or density. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsection (1) through (5) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)  Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6) above, the zoning board of appeals and adjustments shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)  Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning map by patterns, which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the center of any public rights-of-way. 
(9)  Where, due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the zoning map accompanying this chapter, there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or confliction as to the intended location of any district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined upon written application to, or upon its own motion, by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(303), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-55. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Whenever any park, commons, outlet, or any street, alley or other public way, or portion thereof in the City of Trenton shall be vacated, such park, commons, outlet, or any street, alley or other public way, or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches, unless otherwise recommended by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(304), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-56-110-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - R-1-R-3 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 110-81. - Intent. 
    The R-1 through R-3 One-Family Residential Districts are designed to be the most restrictive of the residential districts. The intent is to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density, one-family detached dwellings along with other residentially related facilities which serve the residents in the district. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(400), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-82. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an R-1 through R-3 One-Family Residential Districts, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  One-family residential dwellings. 
(2)  Family day care home and group day care home, as defined in this chapter and regulated by state statute. 
(3)  Foster family home, foster family care home and foster family group home, as defined in this chapter and regulated by state statute that are not within 1,500 feet of any other such facility. 
(4)  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(5)  Cemeteries, which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of this chapter. 
(6)  Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education, and not operated for profit. 
(7)  Accessory buildings and structures, customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(401), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-83. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  One-family cluster housing developments as permitted and regulated in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, section 110-513, in this chapter. 
(2)  Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in Article XXIV Schedule of Regulations, and as otherwise permitted in Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter may be allowed provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
b.  All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 110-636, in this chapter. 
(3)  Day care center as defined in this chapter and regulated by state statute, when accessory to public or quasi-public use permitted in the district, and: 
a.  When adequate off-street drop off and pick up areas, and off-street parking area is provided; and 
b.  When outdoor play area is provided on site, it is securely fenced and fully supervised when in use. 
(4)  Public, parochial and private intermediate and/or secondary schools offering courses in general education, but not operated for profit. Access to the site shall be in accordance with section 110-636, in this chapter. 
(5)  Utility substations and public service buildings without exterior storage yards, when it can be shown that operating requirements necessitate locating such facilities within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity, and: 
a.  Provided that such uses comply with all applicable building setback requirements and height limitations of the district, and; 
b.  Provided that such uses are fully screened from view by the use of architectural masonry screen walls, or heavy evergreen planting screens, or combinations of both, or are placed inside of structures or buildings the appearance of which shall be like or directly similar to the appearance of the buildings around the substation. 
(6)  Home occupations, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  They are conducted wholly and entirely within the principal dwelling building. 
b.  They are located either in the basement of the principal dwelling building, or when they will not be located on the basement, they shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling building, excluding the basement. 
c.  They are conducted only by the inhabitants thereof as defined in this chapter, there being no other employees or assistants employed in connection with the home occupation. 
d.  No article shall be made or sold or offered for sale except for the item or items that may be produced in the principal dwelling building by the inhabitants thereof. 
e.  There shall be no equipment or machinery used in connection with a home occupation that is of an industrial nature, or which may have a negative impact on adjacent residential dwellings. 
f.  They will not change the character or the appearance of the principal dwelling building nor diminish its principal function as a residential dwelling. 
g.  They will not require internal or external alterations or construction to be made to the principal dwelling building other than that which may be required to meet local or state safety or construction codes, as authorized by the city. 
h.  No home occupation shall be carried on to an extent that will require parking in excess of that required for a residential building as set forth and regulated in this chapter. 
i.  They shall have no signs, advertising devices or other manifestation located on any building on the property or within any yard area that suggests or implies the existence of a home occupation. 
j.  A home occupation shall not include clinics, hospitals, barber or beauty shops, tearooms, tourist homes, kennels, millinery shops or a use similar to the above uses or which does not meet the requirements of this subsection. 
k.  The home occupation complies with any applicable licensing requirements of the city. 
l.  Home occupations shall be reviewed by the building department. The building department at its discretion, may forward the request to the planning commission for its review. When the building department or the planning commission has determined that the above conditions are met, the building department shall issue a special occupancy permit with any conditions of approval set forth thereon. Once established no home occupation shall deviate from the requirements of this subsection. No home occupation shall be continued when the same shall be found by the building department to be a nuisance or to be in violation of any of the required conditions set forth in this subsection, or due to noise, electrical interference, dust, smoke, odor, vibration, traffic congestion, reduction of parking, or reduction in the overall living environment of the dwelling or the surrounding area. 
(7)  Private swimming pools when they are accessory to a principal permitted use and when they are located within the rear yard only, and provided further, that they meet the following requirements: 
a.  Private pools shall not require planning commission approval. 
b.  The outside edge of the pool shall be set back from any side or rear lot line a distance at least equal to the side yard setback requirement of the district in which the pool is located, as set forth in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, of this chapter. In no instance shall this setback be less than ten feet from any side street or alley right-of-way. 
c.  A minimum distance of four feet shall be provided between the outside edge of the pool and any building. 
d.  No swimming pool may be located less than 35 feet from any front lot line and no swimming pool shall be located in an easement. 
e.  For the protection of the inhabitants of the lot and the general public, all premises containing a swimming pool shall be completely fenced not less than four feet in height. The gates shall be a self-closing and latching type with the latch on the inside of the gate and not readily available to children to open. Gates shall be capable of being securely locked when the pool is not in use for extended periods of times[. Fences] of four to six feet in height may be permitted provided they meet the setback requirements of a main building. 
(8)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. An accessory use may include a private boat marina as defined in this chapter, so long as the following conditions are met: 
a.  The marina must be accessory to a principal permitted use. 
b.  Only boats or other forms of watercraft that are owned by, and registered to an occupant of the residential establishment that the private marina is accessory to shall be docked or moored at the marina. 
c.  No other boat or boat-related services beyond the keeping of a boat or other watercraft in an approved boat slip shall be allowed in a private marina. 
d.  The numerical off-street parking requirements for a private marina are met in addition to any other off-street parking requirements that may be applicable to the principal use. 
e.  The person, corporation, association or other private entity in control of the residential establishment to which the marina is associated shall be responsible for the maintenance, overall appearance, security, safety and general management of the marina, including limiting use of the marina only to the residents of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(402), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-84. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to all uses permitted in the district: 
(1)  No accessory building or structure shall be permitted except in conjunction with a principal permitted use. 
(2)  All new single-family detached dwelling structures shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  All dwelling buildings shall comply with all applicable local, state or federal codes and ordinances. 
b.  All single-family dwellings shall be permanently attached to a approved foundation which shall be or shall include a perimeter foundation in addition to any other required supporting foundation, the minimum width of which shall six inches wide and the depth of which shall be at least 42 inches deep. In no instance shall concrete piers, cement blocks without proper footing, or the like be permitted as a foundation or system of foundations. 
c.  All dwelling units shall meet the minimum floor area requirements of the district and no single-family dwelling shall exceed four times its front width. Any subsequent structural additions to any dwelling building shall fully comply with the applicable standards of this subsection. 
d.  All dwelling buildings shall be compatible with nearby single-family dwelling buildings by demonstrating a similarity in at least the following features: 
1.  Total square feet of floor area. 
2.  Width to length proportions established in subsection 110-84c. of this article. 
3.  The value and overall quality of the construction. 
4.  The use of exterior materials. 
5.  The overall style and design of the building. 
6.  The provision of storage space such as but not limited to, attic, basement, utility room or similar area, but not including a garage for the parking of motor vehicles. 
e.  For the purpose of this subsection, nearby single-family dwelling buildings shall mean all such buildings within 300 feet of the new dwelling building, measured from the nearest wall of the proposed building to the nearest wall of the next residential dwelling building. When no dwelling buildings are located within the specified distance, nearby dwelling buildings shall mean the nearest single-family dwelling buildings in all directions from the subject parcel boundaries. 
f.  The review and approval of plans pertaining to the above requirements shall be the responsibility of the city's building department and no building permit shall be issued by the same until or unless the above standards are in the opinion of the building department, met. In those instances where the building department may be uncertain of the application of the above standards with respect to the appearance of a particular dwelling building, the department may forward the drawings and pertinent information to the planning commission for its review and recommendation to the building department. 
g.  When reviewing a single-family dwelling building for compliance with the foregoing guidelines, the building department or the planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural design variation, but shall seek to promote reasonable compatibility in the character of single-family dwelling buildings in a manner set forth in this subsection so as to protect the economic welfare and proper values of nearby residential buildings and the City of Trenton at large. The building department or the planning commission may require submittal of plans, elevation drawings and similar drawings and documents as deemed necessary to carry out the requirements of this subsection. 
(3)  Consult Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by a permitted land use, the maximum dwelling density permitted, and minimum building setback requirements. 
(4)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading standards. 
(5)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscape planting screen. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting plan review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(6)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(7)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-622. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-623. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-624. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-625. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-626. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-627. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-628. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-629. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(8)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-721. General exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(403), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-85. - Regulating the location of marijuana caregivers and dispensaries within the city. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 22-503 of the City Code a Caregiver, as defined by state law, dispensing marijuana to more than one patient shall not be located: 
(1)  Within 500 feet of any residential zoning district. 
(2)  Within 500 feet of the property line of any public or private school, college or university, any nursery school, day nursery, licensed day care center of any other building or location either rented or used in any for the care or instruction of children under the age of 18. 
(3)  Within 500 feet of the property line of any church, house of worship or other religious facility or institution. 
(4)  Within 500 feet of any public park, publically owned building or recreational area commonly used by minor children. 
(5)  Within 500 feet of another existing "caregiver" or dispensary. 
(b)  A medical marijuana caregiver with multiple patients shall be located only within I-1 thru I-3 districts within the city. 
(Ord. No. 705-14, § 1, 7-11-16) 
Secs. 110-86-110-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - R-4 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-101. - Intent. 
    The R-4 One-Family Residential District is designed to permit and encourage the erection of specialized single-family dwelling types in areas of the city where this type of housing is proposed on the city's adopted master plan for future land use map. The areas depicted on the master plan map for such development contain residential dwellings. Therefore, the intent ofthe R-4 One-Family Residential District is to encourage the ultimate redevelopment of these neighborhoods or portions of them, with specialized housing configurations designed to provide an alternative type of quality housing environment. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(500), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-102. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the R-4 One-family Residential District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  One-family residential dwellings as regulated in this article. 
(2)  Family day care home and group day care home, as defined in this chapter and regulated by state statute. 
(3)  Foster family home, foster family care home and foster family group home, as defined in this chapter and regulated by state statute. 
(4)  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(5)  Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education, but not operated for profit. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and structures customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(501), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-103. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in section 110-83 of this chapter. 
(2)  One-family attached or detached dwellings in clusters, subject to the requirements of section 110-512, in this chapter. All such development shall commence at block ends unless an entire block frontage has been approved for cluster housing. When the construction of attached dwellings is approved for an entire block frontage, construction may commence anywhere along the block frontage. 
(3)  Single-family detached or attached dwellings permitted under the standards of this district may be developed as single-family site condominiums in accordance with the applicable standards of this chapter and the State Condominium Act 59 of 1978, as amended, or platted in accordance with the Trenton Subdivision Control Ordinance, and the State Land Division Act 591 of 1996, as amended, and Act 525 of 2005. 
Since it is the intent of the R-4 district to permit the redevelopment of previously platted land, the replatting of property may become necessary. In that case, care will need to be taken by the developer and the city to make certain that the applicable standards of the Michigan Public Acts 591 and 525 is carefully followed regarding the replatting of previously subdivided land. 
(4)  All single-family dwelling units, attached or detached, shall be provided with a fully enclosed garage. The garage may be an integral part of the main dwelling building, or it may be attached to the dwelling or detached from the dwelling, but in all cases access to the garage shall be from the rear of the building via an improved public alley located at the rear of the property. 
(5)  A detached garage shall be located no closer to a public alley right-of-way than three feet and shall observe all building height restrictions of the zoning code pertaining to detached accessory buildings in residential districts. 
(6)  Except as permitted in subsection (b)(6) of this section, a detached accessory garage shall observe the minimum side yard setback requirements of the zoning code applicable to detached accessory buildings in residential districts. 
(7)  For detached dwelling units, one side wall of a detached garage may be located directly along a side yard line of the dwelling it is intended to serve, provided that a five-foot-wide accessible maintenance easement is placed on the abutting property adjacent to the full length of the garage wall. The wall may have windows but no doors. All stormwater run-off from that part of the garage roof along the side yard line shall be channeled to a public drain via the maintenance agreement, except a garage wall of a detached dwelling located on a side yard line may be partly or fully in common with the garage wall of a detached garage on the abutting property. Each garage that is attached to another garage shall be fully enclosed by four walls including the door wall, except a single wall may serve as the common wall between two attached garages. Not more than two detached garages serving two detached dwellings shall be attached one to another. 
(8)  When a rear yard is enclosed by a privacy fence or hedge, the restricted clear corner vision requirements of the city's fence control standards shall apply. 
(9)  The minimum off-street parking requirements of the zoning code for single-family dwellings may be satisfied by erection of a two-car garage. If a one-car attached garage is erected, the driveway to the garage may serve as a usable parking space, provided the driveway shall be at least 23 feet by nine feet. If a one-car detached garage is erected at the rear of the property, a hard-surfaced parking space equal to 23 feet by nine feet shall be placed on the property next to the garage. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(502), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-104. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to development in the R-4 districts: 
(1)  All public overhead electrical and other communication lines extending from existing utility systems in the block, to a new dwelling unit in the district shall be placed underground. 
(2)  When an entire block is to be developed or redeveloped under the guidelines of this district, all public overhead electrical and communication lines existing above ground at the time of construction shall be placed underground within the development or redevelopment area, at the time of construction. 
(3)  In those instances where it can be shown that high current in certain electrical lines precludes placing them below ground within a development area, the zoning board of appeals may permit those particular lines to remain above ground provided: 
a.  The lines cannot be relocated out of the development area. 
b.  The lines are placed within the alley rights-of-way. 
c.  The lines are placed on poles of uniform height, diameter and color. 
(4)  In the R-4 district, application of the following detached dwelling unit design guidelines shall apply: 
a.  Not more than two walls of any detached garage shall be in common with the wall of another garage serving the same group of attached dwelling units. Walls of detached garages shall not be in common with a wall of any garage serving any other dwelling cluster. 
b.  Each single-family attached dwelling unit shall be provided with a private front and rear entrance directly from the outside, there being no such entrance permitted from a common hall or foyer. All dwelling units shall be provided with a fully enclosed garage. 
(5)  All dwelling units shall be provided with a basement and raised foundation. 
(6)  All detached dwelling units shall include a decorative front porch with a roof which shall be an integral part of the design of the house and which shall extend across at least one-half the front width of the house. All structural supports below the porch floor shall be constructed of concrete or masonry material. 
(7)  Exterior sidewall materials should be limited to aluminum or vinyl siding, face brick, stone, stucco, or other approved cementitious materials. Other cementitious material may include exterior insulated finish systems (EIFS) material so long as it does not extend closer to the ground than four feet on any exterior wall to which it is affixed. Stained or painted wood or composite lap siding, or combinations thereof, but not including wood or composite panels. 
(8)  The depth or length of a dwelling unit shall not be greater than three times its front width. 
(9)  The roof structure over the dwelling unit shall be sloped with a pitch of not less than nine to 12 (nine inches of vertical rise for every 12 inches of horizontal run) and shall be covered with asphalt, slate, tile, wood shake, enameled metal, or synthetic composite roofing materials. 
(10)  No accessory building or structure shall be permitted except in conjunction with a principal permitted use. This may include a private marina as defined in this chapter, provided the requirements of subsection 110-83(8), in this chapter are met. 
(11)  Consult Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by a permitted land use, the maximum dwelling density permitted, and minimum building setback requirements. 
(12)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Vehicle stacking spaces. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout standards. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading. 
(13)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening Devices and Landscaping, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berm. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscape planting screen. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting plan review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(14)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(15)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(16)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-721. General exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(503), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-105-110-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MH MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-121. - Intent. 
    The MH One-Family Manufactured Housing District is intended to provide suitable sites for manufactured single-family detached dwelling buildings in an environment of like dwellings in developments that are characterized by somewhat higher dwelling density levels than are characteristic of the other single-family residential dwelling districts in the city, and by the fact that some manufactured dwelling buildings are permitted by federal and state law to exist in the district without conforming to the local codes and ordinances that are applicable to single-family dwelling buildings in the city's other one-family residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(600), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-122. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the MH One-Family Manufactured Housing District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or placed, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this article: 
(1)  Manufactured single-family detached homes. 
(2)  One office building, to be used exclusively for conducting the business operations of the manufactured housing development. 
(3)  Buildings for laundry facilities and for the limited indoor storage of resident possessions. 
(4)  A community building for use by the residents of the manufactured housing development. 
(5)  Accessory buildings and structures directly related to the manufactured housing development and to individual home sites within the development. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(601), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-123. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the specific conditions imposed in this subsection for each use and subject further to review of a site plan by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing and by the state manufactured housing commission: 
(1)  The sale of manufactured single-family detached homes, when such activities: 
a.  Are clearly accessory to the occupancy of individual sites within a manufactured housing development and shall not include the sale of recreational vehicles or any other new or used vehicles or products not directly accessory to the occupancy of a manufactured home in the development; 
b.  Only involve homes offered for sale that can be located in a licensed manufactured housing development; 
c.  Are limited to the display of not more than one accessory sign per sales building and which will not exceed (16) square feet in display area; and 
d.  Do not include the display of banners, streamers or pennants of any kind. 
(2)  Home occupations, subject to the requirements of Article IV, section 110-83(4) in this chapter. 
(3)  Public utility buildings, including telephone exchange buildings and repeater stations, electric transformer substations and gas regulator substations, provided no outdoor storage yards shall be a part of any such facility. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(602), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-124. - Required conditions. 
(a)  The following conditions, where applicable, shall apply to all uses permitted in the district: 
    No manufactured home shall occupy any individual site within a manufactured housing development that does not fully comply with all of the applicable requirements of this section. 
(b)  All manufactured housing developments shall further comply with the applicable requirements and associated guidelines set forth in the Mobile Home Commission Act (MCL 125.2301 et seq.) 
(c)  The following standards shall apply to all manufactured home sites in a manufactured housing development: 
(1)  No personal property, including tires, shall be stored outside or under any manufactured home, or within carports, which are open on any side, except for motor vehicles and bicycles. 
(2)  Personal property, such as, but not necessarily limited to, motor vehicles, bicycles, lawn and patio furniture, lawn and garden maintenance equipment, outdoor cooking grills and tires may be stored in a fully enclosed garage on the home site. 
(3)  Seasonal outdoor storage of cooking grills shall be permitted so long as they are kept on a finished wood deck, a hard-surfaced patio, or on an equivalent type of surface associated with the home. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection (c) of this section shall prevent the erection or placement of a storage shed for the storage of personal property on any individual manufactured home site. No storage shed so placed or erected shall exceed 144 square feet in total floor area. 
(d)  If a central television antenna system, cable television, or other such service is provided, the distribution system shall be placed underground and shall be constructed and installed to state and local codes and ordinances. 
(e)  All telephone, electric and other utility lines within a manufactured housing development shall be placed underground, including service to each manufactured home site. 
(f)  Should a manufactured housing development permit the keeping and storage of recreational equipment, such as, but not necessarily limited to, boats, including jet skis, snowmobiles and utility trailers, adequate area for the parking and storage of such equipment shall be provided in accordance with the following guidelines: 
(1)  They shall be restricted to a central or collective parking area. 
(2)  The area so provided shall be in addition to the minimum motor vehicle parking standards of the MH district. 
(3)  The area shall be adequately secured within a fenced area consisting of a woven wire (chain link) fence, and which shall be locked. 
(4)  In conjunction with the security fence, the area shall be buffered with a screening device provided in accordance with the screening guidelines set forth in subsection (k)(7) of this section. 
(g)  All manufactured home pads or supporting piers, as well as all anchoring devices, shall be designed to, and shall comply with, the applicable standards of the Mobile Home Commission Act (MCL 125.2301 et seq.). 
(h)  Each manufactured home shall be provided with a skirt, which shall extend downward in a vertical line perpendicular to the bottom of the home, to the manufactured home pad, or to the surface of the ground directly under the outside edge of the home. The skirt shall extend completely around the home structure in a uniformly continuous manner and shall consist of material approved by the state manufactured housing commission. All skirting shall be securely anchored in place in a manner acceptable to the state manufactured housing commission. 
(i)  A manufactured housing development shall provide the equivalent of one deciduous tree for every other home site within the development; except an existing tree on a home site may count towards this requirement, provided the tree is in a healthy, growing condition. An existing tree's state of health shall be determined after site construction and final grading of the area around the site has been completed. Deciduous trees planted to fulfill this requirement shall have a caliper (diameter) of not less than two inches at a point ten inches above the ground at the base of the tree, and no such tree shall be less than ten feet in height at the time of planting. A general rule to follow would place such trees no closer than 40 feet on centers. 
(j)  General lighting within a manufactured housing development shall follow the guidelines set forth and regulated in Rule 929 of the Michigan Manufactured Housing Code, as amended. 
(k)  In addition to the foregoing requirements of this subsection, the following standards shall also apply: 
(1)  Dwelling density. A manufactured housing development shall contain sites averaging 5,500 square feet per home site; except, when averaging lot area, no home site shall be reduced in size by more than 20 percent, or result in any lot containing less than 4,400 square feet. For each square foot of land area gained through the reduction of lot area below 5,500 square feet, at least an equal amount of land shall be dedicated as open space area within the manufactured housing development. Any open space gained through lot averaging shall be in addition to that required under R125.1946, Rule 946 and R125.1941 and R125.1944, Rules 941 and 944 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended. 
(2)  Dwelling setbacks. Each individual manufactured home shall be placed on a home site of sufficient width and area so that the site will permit the home to comply with the minimum required front, sides and rear yard setback requirements set forth in Rules 941 and 944 of the Michigan Manufactured Housing Code, as amended. 
(3)  Building height. The maximum height of a building designed to serve as a community center or similar use in a manufactured housing development shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet in height, whichever results in the lesser building height. Storage or service buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
(4)  Floor area. In a manufactured housing development, no manufactured home shall contain less than 720 square feet of floor area, measured from the outside walls of the structure. 
(5)  Parking. Motor vehicle parking spaces within a manufactured housing development shall be provided in accordance with the applicable requirements of Rule 925 and Rule 926 of the Michigan Manufactured Housing Code, as amended. 
(6)  Site plan review. A site plan shall be submitted to the city for review by the planning commission. The site plan shall be a general plan view drawing containing all applicable information set forth by the city's site plan review procedures. An adequate number of copies of the site plan, along with a copy of the site plan review application form, shall be submitted. When the planning commission finds the site plan to be in order and in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter, it shall approve the site plan. Upon granting site plan approval, the city shall forward a copy of the approved site plan and all correspondence pertaining to the site plan to the state manufactured housing commission. During its review of the site plan, should the manufactured housing commission cause significant revisions to be made to the approved site plan, additional copies of the revised site plan shall be forwarded to the Trenton Planning Commission for revised site plan approval. Upon granting revised site plan approval, the city shall forward the approved site plan and all correspondence pertaining to the site plan to the manufactured housing commission. For purposes of this subsection, minor revisions to a site plan approved by the city shall not warrant subsequent review and approval by the city. The manufactured housing commission staff may, at its discretion, determine if the revisions to an approved site plan are significant enough to warrant resubmitting a revised site plan to the city for further review and approval. 
(7)  Screening. Whenever a manufactured housing development shall provide an area for the storage of recreational equipment, as set forth in subsection 5. of this section, or wherever a peripheral property line of a manufactured housing development fronts on a public road right-of-way, the following screening requirements shall apply: 
a.  On-site storage areas. When included as part of a manufactured housing development, the storage area shall provide, in addition to the required security fence, landscape screening in the form of planting materials composed of evergreen trees or shrubs, or combinations thereof, which shall not be less than three feet in height at the time of planting and which shall be spaced so as to create a continuous screen at maturity. The screen shall be of a uniform nature and shall be required on all sides of the storage area that abut home sites within the manufactured housing development, or abut a single-family residential zoning district along a peripheral property line. 
b.  Abutting public road rights-of-way. A screening buffer shall be provided. The buffer screen shall be placed between the road right-of-way line and the development, and may consist of a landscaped earth berm, or evergreen trees or shrubs, or combinations thereof. When evergreen planting materials are used, they shall follow the spacing and height guidelines set forth in Article XXVII in this chapter. 
c.  Exterior equipment screens. The applicable requirements of Article XXVII in this chapter pertaining to exterior equipment and trash receptacle screening, may apply to all site-built buildings erected in a manufactured housing development. 
(8)  Loading and unloading. A site-built building erected within a manufactured housing development may be subject to the applicable requirements of Article XXVI in this chapter pertaining to off-street loading and unloading. 
(9)  Residential entranceways. Any entranceway structure erected in conjunction with a manufactured housing development, including but not limited to, walls, columns and gates, and which is designed and intended to mark an entrance to a manufactured housing development, may be erected in any required yard, provided the restricted clear corner vision requirements of Article XXIX in this chapter. 
(10)  Clear corner restriction. No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or decorative entranceway structure, or other obstruction to vision over two feet in height, measured from the established street grade, shall be placed within a triangle formed at the intersection of two public street rights-of-way lines, or within a triangle formed at the intersection of a public street right-of-way line and the nearest edge of an intersecting private drive entrance into a manufactured housing development. The clear vision triangle shall be formed by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines, or right-of-way line and driveway edge, from a point 25 feet back from their point of intersection. 
(11)  Permits. In regard to any manufactured housing unit in the city, the building department shall conduct inspections for a fee, established by ordinance, to determine if a manufactured home in a manufactured housing development has been installed in accordance with the manufacturer's setup instructions or the applicable requirements of the Michigan Manufactured Housing Code, particularly part 6 of the code, and shall conduct inspections when the city has reason to believe that the Manufactured Housing Act or code has been violated, as set forth in Sections 17(2) (MCL 125.2317) and 36 (MCL 125.2336) of the Mobile Home Commission Act. The city shall review and act on plans and inspect and issue building and occupancy permits for any site-built building in a manufactured housing development, and enforce the standards of this article, construction codes and all other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(603), 2-20-2007) 
State Law reference- Special land uses, MCL 125.286b, 125.286d; Mobile Home Commission Act, MCL 125.2301 et seq.; local regulation of mobile homes, MCL 125.2307. 
Secs. 110-125-110-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RT TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 110-141. - Intent. 
    The RT Two-Family Residential Districts are designed to afford a transition of use in existing housing areas by permitting new construction or conversion of existing structures between adjacent residential and commercial, office, thoroughfares or other uses that would affect residential character. This district also recognizes the existence of older residential areas of the city where larger houses have been or can be converted from single-family to two-family residences in order to extend the economic life of these structures and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs and modernization. This district also allows the construction of new two-family residences where slightly greater densities are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(700), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-142. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an RT Two-Family Residential District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All principal permitted uses as regulated in the R-1 - R-3 districts. 
(2)  Two-family residential dwellings. 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(701), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-143. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in section 110-83 of this chapter. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and structures customarily incident to any principal permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(702), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-144. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to development in the RT Districts: 
(1)  No accessory building or structure shall be permitted except in conjunction with a principal permitted use. 
(2)  All uses permitted in the R1-R3 districts shall be subject to the applicable requirements of the R-1 district standards. 
(3)  Consult ARTICLE XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by a permitted land use, the maximum dwelling density permitted, and minimum building setback requirements. 
(4)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading standards. 
(5)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscape planting screen. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting plan review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(6)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(7)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(8)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-721. General exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(703), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-145-110-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RM-1 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (LOW RISE) 

Sec. 110-161. - Intent. 
    The RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential Districts (Low Rise) are designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and lower density single-family districts. The RM-1 Multiple-Family District is further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise medium density, single-family community. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(800), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-162. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District (Low Rise), no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in the RT Two-family District, except those permitted in the R-4 One-family Residential District. 
(2)  One-family detached dwellings as regulated in the R-1, One-Family Residential District, including the minimum standards of the Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter applicable to the R-1 district, and the standards for accessory structures and off-street parking. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(801), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-163. - Principal uses permitted subject to special condition. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  Nonprofit clubs and societies provided that no residential facilities of any kind shall be or shall become a part of the premises. 
(2)  Foster care small group home, as defined in this chapter and licensed by the State of Michigan for up to 12 adults, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  No such facility shall be located within 1,500 feet of any other state licensed care facility. 
b.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVI in this chapter. 
c.  Compliance with the applicable building setback requirements of the district as set forth in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter. 
d.  If an outdoor trash receptacle is used for the disposal of refuse, it shall be located in the rear yard and screened as required in Article XXVII in this chapter. 
e.  Provision shall be made on site for the loading and unloading of supplies in the rear yard or in a nonrequired interior side yard. 
(3)  Foster care large group home, as defined in this chapter and licensed by the State of Michigan for not less than 13 nor more than 20 adults, subject to the requirements of section 110-163(2) in this chapter. 
(4)  General hospitals, with no maximum restrictions, when the following conditions are met: 
a.  The hospital shall be developed only on a site containing not less than ten net usable acres of land. 
b.  All access to the site shall be in accordance with Article XXIX, section 110-636, in this chapter. 
c.  Any main or accessory buildings shall be set back at least 100 feet from any peripheral lot line or street right-of-way line for all two-story structures. For every story above two stories, the minimum building setback requirement shall be increased by at least 20 feet. 
d.  Ambulance and delivery area shall be obscured from view from any abutting residential zoning district with a screening device as set forth and regulated in Article XXVII in this chapter. 
(5)  Independent elderly housing, not to exceed the maximum building height limitations of the district, and when the following conditions are met: 
a.  Dwelling units shall be limited to cottage-type dwellings and/or apartment-type dwelling units, subject to the minimum applicable floor area requirements of Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter. 
b.  Common services containing, but not necessarily limited to, central dining rooms, recreation rooms, which may include exercise facilities, auditorium, meeting rooms, central lounges and workshops. 
c.  Self-contained services such as a barbershop or beauty shop, gift shop and pharmaceutical dispensary for use by the residents only and with no outside signs or advertising. 
d.  The maximum number of dwelling units to the acre shall not exceed the applicable dwelling unit density limitations of the district as set forth and regulated in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter. 
(6)  Dependent elderly housing not to exceed the maximum building height limitations of the district and when the following conditions are met: 
a.  There shall be provided on the site, not less than 150 square feet of open space for each bed in the home. The 150 square feet of land area per bed shall provide for a landscaped setting only and shall not include any area used for off-street parking, service drives, loading space, or area covered by any principal or accessory buildings. 
b.  No building shall be located closer than 40 feet to any property line. 
c.  The maximum number of dwelling units to the acre shall not exceed the applicable dwelling unit density limitations of the district as set forth and regulated in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter. 
d.  The use shall be located on a major or secondary thoroughfare as designated on the city's adopted master plan for future land use map and all access to the site shall be in accordance with Article XXIX, section 110-636, in this chapter. 
(7)  Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any uses permitted herein shall be developed only on sites of at least 40 acres in area, and shall not be permitted on any portion of a recorded subdivision plat. 
b.  All access to the site shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXIX, section 110-636, in this chapter. 
c.  No building shall be closer than 80 feet to any property line. 
(8)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. This may include a private marina as defined in this chapter, provided the requirements of section 110-83(8) in this chapter are met. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(802), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-164. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions, where applicable shall apply to all uses permitted in this district: 
(1)  No accessory building or structure shall be permitted except in conjunction with a principal permitted use. 
(2)  All one- and two-family uses permitted in the RM-1 districts shall be subject to the applicable requirements of the R-1 and RT districts. 
(3)  Consult Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by a permitted land use, the maximum dwelling density permitted, and minimum building setback requirements. 
(4)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading standards. 
(5)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscape planting screen. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape area. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting plan review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(6)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(7)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(8)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-721. General exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(803), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-165-110-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (HIGH RISE) 

Sec. 110-181. - Intent. 
    The RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential Districts (High Rise) are designed to provide sites for high density multiple dwelling structures adjacent to high traffic generators commonly found in the proximity of large acreage nonresidential development areas abutting major thoroughfares and expressways, and along the Detroit River. This district is further provided to serve the residential needs of persons desiring a higher density, high rise apartment type of accommodation as opposed to the lower density, low rise residential patterns found in the One-Family and RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential Districts. This district is further designed so as to provide a zone of transition between high traffic generators and other residential districts through the requirements of lower building coverage, which in turn, will result in more open space. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(900), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-182. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District (High Rise), no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in the RM-1 DISTRICTS, except single- and two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(901), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-183. - Principal uses permitted, subject to the special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  High rise structures (four stories or greater) subject to the conditions herein imposed: 
a.  The proposed site for any such use shall have one property line abutting a major thoroughfare (at least 120 feet of right-of-way), and expressway or the Detroit River. 
b.  The entire area of the site shall be treated so as to service only the residents of the multiple-family developments, and any accessory buildings, uses, or services shall be developed solely for the use of residents of the main building. Uses considered herein as accessory uses include parking structures, swimming pools, recreation areas, pavilions, cabanas, docking facilities, incidental marina facilities, personal service uses (such as a beauty parlor, barber shop, or dry cleaning pick-up station) and other similar uses. A cash or surety bond in the amount of $1,000.00 shall be deposited with the city engineer on the condition that personal service uses will not be available to other than residents of the multiple-family development. 
(2)  Nonprofit clubs and societies, subject to the applicable requirements of Article VIII, section 110-163(1), in this chapter. 
(3)  Foster care small group home, subject to the applicable requirements of Article VIII, section 110-163(2), in this chapter. 
(4)  Foster care large group home, subject to the applicable requirements of article VIII, section 110-163(3), in this chapter. 
(5)  General hospitals, subject to the applicable requirements of Article VIII, section 110-163(4), in this chapter. 
(6)  Independent elderly housing, subject to the applicable requirements of Article VIII, section 110-163(5), in this chapter. 
(7)  Dependent elderly housing, subject to the applicable requirements of Article VIII, section 110-163(6), in this chapter. 
(8)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(902), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-184. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions, where applicable shall apply to all uses permitted in this district: 
(1)  Whenever a building shall be proposed the height of which will exceed four stories a site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and recommendation to the city council for approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. Site plan approval shall be effective for a period of one year, commencing on the date of approval. A one-year extension may be requested prior to expiration date of the initial approval. After one year if no extension has been granted and no construction activity has taken place on the property a new site plan must be submitted to the planning commission for its review and recommendation to the city council for approval. 
(2)  No accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted except in conjunction with a principal building. 
(3)  Consult Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by permitted land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum building setback requirements. 
(4)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading standards. 
(5)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscape planting screen. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting plan review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(6)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(7)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(8)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-721. General exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(903), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-185-110-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED 

Secs. 110-201-110-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 110-231. - Intent. 
    The OS-1 Office Service Districts are designed to accommodate uses such as offices, banks, and personal services which can serve as transitional areas between residential and commercial districts and to provide a transition between major thoroughfares and residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1100), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-232. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an OS-1 Office Service District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: Executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting and sales subject to the limitations contained below in section 110-234, Required conditions, in this chapter. 
(2)  Medical office, including clinics. 
(3)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses; drive-in facilities as an accessory use only. 
(4)  Off-street parking lots: Subject to the required conditions of section 110-373, in this chapter. 
(5)  Churches. 
(6)  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(7)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1101), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-233. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  An accessory use customarily related to a principal use authorized by this section, such as but not limited to: A pharmacy or apothecary shop, stores limited to corrective garments or bandages, or optical service, may be permitted. 
(2)  Mortuary establishments, when adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in funeral processions, provided further that such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main building of a mortuary establishment. 
(3)  Publicly owned buildings, telephone exchange buildings and public utility offices, but not including storage yards, transformer stations, substations, or gas regulator stations. 
(4)  Personal service establishments including barbershops, beauty shops and health salons when established in conjunction with and developed as an integral part of an office center, it is the specific intent that these uses shall not be permitted as an individual or free-standing use. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1102), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-234. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to all uses permitted in the district: 
(1)  No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building. 
(2)  The outdoor storage of goods or material shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incident to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited. 
(4)  No accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted except in conjunction with a principal building. 
(5)  Consult Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by permitted land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum building setback requirements. 
(6)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking layout standards. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading standards. 
(7)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscape planting screen. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting plan review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(8)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(9)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(10)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-721. General exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1103), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-235-110-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 110-251. - Intent. 
    The B-1 Local Business Districts are designed for the convenience shopping of persons residing in nearby residential areas and to permit only such uses as are necessary to satisfy those basic shopping and/or service needs which by their very nature are low volume and not related to the shopping pattern of the comparative shopping center. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1200), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-252. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-1 Local Business District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Generally recognized retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises, such as, but not limited to: Groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions of hardware. 
(2)  Personal service establishments that perform services on the premises, such as, but not limited to: Repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barbershops, photographic studios, and self-service laundries and dry cleaners. 
(3)  Dry cleaning establishments, or pickup stations, dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Business establishments that perform services on the premises, such as, but not limited to: Banks, credit unions, loan companies, insurance offices and real estate offices. 
(5)  Professional services including the following: Offices of doctors, dentists and similar or allied professions. 
(6)  Post office and similar governmental office buildings, serving persons living in the nearby residential area. 
(7)  Restaurant sit-down, as defined in this chapter. 
(8)  Restaurant fast food sit-down, as defined in this chapter. 
(9)  Business schools and colleges or private schools, operated for profit. 
(10)  Other uses that are directly similar to the above uses. 
(11)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1201), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-2, § 1, 3-21-2011) 
Sec. 110-253. - Uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  Gasoline station with or without a retail adjunct for the sale of gasoline, oil, and minor accessories only, except incidental repair work may be done so long as all such work is done within a completely enclosed building, and so long as no repair work is performed on any motor vehicle with a load capacity of more than one ton. Steam cleaning or undercoating, vehicular body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstering or auto glass work, the outdoor storage, rental, sale or lease of motor vehicles, trailers, campers and such other activities whose external effects could adversely extend beyond the property line is expressly prohibited. Repair work shall not be performed on commercial or industrial vehicles with a load capacity greater than one ton. Furthermore, a gasoline station shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  The standards set forth in Ordinance No. 359 in the Trenton Code to regulate and control the location and site of gasoline stations (automobile service stations). 
b.  Shall be permitted only at the intersection of two major thoroughfares as designated on the city's master plan map. 
c.  The minimum lot area for a gasoline station shall be 15,000 square feet for stations having no more than two pump islands. Each additional pump island beyond two shall require an additional 3,000 square feet of site area. 
d.  One street lot line shall have at least 150 feet in length along one major thoroughfare. The lot line shall be so shaped and the station so arranged as to provide ample space for vehicles that are required to wait. 
e.  The driveway or curb cuts for access to a service station shall not be permitted at any location that is likely to create a traffic hazard in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be located no less than ten feet from an adjoining property line, 25 feet to the curb or pavement. Entrances shall also be no less than 25 feet from an intersecting street right-of-way line extended to the curb or pavement. 
f.  An obscuring screening device as required in Article XXVII in this chapter shall be provided and maintained on those property lines adjacent to or abutting a residential district or an existing residence. 
g.  A site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. Site plan approval shall be effective for a six-month period of time after which application for a renewal of time a new site plan must be submitted to the planning commission, unless construction has been started under the original site plan. The review of a site plan is necessary in order to determine if proper relationships have been established between the location of driveways, parking areas, building location, any obscuring screening devices, and any other development features on the site, and development on adjacent properties, and on traffic safety. 
(2)  Veterinary medicine office, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The use shall consist of only the offices of veterinary medicine doctors and related staff. 
b.  The use and all operations associated with the use shall be conducted wholly within the principal building. 
c.  The principal building shall be a freestanding building. 
d.  No overnight keeping of pets shall be permitted, except for pets recovering from surgery or which need to be kept overnight for medical observation only. 
e.  No kenneling of pets shall be permitted. 
f.  No outdoor pens shall be allowed. 
g.  The principal building shall contain sufficient insulating and sound deadening materials so as not to have an adverse impact on abutting properties. 
h.  All medical waste, pet waste and the remains of euthanized pets shall be disposed of in strict accordance with all applicable federal and state requirements. 
i.  Off-street parking, loading and unloading and any trash receptacles associated with the use shall comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter. 
j.  Pet grooming as subject to the conditions set forth in Article XII, section 110-253(3) of this chapter. 
(3)  Pet day care, pet grooming or other pet service establishments, with no boarding or overnight stay, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Overnight stay of pets shall be prohibited. 
b.  Size of pet grooming area: Minimum of 15 square feet with a minimum width dimension of three feet and a minimum depth dimension of three feet. 
c.  Each grooming facility shall be equipped with at least a bath tub, a grooming table, hot and cold running water, a drier, clippers, combs, brushes, and shears. All equipment must be sterilized after each use and kept in sanitary condition. 
d.  Pets shall be securely confined. Pets shall not be allowed to wander at large. 
e.  Grooming facilities that keep pets for grooming for longer than four hours must have an indoor or outdoor pet exercise area. The exercise area must measure at least three feet by eight feet, with a covered top. 
f.  Interior building surfaces, including walls, ceilings, and floors shall be constructed so as to be water resistant and capable of being readily cleaned and maintained. 
g.  Readily accessible washrooms or sinks shall be provided, convenient to all work areas, to ensure maintenance of personal hygiene by pet caretakers. A sink in good repair shall be provided for washing and sanitizing equipment and utensils. Single service soap and towel dispensers must be available at all hand washing sinks. 
h.  All facilities shall be adequately ventilated with fresh or filtered air to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation and to provide for the health and comfort of the pets at all times. Ventilation shall be provided by either natural or mechanical means. The necessary equipment or comparable means shall be provided to exhaust the air from the pet area to outside of the building. 
i.  The groomer must keep the grooming area, and exercise area if necessary, disinfected, clean, and sanitary at all times. 
j.  Pet waste areas, either indoor or outdoor, shall be constructed of a hard surface that is easily cleaned. Such areas shall be connected to a sanitary system. 
k.  Drying cages shall be: 
1.  Kept clean and sanitary. 
2.  Large enough to comfortably contain the pet. The pet shall be able to stand, lie down, and turn around. The recommend dimensions are: 22 inches to 24 inches wide, by 24 to 28 inches high, by 30 to 34 inches deep. 
l.  Outdoor areas where pets will be allowed shall: 
1.  Not be within 300 feet of a residential district. 
2.  Permitted only in the rear and side yards. 
3.  The setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the property line and landscaped with one canopy tree, one evergreen tree and four shrubs per each 30 linear feet along the property line, rounded upward. 
4.  Fully enclosed by a six-foot screening fence or wall providing full containment for the pets in accordance with Article XXVII, Screening Devices and Landscaping. 
m.  All pets shall be kept indoors from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
n.  A written statement of operating procedures must be submitted, such as those recommended by the Pet Care Services Association or the American Kennel Club. The procedures, which are to be followed for the life of the business, must address, at a minimum, the following items: 
1.  Identification and correction of pet behavior that impacts surrounding uses, including excessive noise (barking). 
2.  The time interval anticipated for waste removal and method of clean up. 
3.  Identification of the hours of operation and timing of shift changes, if applicable. 
4.  Indication of staffing levels during all shifts and the qualifications of each staff member. 
5.  Membership in the Voluntary Facilities Accreditation program via the Pet Care Services Association is strongly encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1202), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-3, § 2, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 110-254. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to all uses permitted in the district: 
(1)  Business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on premises where produced. 
(2)  Except as otherwise permitted in this section, all business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. In the instance of a sit-down restaurant or a fast food sit-down restaurant, as permitted in section 110-252 in this article, seasonal outdoor eating environments may be permitted in conjunction with a sit-down or a fast food sit-down restaurant, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Outdoor eating may be provided in any yard. When placed in a yard next to a residential district, the outdoor eating area shall be screened according to the applicable screening requirements of Article XXVII in this chapter, and all exterior lighting shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article XXIX, section 110-631, in this chapter. 
b.  Outdoor eating facilities proposed within a public street right-of-way directly in front of and adjacent to a permitted sit-down or fast food sit-down restaurant shall be subject to the requirements for outdoor sidewalk restaurants set forth and regulated in Article XV, section 110-313(3), in this chapter. 
(3)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials beyond that normally incident to the uses permitted in this article, shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Except as expressly permitted in this article, the outdoor storage of goods or materials beyond that normally incident to a use permitted in this article, shall be prohibited. 
(5)  No accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted except in conjunction with a principal building. 
(6)  Consult Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(7)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading standards. 
(8)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscape planting screen. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting plan review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(9)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(10)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(11)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-721. General Exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1203), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-255-110-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - B-2 PLANNED COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 110-271. - Intent. 
    The B-2 Planned Community Business Districts are designed to cater to the needs of a larger consumer population than is served by the local business districts, and is generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments served by a common parking area and generating larger volumes of vehicular traffic than neighborhood-oriented businesses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1300), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-272. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-2 Planned Community Business District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any retail business or service establishment permitted in B-1 districts, when made an integral part of a planned commercial center, as defined in this chapter, and regulated in this article. 
(2)  All retail business, service establishments or processing uses as follows: 
a.  Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building, when it shall be an integral part of a planned commercial center, as defined in this chapter and as regulated in this article. 
b.  Any service establishment of an office, showroom or workshop such as but not necessarily limited to an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer or an establishment doing radio or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct, when made an integral part of a planned commercial center, as defined in this chapter, and as regulated in this article. 
c.  Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls. 
d.  Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, banquet halls, chapels or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
e.  Business schools and colleges or private schools operated for profit. 
f.  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(3)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1301), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-273. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  Planned commercial centers, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Development under this provision shall be permitted only as part of the overall development of a planned commercial center. To proceed under this approach, the petitioner shall submit a complete site plan prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVIII in this chapter for review and approval by the planning commission. 
b.  If the site is to be subdivided, the plat shall be reviewed in accordance with the City of Trenton Subdivision Regulations Code [Chapter 86 of this Code] and the applicable subdivision platting control standards of Michigan Land Division Act 591 of 1996, as amended. If the site is to be developed as a condominium site, it shall comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter and with the applicable requirements of Michigan Condominium Act 59, of 1978, as amended. 
c.  In reviewing individual site plans in or for a commercial center, coordination of development shall be a principal endeavor of the planning commission. When conducting its review the planning commission shall: 
1.  Encourage a uniform architectural appearance between individual buildings; 
2.  Make certain that off-street parking is distributed so it will be convenient to all stores in the development; 
3.  All activity centers such as loading and unloading are effectively screened where required by ordinance; 
4.  If an ancillary outdoor area for the display and sale of seasonal products is to be provided, it shall be located only in the rear or side yard and when located next to a residential zoning district shall not be located in any minimum required rear or side yard setback and shall be effectively screened. When the front and/or side of a seasonal outdoor sales area shall be visible from a street, it shall be secured with decorative wrought iron materials and not woven wire (chain link type) fence materials. Except for gated openings, the entire outdoor seasonal sales area will be enclosed by a three-foot-high masonry wall which shall consist of the same masonry wall materials as the principal building to which it is attached. Security fencing may be installed on top of the structure. 
d.  During its review of the site plan, the planning commission may vary the following standards: 
1.  Minimum interior side yard setbacks as required in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter for the B-2 districts may be reduced to 20 feet when adjacent to an RM-1 or RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District. As a condition of any such approval the planning commission shall require the installation of an obscuring screening device as required in Article XXVII in this chapter. 
2.  In those instances where the planning commission finds that an excessive number of ingress and/or egress points may occur along a major or secondary thoroughfare, thereby diminishing the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare and creating a potential traffic hazard, the planning commission may require the installation of a system of marginal access or limited access roads or service drives along the property frontage to assure adequate traffic circulation on the site, and to allow motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic to proceed directly from one parcel to another without exiting a property via a public street before entering an abutting property. 
e.  Except as otherwise permitted in this subsection a planned commercial center as envisioned in the standards of this section shall not permit the development of any freestanding ancillary uses in conjunction with a planned commercial center, such as but not necessarily limited to, motor vehicle oriented service facilities, including gasoline service stations, new and used motor vehicle sales lots, restaurants of any kind, or any other freestanding use, unless the planning commission shall find that the overall site of the planned commercial center is of such ample size that it can effectively and efficiently handle such uses in conjunction with a planned commercial center, and when such uses will be accessed only from an interior service drive or marginal access drive system serving the center, there being no direct access permitted to any abutting public street from any ancillary freestanding use. 
(2)  Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor tennis courts, indoor skating rink, or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation when located at least 100 feet from any front, rear, or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential district. 
(3)  Automobile service centers, when developed as part of a larger planned shopping center designed so as to integrate the automobile service center within the site plan and architecture of the total shopping center, and provided further that a building permit shall not be issued separately for the construction of any such automobile service center within the B-2 district. 
(4)  Indoor recreational space providing children's amusement facilities and child care, when part of a planned development and when the use shall be located within the center itself and not as an accessory use in a freestanding building in the center complex. Any outdoor play area provided with the use shall be located in a nonrequired yard, shall be fully secured within a fenced area and shall be fully supervised when in use. 
(5)  Development shall only take place in accordance with the plan as approved by the planning commission. Any amendment to the plan shall require review and approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1302), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-274. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to all uses permitted in the district: 
(1)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(2)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading, and those open-air uses indicated as being subject to special conditions in section 110-273 of this article, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(3)  No accessory building shall be permitted except in conjunction with a principal building. 
(4)  Consult Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(5)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading standards. 
(6)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscape planting screen. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting plan review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(7)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(8)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(9)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-721. General Exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1303), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-275-110-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 110-291. - Intent. 
    The B-3 General Business Districts are designed to provide sites for more intense types of businesses that would often be incompatible with the more restricted and more pedestrian-oriented local business districts or the greater size and diversity of the planned community business districts. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1400), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-292. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-3 General Business District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any retail business or service establishment permitted in B-2 districts as principal uses permitted and uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
(2)  Automatic motor vehicle wash facility when completely enclosed in a building. 
(3)  Manually operated motor vehicle wash stall facilities. 
(4)  Bus passenger stations. 
(5)  Sit-down restaurant as defined in this chapter. 
(6)  Fast food sit-down restaurant as defined in this chapter. 
(7)  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(8)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1401), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-293. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  Gasoline service station with or without a retail adjunct, for the sale of gasoline, oil, and minor accessories only and for the renting of vehicles and trailers, provided all such rentals are stored in the rear yard or in an interior side yard only, and subject further to the limitations of use and requirements set forth in Article XII, section 110-253(1), in this chapter. 
(2)  The sale or leasing of new and/or used automobiles, trucks, house trailers, or rental of trailers and/or automobiles, all subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The lot or area shall be provided with an asphalt or concrete surface, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area in a manner approved by the city. 
b.  Motor vehicle ingress and egress to and from the facility shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.  Adequate area shall be provided and reserved for customer parking as required in Article XXVI in this chapter and shall be in addition to any spaces for the display or storage of new or used motor vehicles. 
d.  All exterior site lighting shall comply with the requirements of Article XXIX, section 110-631, in this chapter. 
e.  The landscaping requirements applicable to a motor vehicle sales establishment as set forth in Article XXVII in this chapter shall be complied with. 
f.  When located next to a residential zoning district the property will be screened in a manner set forth and regulated in Article XXVII in this chapter. 
(3)  Motel or motor hotel, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare. 
b.  Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area. 
c.  No guest shall establish permanent residence at a motel for more than 30 days within any calendar year. 
(4)  Business in the character of an open front store, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street shall be maintained. 
b.  Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.  All exterior site lighting shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article XXIX, section 110-631, in this chapter. 
d.  A screening device shall be provided as set forth and regulated in Article XXVII in this chapter along any property line that abuts a residential district. 
(5)  Fast food restaurants as defined in this chapter, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  When a public address system will be used to take orders from an outdoor menu board or display from drive-through customers the drive-through lane and the menu board display must be located in the nonrequired front yard when the use abuts a residential district or an office service district. In the event the narrowness of the site prevents the location of the menu display board in the nonrequired front yard, it may be placed in the nonrequired side yard that is farthest from a residential district or office service district. 
b.  Any drive-through lane shall be separate from a service drive, loading and unloading area, or vehicle maneuvering lane. 
c.  Seasonal outdoor eating facilities may be provided for any restaurant subject to the applicable requirements of Article XV, section 110-313(2), in this chapter pertaining to an outdoor eating facility on private property or the applicable requirements of Article XV, section 110-313(3), in this chapter pertaining to an outdoor eating facility within a public right-of-way. 
(6)  Office of a veterinarian, subject to the requirements set forth in Article XII, section 110-253(2), in this chapter. 
(7)  Plant materials nursery for the retail sale of plant materials, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The storage and/or display of any materials and/or products shall meet all setback requirements of a structure. 
b.  All loading and parking shall be provided off-street. 
c.  The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or other loose, unpacked materials shall be contained so as to prevent any effects on adjacent uses. 
(8)  Commercial outdoor recreational and sport uses, including golf driving ranges, miniature golf and its variations, archery ranges, court games, vehicle tracks and courses, including remote control miniature boats, aircraft or vehicles, and similar uses excluding firearm ranges, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  There shall be no adverse off-site impacts, including those of sound, smoke, odor, dust, radio waves and similar sensory effects. Adequate fencing and screening shall be provided so that any driven or batted balls or airborne objects shall be contained on site within a designated area. 
b.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way, and there shall be no direct off-site glare. 
c.  The compatibility of the hours of operation with adjacent uses shall be considered. 
d.  Adequate off-street parking designed to accommodate peak use, as estimated by the planning commission, shall be provided. 
e.  The erection and permanent year-round maintenance in sound condition, good repair, and visibly attractive condition of all screens, fences, equipment, storage buildings and lighting shall be provided. 
f.  The planning commission may impose limits on signs. 
g.  All food and beverage concessions and sales shall be clearly accessory to the principal use. 
(9)  Indoor self-storage facility, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  All access to the facility will be from a major thoroughfare as designated on the city's master plan map, as amended. 
b.  Except as otherwise permitted in this subsection access to all storage spaces shall be from the interior of the building only, there being no direct outside access to any such storage space permitted. 
c.  When placed in conjunction with any loading and unloading area at the rear of the building direct outside access to storage spaces may be permitted along the rear wall of the building and along the rear half of the side walls of the building provided the sidewalks do not front a street right-of-way or a residential zoning district. 
d.  An office area and a manager's or security person's living quarters may be provided in the storage building or in a separate building on the property. Any such living quarters shall meet the minimum applicable floor area requirements of this chapter for a multiple-family dwelling. An attached or detached private garage may be provided in conjunction with the living quarters for the sole use of its occupant(s). If so provided the garage shall not be made available for customer storage. 
e.  Except for trash receptacles no outdoor storage of any kind shall be permitted either as the principal use or as a use accessory to the principal use. 
(10)  Pet day care, pet grooming or other pet service establishments, with no boarding or overnight stay, subject to the conditions set forth in Article XII, section 110-253(3) of this chapter. 
(11)  To encourage and provide for land use diversity and to promote the economic vitality of the central business district, residential occupancy shall be permitted in buildings of two stories in height or greater. In buildings used for the mixing of business and residential occupancy the following conditions shall apply: 
a.  No dwelling unit shall occupy any portion of the floor area of the building at grade level. 
b.  Business uses may occupy any number of total floors in the building, but no business shall be located on the same floor as a residential use. 
c.  No floor in the building may be used for business purposes that is located above a floor used for residential purposes. 
d.  No dwelling unit shall have more than two bedrooms. 
e.  Each dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum applicable floor area requirements set forth in section 110-511, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter. 
f.  Off-street parking shall be provided for each dwelling unit in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVI in this chapter unless otherwise excused. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1402), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-3, § 3, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 705-5, § 1, 1-22-2013) 
Sec. 110-294. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to all uses permitted in the district: 
(1)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(2)  No business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading, and those open-air uses indicated as being subject to special conditions in section 110-293 in this article, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(3)  No accessory building shall be permitted except in conjunction with a principal building on the property. 
(4)  Consult Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(5)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Off-street parking stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading standards. 
(6)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscape planting screen. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting plan review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(7)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(8)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(9)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-721. General Exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1403), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-295-110-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-311. - Intent. 
    The CBD Central Business District is intended to permit those uses that provide for a variety of retail stores and related activities, and for office buildings and service establishments that occupy the prime frontages in the central business district; and which serve the consumer population beyond the corporate boundaries of the city. The district regulations are designed to promote convenient pedestrian shopping and the stability of retail development by encouraging a continuous retail frontage and by prohibiting automotive-related services and nonretail uses which tend to break up such continuity. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1500), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-312. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the CBD Central Business District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any generally recognized retail business, which supplies commodities on the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited to: Foods, drugs, liquor, furniture, clothing, dry goods, notions, or hardware. 
(2)  Any personal service establishment which performs services on the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited to: Repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoes, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, interior decorators, photographers, and dry cleaners. 
(3)  Restaurants and taverns where the patrons are served while seated within a building occupied by such establishment, and wherein said establishment does not extend as an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any service of a drive-in or open front store. 
(4)  Offices and office buildings of an executive, administrative or professional nature. 
(5)  Banks, with drive-in facilities permitted when said drive-in facilities are incidental to the principal function. 
(6)  Public and quasi-public buildings, such as, but not restricted to: 
a.  Churches 
b.  Municipal offices 
c.  Municipal off-street parking 
d.  Libraries 
e.  Museums 
f.  Fraternal Organizations 
(7)  Commercial recreation facilities such as bowling alleys, theatres, and similar uses. 
(8)  Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians, decorator or similar trades, of which not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the building or part of the building occupied by said establishment is used for making, assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering, finishing, or refinishing its products or merchandise, and provided that the ground-floor premises facing upon and visible from any abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices or display. 
(9)  Business schools, or private schools operated for profit. Examples of private schools permitted herein include, but are not limited to, the following: Dance, music, and voice schools, and art studios. 
(10)  Newspaper offices. 
(11)  Storage facilities when incident to and physically connected with any principal use permitted, provided that such facility is within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by said establishment. 
(12)  Hotels and motels. 
(13)  Other uses which are similar to the above permitted uses. 
(14)  Accessory structures customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1501), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-313. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  To encourage and provide for land use diversity and to promote the economic vitality of the central business district, residential occupancy shall be permitted in buildings of two stories in height or greater. In buildings used for the mixing of business and residential occupancy the following conditions shall apply: 
a.  No dwelling unit shall occupy any portion of the floor area of the building at grade level along West Jefferson or West Rd. 
b.  Dwelling units on the first floor at grade level may be permitted if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The dwelling unit is setback no less than thirty-five (35) feet from West Jefferson or West Road, respectively. 
2.  The façade of the dwelling unit along any street contains at least 35 percent glass windows and doors. The planning commission may grant a reduction allowing 25 percent glass windows and doors if the applicant provides additional architectural features acceptable to the planning commission. 
3.  The building material of the façade of the dwelling unit along the street is brick. 
c.  Business uses may occupy any number of the total floor in the building, but no business shall be located on the same floor as a residential use. 
d.  No floor in the building may be used for business purposes that is located above a floor used for residential purposes. 
e.  No dwelling unit shall have more than two bedrooms. 
f.  Each dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum applicable floor area requirement set forth in section 110-511, Schedule of regulations, in this chapter. 
g.  Off-street parking shall be provided for each dwelling unit in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVI in this chapter unless otherwise excused. 
(2)  Outdoor eating areas, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  They are located and maintained entirely on privately-owned land. 
b.  They are accessory to a sit-down restaurant on the same premises. 
c.  They shall have been reviewed and approved by local or county health agencies prior to review and approval by the planning commission. 
d.  They shall be fenced and when located next to a residential district, shall be screened in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVII in this chapter. 
e.  The outdoor eating area is made part of the license of the principal use. 
(3)  Sidewalk sit-down restaurants or cafes, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The city may issue revocable annual permits to an eating and drinking establishment, on a limited portion of the public sidewalk adjacent to the business, provided: 
1.  The sidewalk on which the cafe is to be located is flat, is in good repair and is physically separated from the abutting street by a raised curb; 
2.  The location of the cafe on the sidewalk will not interfere with the clear vision of motorists on the adjoining street, particularly at any intersection of the sidewalk with another street or alley; 
3.  The location of the cafe on the sidewalk will not unduly encumber clear and safe passage of pedestrian on the sidewalk; 
4.  All tables and chairs shall be located inside the approved area on the sidewalk towards the building, to which it is accessory; 
5.  All construction involved in the establishments and maintenance of a sidewalk cafe shall be of a temporary nature and subject to review and approval by the city, or by the jurisdiction in control of the right-of-way; 
6.  All eating areas shall be provided with trash receptacles. The property owner or operator of the establishment shall keep the area clean and free of all paper, trash, refuse and debris; 
7.  The eating area may be covered by a temporary structure such as a canopy or awning, or umbrella-type shades affixed securely to a table or to the sidewalk, in a manner acceptable to the city or the jurisdiction in control of the right-of-way. Any such temporary structure or umbrella shall be completely within the area on the sidewalk approved for the cafe; 
8.  The seating area of the sidewalk cafe must satisfy the applicable requirements of the state construction code with respect to the amount of seating, spacing and points of ingress and egress; 
9.  No outdoor cooking will be permitted in any sidewalk cafe permitted in this subsection; 
10.  Materials used in conjunction with a sidewalk cafe, including tables, chairs and wait stations shall be fully and completely removed from the sidewalk and kept elsewhere, when the cafe is closed for the season; 
11.  The Trenton City Council may, when deemed necessary, and at its discretion, adopt by resolution, additional regulations governing hours of operation, lighting, noise and other aspects of sidewalk cafe operations; 
12.  Applications to establish a sidewalk cafe shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be reviewed on an annual basis. The application shall be submitted to the building department for review and approval. [As] The building department is conducting its review, the building department may require submittal of a scaled drawing of the proposed sidewalk cafe, including the location and area of the sidewalk involved, the arrangement of tables and chairs, wait stations, etc.; 
13.  Application for a sidewalk cafe shall not be approved by the building department until approval to operate the use in the public right-of-way has been received in writing from the city or the jurisdiction in control of the right-of-way; and: 
i.  The applicant has executed a statement agreeing, at the applicant's expense, that the City of Trenton, its elected and appointed officials, employees and consulting agents and agencies, are held harmless from, and indemnifying them for and defending them (with legal counsel acceptable to them through any appellate proceedings they wish to pursue until a final resolution, settlement or compromise approved by them) from any liability for loss, damage, injury or casualty to persons or property caused or occasioned by or rising from any act, use, or occupancy or negligence by or of the applicant and any of its agents, agencies, servants, visitors, licenses, or employees occurring during the term of this agreement or any extended term. 
ii.  The applicant has furnished the City of Trenton with a certificate or other evidence indicating that the applicant has had issued to it a policy or policies of insurance against damage to public property, against bodily injury, including death, to one person and against more than one person, in amounts agreeable to the city. The certificate(s) of insurance shall show the City of Trenton as a certificate holder and an insured and shall provide that coverage may not be terminated without 30 days' prior written notice in the city. Such insurance must provide coverage of the city and its officers, employees and its consulting agents and agencies for any occurrence during the term of the permit. Upon request, the applicant shall provide the city with a copy of the insurance policy(ies), and 
iii.  The applicant has secured and is maintaining all legally required works disability compensation and unemployment compensation insurance. 
14.  A sidewalk cafe may display on the sidewalk in conjunction with the sidewalk cafe, a temporary freestanding sign which shall not be more than five feet in height and which shall not have more than six square feet of display area per side. The sign shall display only the name of the cafe and the menu of the day. The sign shall be placed within the area designated for the sidewalk cafe; and 
15.  Prior to issuance of an annual permit by the building department, a permit fee in an amount established by the city council shall be paid to the city. The permit shall include the dates and duration of the sidewalk cafe. Any permits so issued shall be subject to revocation by the city for the applicant's failure to meet or to maintain the area of the sidewalk cafe in strict accordance with all applicable state, county or local requirements. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1502), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-18, § 1, 8-21-2017) 
Sec. 110-314. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to all uses permitted in this district: 
(1)  Except as may be otherwise permitted in this district, uses permitted in the CBD Central Business District shall contain all storage of goods and materials for sale and/or distribution within the building, there being no outdoor storage permitted. Any indoor storage shall be ancillary to the principal permitted use or uses in the building and shall not include warehousing or storage other than that normally incidental to the uses permitted in the district. 
(2)  Business establishments in the CBD Central Business District shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(3)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and unloading and those open air uses permitted in the district, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(4)  The parking of commercial used or licensed vehicles will be permitted in the rear yard only and any such vehicle shall be clearly incidental to the permitted use. The parking of any such vehicle shall be limited to operable vehicles which are moved off the site on a regular basis and shall not include those used for storage, sales and/or advertising. 
(5)  Parking and/or storage of disabled or damaged vehicles is prohibited. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Except where otherwise regulated in this article, see Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter limiting the height and bulk of building, and building setbacks. 
(8)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Layout Standards, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading standards. 
(9)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening Devices Required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscape planting screen. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Required conditions. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting plan review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(10)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(11)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(12)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding exceptions to certain regulations as they may apply to certain uses permitted in this district. 
Sec. 110-721. General exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1503), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-11, § 1, 8-3-2015) 
Secs. 110-315-110-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 110-331. - Intent. 
    The I-1 Light Industrial Districts are the most restrictive of the several industrial districts and are designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any surrounding districts, including residential districts. The I-1 Districts are so structured to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material. It is intended that all such operations and uses, including materials storage, be totally enclosed within a building or buildings harmonious with other structures that border the district. Because of the restrictive nature of the I-1 Districts the processing of raw material on a site within the district for shipment in bulk form off site to be used in an industrial operation at another location, is expressly prohibited. 
    The general goals of this district include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the municipality's expected future economy for the types of manufacturing and related uses permitted in the district. 
(2)  To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development. 
(3)  To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, and other objectionable influences. 
(4)  To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well-considered plan. 
(5)  To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures in the district, and in adjacent districts. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1600), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-332. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I-I Light Industrial District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(2)  Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding, or processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building; Except when it can be shown that outdoor storage area is necessary for reasons of maintaining the health, safety or general welfare of those working on the premises, or to meet federal safety standards, open outdoor storage of materials or equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding, processing or business operations of the use may be permitted, provided such area is located in the rear yard or in an interior side yard on the same property with the principal permitted use, and subject further to review and approval by the planning commission. When any outdoor storage area is located next to any zoning district other than an I-Industrial District, or when such area will be visible from a street it shall be screened from view in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVII in this chapter. The height and extent of the screening device may be determined by the planning commission based on the height and extent of the items or materials to be stored, up to a height of ten feet for a masonry screen wall structure. 
(3)  Warehousing and wholesale establishments and trucking facilities. 
(4)  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as, but not limited to: Bakery goods, candy, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
(5)  The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials: canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell, tobacco, wax, wire, wood and yarns. 
(6)  The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
(7)  Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products. 
(8)  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs. 
(9)  Laboratories-experimental, film, or testing. 
(10)  Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the like. 
(11)  Central dry cleaning plants or laundries provided that such plants shall not deal with consumer at retail. 
(12)  Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings. Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations, substations, and gas regulator stations and water supply buildings. 
(13)  Railroad transfer and storage tracks, railroad rights-of-way and freight terminal buildings with no outdoor storage of vehicles, trailers or materials. 
(14)  Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or within a screened storage yard, when the storage area will be visible from a street or when adjacent to any zoning district other than an I-Industrial District. 
(15)  Municipal buildings and uses. Any necessary outdoor storage is subject to the same screening provisions as are all other uses within the district. 
(16)  Greenhouses. 
(17)  Trade or industrial schools. 
(18)  Motor vehicle repair, major or general repair as defined in this chapter including undercoating shops when completely enclosed within a building. 
(19)  Freestanding nonaccessory signs. 
(20)  Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character to the above uses. 
(21)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1601), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-333. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  A commercial kennel provided all outdoor runs and accessory shelters intended for the keeping of animals shall be located in the rear yard or in an interior side yard and at least 300 feet from any residential district. 
(2)  Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed within a building and when located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall abut any other district but an I-Industrial District. 
(3)  Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances. 
(4)  Self-storage facilities with or without resident manager quarters, including outdoor storage area, provided when outdoor storage area shall be provided it shall be located in the rear yard or in an interior side yard on the same property with the principal permitted use. When such area is located next to a zoning district other than an I-Industrial District the area shall be screened from view in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVII in this chapter. When a resident manager's living quarters are included, the dwelling unit shall meet the minimum applicable floor area requirements in this chapter. 
(5)  Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms by either their outdoor storage requirements or activities (such as, but not limited to: lumber yard, building materials outlet, upholsterer, cabinet maker, outdoor sales of boats, house trailers, automobile garages, or agricultural implements) or serve the convenience needs of the industrial district (such as, but not limited to an eating and drinking establishment, bank, savings and loan association, credit union, automobile service station, motel or bowling alley, trade or industrial school or industrial clinic. 
(6)  Pet day care, pet grooming or other pet service establishments, with overnight stay, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Boarding of pets shall not be allowed outdoors. 
b.  Size of pet grooming area. Minimum of 15 square feet with: 
Minimum width dimension: Three feet. 
Minimum depth dimension: Three feet. 
c.  Each grooming facility shall be equipped with at least a bath tub, a grooming table, hot and cold running water, a drier, clippers, combs, brushes, and shears. All equipment must be sterilized after each use and kept in sanitary condition. 
d.  Pets must be securely confined. Pets shall not be allowed to wander at large. 
e.  Only pets of the same household and/or with the consent of the owner(s) may be caged together. Only compatible pets may be caged together. 
f.  Each primary enclosure with steel grate flooring shall contain a solid resting surface. All primary enclosures shall allow each pet to turn around, exercise normal postural movements, and to experience necessary socialization with cage mates one square foot minimum for small and medium pets and two square feet minimum for large pets, that is water resistant and can be cleaned and sanitized. Primary enclosures are those pet enclosures in which the pet normally rests or sleeps (also referred to as temporary housing). 
g.  Primary enclosures shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to in good repair to protect the pets from injury, to contain them, and to keep predators out. Primary enclosures shall be constructed such that they can be routinely maintained to allow pets to stay dry and clean (as appropriate for the species) and to provide convenient access to clean food and water. 
h.  All the surfaces of the primary enclosure must be constructed of a material that is water resistant and can be cleaned and sanitized. 
i.  All buildings with overnight stay shall provide a filtration system to protect air quality and shall be insulated so as to contain excessive noise. 
j.  The height of the primary enclosure shall be such that the pet can stand up and exercise normal postural movements. 
k.  Each facility shall have an indoor or outdoor pet exercise area. The exercise area must measure at least three feet by eight feet, with a covered top. 
l.  Interior building surfaces, including walls, ceilings, and floors shall be constructed so as to be water resistant and capable of being readily cleaned and maintained. 
m.  Readily accessible washrooms or sinks shall be provided, convenient to all work areas, to ensure maintenance of personal hygiene by pet caretakers. A sink in good repair shall be provided for washing and sanitizing equipment and utensils. Single service soap and towel dispensers must be available at all hand washing sinks. 
n.  All facilities shall be adequately ventilated with fresh or filtered air to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation and to provide for the health and comfort of the pets at all times. Ventilation shall be provided by either natural or mechanical means. The necessary equipment or comparable means shall be provided to exhaust the air from the pet area to outside of the building. 
o.  The groomer must keep the grooming area, and exercise area if necessary, disinfected, clean, and sanitary at all times. 
p.  Pet waste areas, either indoor or outdoor, shall be constructed of a hard surface that is easily cleaned. Such areas shall be connected to a sanitary system. 
q.  Drying cages shall be: 
1.  Kept clean and sanitary. 
2.  Large enough to comfortably contain the pet. The pet shall be able to stand, lie down, and turn around. The recommend dimensions are: 22 inches to 24 inches wide, by 24 to 28 inches high, by 30 to 34 inches deep. 
r.  Outdoor areas where pets will be allowed shall: 
1.  Not be within 300 feet of a residential district. 
2.  Permitted only in the rear and side yards. 
3.  Have a setback a minimum of 20 feet from the property line and landscaped with one canopy tree, one evergreen tree and four shrubs per each 30 linear feet along the property line, rounded upward. 
4.  Be fully enclosed by a six-foot screening fence or wall providing full containment for the pets in accordance with Article XXVII, Screening Devices and Landscaping. 
s.  All pets shall be kept indoors from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
t.  A written statement of operating procedures must be submitted, such as those recommended by the Pet Care Services Association or the American Kennel Club. The procedures, which are to be followed for the life of the business, must address, at a minimum, the following items: 
1.  Identification and correction of pet behavior that impacts surrounding uses, including excessive noise (barking). 
2.  The time interval anticipated for waste removal and method of clean up. 
3.  Identification of the hours of operation and timing of shift changes, if applicable. 
4.  Indication of staffing levels during all shifts and the qualifications of each staff member. 
5.  Membership in the Voluntary Facilities Accreditation program via the Pet Care Services Association is strongly encouraged. 
(7)  Other uses of a similar character to the above uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1602), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-3, § 1, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 110-334. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to all uses permitted in the district, and all uses shall be subject to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  Except as may be otherwise permitted in this district, uses permitted in the I-1 District shall contain all storage of goods and materials for sale and/or distribution within the building, there being no outdoor storage permitted. Any indoor storage shall be ancillary to the principal permitted use or uses in the building and shall not include warehousing or storage other than that normally incidental to the uses permitted in the district. 
(2)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and unloading and those open air uses permitted in the district, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(3)  The parking of commercial rated (licensed) vehicles will be permitted in the rear yard only and any such vehicle shall be clearly incidental to the permitted use. The parking of any such vehicle shall be limited to operable vehicles which are moved off the site on a regular basis and shall not include those used for storage, sales and/or advertising. 
(4)  Parking and/or storage of disabled or damaged vehicles is prohibited. 
(5)  Except where otherwise regulated in this article, see Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, and building setbacks. 
(6)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Numerical off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading standards. 
(7)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscaped planting screens. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting screen review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(8)  Consult Article XVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(9)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approvals of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(10)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding exceptions to certain regulations as they may apply to certain uses permitted in this district. 
Sec. 110-721 General exceptions 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1603), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-335-110-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - I-2 MEDIUM INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 110-351. - Intent. 
    The I-2 Medium Industrial Districts are designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling, and fabrication activities whose external physical effects may be felt to a limited extent in the surrounding zoning districts. The I-2 District is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing, and compounding of semi-finished products from previously prepared material. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1700), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-352. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I-2 Medium Industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any principal use permitted in an I-1 District. 
(2)  The assembly, manufacturing, stamping or fabricating of vehicles, vehicle bodies, parts and accessories, but not including tire manufacture. 
(3)  The assembly, and/or manufacturing of heavy electrical parts, motors or batteries. 
(4)  Machining, cold and hot forming, shearing, fabricating and welding shops, including reprocessing of scrap materials of self-produced materials for reuse on the premises. 
(5)  Manufacturing of large home appliances, such as refrigerators, washers, etc. 
(6)  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as, but not limited to, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, or toiletries. 
(7)  Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies. 
(8)  Electric transformer stations, substations, and gas regulator stations not enclosed in buildings. 
(9)  Any other manufacturing uses which shall be determined to be of the same general character as the permitted uses outlined in section 110-352 of this article except any use restricted to the I-3 Heavy Industrial District. 
(10)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1701), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-353. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  Any principal use permitted subject to special conditions in the I-1 District. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1702), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-354. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to all uses permitted in the district and all uses shall be subject to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  When outdoor storage area shall be provided in conjunction with the use it shall be located in the rear yard or in an interior side yard, except property on which the principal use will be outdoor storage the minimum front yard setback requirement of the district shall be provided. Any outdoor storage area that abuts a residential or a commercial zoning district shall be screened from view in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVII in this chapter. The planning commission may determine the height and the extent of the screening device based on the height and extent of the items or materials to be stored, up to a height of ten feet for a masonry screen wall structure. 
(2)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and unloading and outdoor storage permitted in the district, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(3)  The parking of commercial used or licensed vehicles will be permitted in the rear yard only and any such vehicle shall be clearly incidental to the permitted use. The parking of any such vehicle shall be limited to operable vehicles which are moved off the site on a regular basis and shall not include those used for storage, sales and/or advertising. 
(4)  Parking and/or storage of disabled or damaged vehicles is prohibited. 
(5)  Except where otherwise regulated in this article, see Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter limiting the height and bulk of building, and building setbacks. 
(6)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Layout Standards, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Numerical off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading requirements. 
(7)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscaped planting screens. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting screen review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(8)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(9)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approvals of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(10)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding exceptions to certain regulations as they may apply to certain uses permitted in this district. 
Sec. 110-721. General exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1703), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-355-110-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - I-3 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 110-371. - Intent. 
    The I-3 Heavy Industrial Districts are designed primarily for large scale or specialized industrial operations whose external physical effects may be experienced to a greater degree in the surrounding zoning districts. The I-3 district is structured mainly to permit the manufacturing or processing of products from raw materials in which a molecular breakdown in the raw material may take place. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1800), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-372. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I-3 Heavy Industrial District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses: Uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
(1)  Any principal use first permitted in the I-2 districts. 
(2)  Heating and electric power generating plants. 
(3)  The following production or manufacturing uses provided the principal use is located not less than 800 feet from any residential zoning district and not less then 300 feet from any other nonindustrial zoning district; except when the right-of-way of a major thoroughfare as designated in the Trenton Master Plan for Future Land Use creates a natural buffer area, the principal use may be located not less than 200 feet from the center of said right-of-way and not less than 300 feet from any other nonindustrial zoning district: 
a.  Junk yards, provided such are entirely enclosed within a building or within an eight foot obscuring wall and provided further that one property line abuts a railroad right-of-way. 
b.  Commercial incineration or other forms of waste treatment when conducted within a plant approved by appropriate governmental agencies. 
c.  Integrated steel manufacturing, ore storage, and coking, sintering, and related manufacturing processes. 
d.  Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris. 
e.  Petroleum or other inflammable liquids, production, refining, or storage. 
f.  Smelting of metallic ores or compounds, such as copper, iron, or zinc ore. 
g.  Tire manufacturing. 
h.  Recycling centers or material recovery facilities. 
(4)  The filling of existing open quarry excavation with soil that is acceptable to the city and the county and to the level of the grade established by the city engineer, and subject further to all applicable standards set forth in the City of Trenton Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
(5)  Any use which may be determined by the city council, after recommendation by the planning commission, to be of the same general character as the uses permitted in section 110-372. The city council may stipulate a greater setback than the minimum required in the district and impose reasonable performance standards to insure maintenance of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community around the use and of the city as a whole. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1801), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-4, § 1, 1-22-2013) 
Sec. 110-373. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions shall apply where applicable to all uses permitted in the district and all uses shall be subject to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  When outdoor storage area shall be provided in conjunction with the use it shall be located in the rear yard or in an interior side yard, except property on which the principal use will be outdoor storage the minimum front yard setback requirement of the district shall be provided. Any outdoor storage area that abuts a residential or a commercial zoning district shall be screened from view in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVII, in this chapter. The planning commission may determine the height and the extent of the screening device based on the height and extent of the items or materials to be stored, up to a height of ten feet for a masonry screen wall structure. 
In those instance where a principal permitted use in the I-3 district is of a type that requires substantial area for massive outdoor storage of materials and which due to its mass or height is impractical to screen from view, wherever such storage will be visible from a street or from any nonindustrial zoning district, the materials shall be stored within the minimum applicable building setback lines of the district and shall be kept in an organized manner, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(2)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and unloading and outdoor storage permitted in the district, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(3)  The parking of commercial used or licensed vehicles will be permitted in the rear yard only and any such vehicle shall be clearly incidental to the permitted use. The parking of any such vehicle shall be limited to operable vehicles which are moved off the site on a regular basis and shall not include those used for storage, sales and/or advertising. 
(4)  Parking and/or storage of disabled or damaged vehicles are prohibited. 
(5)  Except where otherwise regulated in this article, see Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter limiting the height and bulk of building, and building setbacks. 
(6)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Layout Standards, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Numerical off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading requirements. 
(7)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscaped planting screens. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting screen review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(8)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(9)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approvals of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on a public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(10)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding exceptions to certain regulations as they may apply to certain uses permitted in this district. 
Sec. 110-721. General exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1802), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-374-110-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - WM WATERFRONT MARINA DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-391. - Intent. 
    The WM Waterfront Marina District is designed to accommodate recreational and commercial boating along with those activities and services related to harbor and waterway improvements, thereby facilitating navigation and providing safe and economical waterfront recreational development. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1900), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-392. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a WM Waterfront Marina District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Municipal or private development of either the berthing, protection or servicing and storage of recreational and commercial boats, yachts, cruisers, inboards, outboards and sailboats. 
(2)  Municipal or private beaches and recreational areas. 
(3)  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(4)  Accessory structures and uses including private launching ramps customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1901), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-393. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted when established in conjunction with a marina operation. It being the specific intent that these uses shall not be permitted as an individual or freestanding use, and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  Engine and hull repair shops. 
(2)  Boat fuel stations. 
(3)  Commissary facilities for the provision of food, beverages, and the like to be stored aboard boats. 
(4)  Retail businesses, which supply commodities for persons using the facilities of the district such as: sale of boats, engines and accessories, fishing equipment and other similar items. 
(5)  Restaurant, lounge or club. 
(6)  Hotels or other such facilities to provide temporary home-port accommodations. 
(7)  Winter storage. 
(8)  Public launching ramps. 
(9)  Dredging and sheet pile equipment when used solely by a marina in its normal marina activities, such equipment, when not actively used, shall be concealed from adjacent districts. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1902), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-394. - Required conditions. 
(a)  All dredging, construction and/or development shall be subject to the requirements of all subject codes and ordinances of the City of Trenton. 
(b)  The flushing of discharge of boat toilets, discarding of waste or refuse from boats in a marina is prohibited. Facilities shall be provided at the marina for disposal of refuse from boat holding tanks in an approved and sanitary manner. Each marina shall provide suitable, safe and sanitary toilet and refuse facilities within buildings designed for this purpose. No less than one toilet shall be provided for each 50 boat spaces or less within not more than 1,000 feet of walking distance of each boat space. Refuse and garbage containers shall be provided and kept in clean and sanitary condition for the use of boat owners within not more than 150 feet of walking distance of each boat space. All such facilities shall be subject to the approval of the Wayne County Health Department. 
(c)  Public launchings permitted in any marina having a public launching ramp, shall be limited as follows:. The number of public launchings permitted shall be limited to the number of designated parking spaces available to vehicles and boat carriers in any such marina, and likewise the number of public launchings shall be limited in direct proportion to the available harbor spaces in any such marina as hereinafter required, whichever number of parking spaces or harbor spaces is the lesser amount. 
    Harbor accommodations: Any marina having a public launching ramp shall provide harbor space or spaces directly connected with such marina, capable of accommodating as many boats as there are parking spaces for vehicles and boat carriers, on the lands of such marina. The foregoing requirements as to harbor space are to assure protection to boats launched at such public ramp from the turbulent waters caused by storms or high winds. Before any use shall be made of the public launching ramp, a site plan for such ramp and attendant facilities shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. The commission shall determine that all provisions of this section have been complied with before granting site plan approval. 
(d)  Consult Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter regarding setbacks applicable to parking lots in the district. 
(e)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking Requirements, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-551. Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
Sec. 110-552. Numerical off-street vehicle stacking space requirements. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street loading and unloading requirements. 
(f)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping, of this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required. 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscaped planting screens. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting screen review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(g)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in the district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedures and requirements. 
(h)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in this district. 
Sec. 110-621. Procedures for review and approval of conditional uses. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-635. Frontage on public street. 
Sec. 110-636. Access to a major thoroughfare. 
Sec. 110-639. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(i)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to various uses permitted in this district. 
Sec. 110-721. General Exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(1903), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-395-110-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-411. - Intent. 
    The P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts are intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used for the off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will generally be provided by petition or request to serve an older established nonresidential use district that was developed without adequate off-street parking. A P-1 district can also serve as a district of land use transition between a nonresidential district and a residential district. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2000), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-412. - Principal uses permitted. 
    The premises in a P-1 Vehicular Parking District shall be used for the organized off-street parking of motor vehicles and shall be developed and maintained subject to the regulations in this article. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2001), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-413. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing: 
(1)  In those instances where it can be clearly shown that the proper and functional use of a trash receptacle cannot be achieved on the same parcel as the principal use, the planning commission may permit a trash receptacle to be located in a developed or developing off-street parking lot in a P-1 district, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The trash receptacle will be used only by the principal use for which the off-street parking lot is provided. 
b.  Access to the trash receptacle shall be gained from an improved public alley which abuts the P-1 district and the parking lot, or from an improved private access drive which provides access to the P-1 district and the parking lot from the abutting property containing the principal use the parking lot is intended to serve. 
c.  The trash receptacle is located next to the improved public alley or improved private access drive and can be accessed and serviced directly from the improved public alley or improved private access drive. The trash receptacle shall be effectively screened and maintained in strict compliance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVII in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2002), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-414. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions where applicable shall apply to development in the P-1 district: 
(1)  Parking areas in the P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with, one or more business or industrial establishments located in an adjoining business or industrial district or in connection with one or more existing office buildings, institutions or multiple dwelling developments. 
(2)  Parking areas shall be contiguous to an RM-1 or RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District or a nonresidential district. Such parking areas may be approved when adjacent to such districts or at the end of a block where such areas front on a street that is perpendicular to a street servicing the district. There may be a private driveway or public street or alley between the P-1 district and such contiguous districts. 
(3)  The parking area shall be used for the parking of private passenger vehicles as defined in this chapter, shall not be used as a loading or unloading area, or for the parking or storage of disabled or damaged vehicles. 
(4)  No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display thereof, shall be conducted in the parking lot. 
(5)  No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use shall be maintained on the premises of the parking lot. 
(6)  No building, other than one for the shelter of attendants, shall be erected upon the premises and it shall not exceed ten feet in overall height. 
(7)  Application for P-1 district rezoning shall be made by submitting a dimensioned layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plans in accordance with Article XXVIII in this chapter. 
(8)  Consult Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, in this chapter regarding setbacks applicable to parking lots in the district. 
(9)  Consult Article XXVI, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Layout Standards, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to the layout standards for this district. 
Sec. 110-553. Off-street parking space layout requirements. 
Sec. 110-554. Off-street loading and unloading requirements. 
(10)  Consult Article XXVII, Screening and Landscaping, of this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to the district this district. 
Sec. 110-571. Screening devices required 
Sec. 110-572. Screen wall structures. 
Sec. 110-573. Landscaped earth berms. 
Sec. 110-574. Landscaped planting screens. 
Sec. 110-575. Building wall serving as a screen. 
Sec. 110-576. Approvals and waivers. 
Sec. 110-577. Landscape planting standards. 
Sec. 110-578. Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
Sec. 110-579. Aesthetic landscape areas. 
Sec. 110-580. Planting screen review. 
Sec. 110-581. Maintenance and replacement. 
Sec. 110-582. Cost estimates and surety. 
Sec. 110-583. Exterior utility equipment screens. 
Sec. 110-584. Trash receptacle screens. 
(11)  Consult Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to this district. 
Sec. 110-601. Intent. 
Sec. 110-602. Procedure and requirements. 
(12)  Consult Article XXIX, General Provisions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections as they may apply to this district. 
Sec. 110-630. Accessory uses. 
Sec. 110-631. Exterior site lighting. 
Sec. 110-632. Signs (where applicable). 
Sec. 110-634. Corner clearance. 
Sec. 110-640. Exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
(13)  Consult Article XXXIII, General Exceptions, in this chapter regarding compliance with the requirements of these sections may apply to this district. 
Sec. 110-721. General exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2003), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-415-110-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - MD MIXED USE DISTRICT 

Sec. 110-431. - Intent. 
    The intent of the MD Mixed Use District is to serve as the principal district for the development or redevelopment of those areas in the city designated on its adopted master plan map as areas for mixed use development. Mixed use development as envisioned in the master plan and set forth in the MD district, is designed to encourage the blending of various types of residential land use which may include single-family (including cluster housing) and multiple-family units in a harmonious and functional relationship with nonresidential land use such as office and select commercial uses, including marina and related commercial uses. Furthermore, the MD district is structured to encourage: 
(1)  Infill development, redevelopment designed and intended to contribute to a more compact use of the land, resulting in less consumption of land and natural resources, while at the same time, enhancing the site's natural features by sustaining them through their careful integration into the site's overall development scheme; 
(2)  Full utilization of the city's existing utilities and other municipal services; 
(3)  A high level of development that will make a positive contribution to sustaining the quality of life in the community by: 
a.  Enhancing and diversifying the economy of the community; 
b.  Enhancing the environmental qualities of the community; and 
c.  Enhancing the recreational potential of the community. 
(4)  The redevelopment of environmentally impacted areas with a form of diversified land use that will be environmentally acceptable to the community; 
(5)  A creative approach to the mixing of land use types by minimizing regulatory standards generally associated with a zoning district in order to encourage a high level of design innovation; and 
(6)  The optimum use of public park and open space areas to attract infill development of environmentally impacted sites. 
(7)  It is further the intent of the MD district to encourage the development of traditional neighborhoods through coordinated land use patterns of residential, office or local commercial land use. The application of residential living in the upper floors of multiple story buildings containing office and commercial land use is encouraged. Excellence in the use of land, the coordinated and orderly mixing of land use types, the design and placing of buildings, open spaces, parking and the design and extent of landscaping are all critical components in the successful use of this district. A successful development will create a desirable visual image that will lend itself to safe and pleasant pedestrian movements throughout the development. Therefore, multiple developers, development teams or consortium of developers are encouraged to prepare and present development proposals for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2100), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-432. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the MD districts, no building land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any principal use permitted in the R-1 through RM-2 residential districts. 
(2)  Any principal use permitted in the OS-1, B-2 and WM nonresidential districts. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2101), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-433. - Principal uses permitted, subject to special conditions. 
    In the MD districts, the following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to review and approval by the planning commission at a public hearing established in accordance with the guidelines set forth in Article XXX, Public Hearing, in this chapter: 
(1)  Any conditional use permitted in the R-1 through RM-2 residential districts when found by the planning commission to be compatible with land use around it. 
(2)  Any conditional use permitted in the OS-1, B-2 and WM nonresidential districts when found by the planning commission to be compatible with land use around it. 
(3)  Any mitigation measure(s) or structure(s) required to treat, retain, detain or remedy former environmental conditions on the property. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2102), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-434. - Application procedure. 
    An applicant or applicants interested in developing land within an MD district shall do so in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  A presubmittal meeting shall first be held between the applicant or applicants and the city to discuss the overall intent and purpose of the MD district and to learn of the applicant's proposal to develop land in an MD district. The intent of the presubmittal meeting is to determine if development envisioned by the applicant for the site is in keeping with the intent and purpose of the MD district and conforms to the general development guidelines of the district. This may be an exploratory meeting in which the applicant need not have a prepared concept plan. 
(2)  If the applicant had not prepared a concept plan prior to the presubmittal meeting, the applicant shall thereafter prepare and submit a general concept plan for review and comment by the engineering department involved in the site plan review process. The general concept plan shall reflect the outcome of the presubmittal meeting. 
(3)  If a concept plan was submitted for presentation and discussion purposes at the presubmittal meeting, if needed, the plan shall be revised to reflect the outcome of the presubmittal meeting. Subsequent to the formal staff review, the applicant shall pay all necessary application fees and properly and fully prepare and submit all necessary application forms. At a minimum the concept plan shall consist of at least the following plans and materials: 
a.  An existing conditions drawing of the entire development site drawn to an appropriate engineering scale. 
b.  A conceptual plan view drawing of the entire development site prepared at the same scale as the existing conditions drawing and depicting the general location of: 
1.  All streets, drives, off-street parking and loading, unloading areas; 
2.  Buildings, and structures; 
3.  Open spaces, the general location of any areas of environmental significance on the site including wetlands, extensive tree cover, and topographic conditions; 
4.  General statistical information pertaining to the number of off-street parking spaces provided for the development, dwelling unit density, and the general square feet of floor area proposed for office and commercial use. This information is necessary to provide some guideline for the extent of surface site area that will be required for off-street parking. The numerical off-street parking requirements of this article may be used to determine general parking need for the proposed development; and 
5.  Any other information considered to be vital to revealing the general design and function of the proposed development. 
6.  Building floor plans, exterior building wall elevation drawings and landscape planting plan shall not be required at this point. 
7.  If such plans and drawings are available, the applicant is encouraged to submit them as part of the concept plan. All buildings and structures, and development areas will be identified on the conceptual plan view drawing as to their proposed use, ie; residential, office, commercial, or combinations thereof. 
c.  A site impact assessment providing in sufficient detail, the following information: 
1.  The availability of suitable public utilities to serve the proposed development and any anticipated public utility improvements that may be necessary to properly serve the development. 
2.  Motor vehicle traffic the development can be expected to generate and the anticipated street improvements that may be necessary to adequately accommodate increased traffic. 
3.  If residential dwelling units are proposed as part of the development, a statement estimating the number of residents that will be living in the development when it is fully completed. 
4.  A statement detailing resident site amenities that are to be provided, such as parks or open spaces, pedestrian oriented design concepts, walk areas including trails, or the provision of convenient on-site shopping and service facilities that will be pedestrian oriented to provide convenient resident access, so as to serve their essential shopping and service needs. 
5.  A statement detailing how any site areas of natural environmental significance will be preserved outright, or maintained by integrating them into the general open space areas of the development. 
6.  The statement will also describe the steps that will be taken to avoid disturbing, disrupting or destroying any such area during site development. 
7.  How general on-site drainage will be accommodated in accordance with all applicable federal and state requirements, including soil and sedimentation controls, the prevention of site contamination during development and if necessary, what performance standards will be observed during development to control dust, noise, fumes, smoke and vibration during development, when the site is located next to existing development. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2103), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-435. - Review procedure. 
(a)  Conceptual plan: City staff shall review the concept plans for completeness as outlined in section 110-434 of this article. If the submittal package is complete and properly prepared, city staff will review the plans and formulate their conclusions with regard to the overall concept of the proposed development conforming to the general development guidelines and requirements of the MD district and decisions made during the presubmittal meeting(s). Staff review shall be conducted in a timely and prudent manner. Upon completion of its review the city shall promptly contact the applicant to inform them of any changes or modifications that are needed. The applicant thereafter shall submit a revised concept plan for review and comment by city staff. When city staff finds the concept plan to be in order the city shall so inform the applicant. Approval of the concept plan shall authorize the applicant to proceed with preparation and submittal of a preliminary site plan. 
(b)  Preliminary site plan: A complete site plan shall be prepared and submitted by the applicant for review and comment by city staff. The site plan shall reflect the general layout and overall land use development concept depicted in the approved concept plan. The site plan shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter, and the city's site plan review checklist. The site plan package shall include building floor plans, exterior building wall elevation drawings and a general overall site landscape plan. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the city staff to review the preliminary site plan for completeness and for compliance with the general development concept plan and with the applicable requirements of this article. City staff shall review the preliminary site plan in a timely and prudent manner. Upon completion of its review city staff shall contact the applicant to review any changes to the plan that may be needed to carry out the overall intent and purpose of the MD district. 
    When city staff is satisfied that the site plan is in order it shall submit the plans to the planning commission for preliminary site plan approval, the planning commission shall schedule a duly authorized public hearing to be held in accordance with the requirements of Article XXX, Public Hearing, in this chapter. 
    Any revisions or modifications required by the planning commission to be made to the site plan they have received shall be made a part of their recommendation to the Trenton City Council for preliminary site plan approval. 
    Upon receipt of a recommendation from the planning commission for preliminary site plan approval, the city council shall review the site plan, and if it finds the site plan to be in order, it shall grant preliminary site plan approval, conditioned on any contingencies that may have accompanied the planning commission's recommendation, as well as any additional conditions the city council may attach to their preliminary approval. 
    The granting of preliminary site plan approval by the city council shall authorize the applicant to proceed with preparation and submittal of the final site plan. 
(c)  Final site plan approval: A final site plan package shall be submitted to the city for review and recommendation to the planning commission for final site plan approval. The final site plan shall mirror the approved preliminary site plan, except the final site plan shall include all changes and modifications attached to the preliminary site plan as any condition of its approval. 
    When the planning commission finds the final site plan to be in order it shall grant final site plan approval and recommend final site plan approval to the city council. 
    Upon receipt of the final site plan from the planning commission the city council shall grant final site plan approval when it is also satisfied that the final site plan is in order. 
(d)  Phased development: Should the applicant elect to develop the site in phases, each phase shall be clearly delineated on the final site plan by phase development lines. Each such phase shall be clearly identified as phase 1, 2, or A, B, etc.; the type and extent of development in each phase shall be clearly identified, including the amount of commercial and office floor area to be developed in each phase as well as the number of dwelling units, if any, in each phase. Each development phase shall be able to stand on its own in terms of meeting the dwelling density and numerical off-street parking requirements of the district. Upon completing its review the city council may at its option, elect to grant final site plan approval only to the development phase to be first developed. In such case, each subsequent development phase shall require final site plan approval by the city council. 
(e)  Site plan revisions: Any subsequent changes, modifications or revisions beyond any modifications or changes attached to a preliminary site plan as a condition of approval by the planning commission or the city council, that are made or requested by the applicant, shall require submittal of a revised site plan for a recommendation of preliminary site plan approval by the planning commission to the city council. 
(f)  Modifications to application procedure: At the time of the presubmittal meeting, should city staff determine that a site plan package, including an impact assessment as required in subsection 110-434(3)c. of this article, prepared by the applicant and submitted to the city prior to the meeting, is found by city staff to be in substantial order and to significantly reflect the overall intent and purpose of the MD district, city staff, upon meeting with the applicant, may preclude the initial site plan concept stage set forth in subsection 110-434(3) of this article. 
(g)  Modifications to the review process: Upon completion of its review should city staff find the preliminary site plan to be in such substantial order that no additional modifications or revisions are necessary or desired, city staff may recommend both preliminary and final site plan approval to the planning commission. 
    The planning commission may concur with the recommendation of city staff and recommend both preliminary and final site plan approval to the city council, provided all necessary information and data required for final approval appears on the site plan, and provided further that the site plan package is found to be in order by the planning commission, and the recommendation includes no conditions or contingencies. 
    Upon receipt of a recommendation from the planning commission for both preliminary and final site plan approval, the city council may grant both preliminary and final site plan approval, provided it finds the site plan package to be in order and there are no conditions or contingencies to be attached. 
(h)  Site plan review committee: City staff at any time during the course of its review of a development plan, including before the initial presubmittal meeting, may request the chair of the planning commission to appoint a site plan review committee to aid in the review of a development plan, thereby potentially expediting the review process. In addition to city staff, the committee shall consist of the planning commission chair, and two planning commission members appointed by the chair. If deemed desirable, the committee may also include the mayor and/or the city administrator and two members of the city council appointed by the mayor. 
(i)  Duration of approval: The granting of preliminary site plan approval by the city council shall have a duration of one year from date of approval by the city council. Upon request by the applicant, and after review and recommendation by city staff, the city council may grant one, one year extension. The granting of final site plan approval by the city council shall have a duration of two years from date of approval by the city council. Upon request by the applicant, and after review of development progress to date, and upon recommendation of city staff, the city council may grant one one-year extension. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2104), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-436. - Required conditions. 
    It is the implied intent of the MD district to encourage quality developments by providing for a diversified mix of land use. It is further the intent of this mixed use district to encourage quality design innovation by minimizing specific height, bulk, density and area requirements, thereby giving the applicant freedom to configure buildings, parking and related site amenities in ways that would otherwise be discouraged or curtailed under the standards of conventional zoning districts. Freedom from extensive site layout restrictions and controls is intended to encourage utilization of a site in ways that will more fully satisfy the overall intent and purpose of the MD district and the city's adopted master land use plan, so long as it is clearly understood that the absence of such restrictions and regulatory standards in no way implies, or is to be interpreted to imply that such critical site layout standards are excused or may be ignored in the general layout and composure of development in this district. To the contrary, proper building setbacks and the thoughtful location and tasteful application of site amenities shall be considered as crucial design elements of any development proposed in the MD districts and will be subject to careful review by the city. Site plans that minimize or demonstrate little regard for such amenities will be subject to rejection by the city. 
    Standards that shall apply to all development in the MD districts are set forth in this section. Since it is the implied intent of the MD district to encourage innovative development, redevelopment, such standards are limited to following specified development control standards. 
(1)  The minimum land area required for development under the standards of the MD district shall be sufficient to fully support the type of development proposed for the site. Over-intensification of development on a site is likely to be rejected. 
(2)  The minimum distance between nonresidential buildings, between nonresidential buildings and multiple-family residential buildings and between multiple-family residential buildings shall not be less than required by application of the building separation requirements as set forth in article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, footnote (d), in this chapter, except these distance requirements may be modified by the city council with planning commission recommendation at the time of preliminary site plan review, if it is found that the height and/or bulk of a building or buildings is such that a greater or lesser setback would be warranted in the interest of promoting the general health, safety and common good of the community, or in the interests of improving the visual aesthetics of a building, or buildings on the site. 
(3)  Multiple-family residential dwelling density shall not exceed the maximum dwelling density requirements of RM-1 district for low rise buildings (three stories or less) and the maximum dwelling density requirements of the RM-2 district for all dwelling buildings over three stories, except when multiple dwellings included in the upper floors of a building containing nonresidential uses, the density limitations of the RM-2 district shall not apply to those dwelling units. 
(4)  When multiple-family residential dwellings shall be established in the upper floors of a building containing nonresidential uses, the following conditions shall apply: 
a.  All retail commercial uses shall be located on subfloors below grade, on the ground floor, or on the ground floor mezzanine only; 
b.  No dwelling unit shall occupy any portion of any floor occupied by a nonresidential use; and 
c.  No nonresidential use including an office shall occupy any area of the same floor as a residential use, unless all access to the nonresidential use, including an office, is physically separate from any access to a dwelling unit on the same floor, and no nonresidential use including an office, shall occupy any floor area above any floor used for residential purposes. 
(5)  No building shall exceed 75 feet in height. 
(6)  Buildings next to river frontage shall provide an adequate setback to permit proper application of walkways, including boardwalks and other landscaping amenities between the building and the riverfront. 
(7)  The numerical off-street parking requirements of Article XXVI as well as the off-street parking layout standards of Article XXVI, this chapter shall apply to all uses in the MD district. Wherever possible the surface land area required for off-street parking shall be minimized to the extent possible and landscaped in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVII, in this chapter. 
(8)  All business, servicing or processing, except off-street parking, loading and unloading, and accessory outdoor eating and drinking facilities, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(9)  The inconspicuous outdoor parking of commercially used or licensed vehicles will be permitted only when the vehicle is clearly incidental to a permitted use. The parking of any such vehicle shall be limited to operable vehicles which are moved off the site on a regular basis and shall not include those used for storage, sales, and/or advertising. 
(10)  The parking or storage of any disabled vehicle is prohibited. 
(11)  Whenever a peripheral site boundary of development within an MD district shall abut existing residential development, development within the MD district shall be effectively screened along the abutting site line in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVII in this chapter. Except, if the type of development in the MD district will consist of the same land use as exists on the abutting property, the city council with planning commission recommendation may vary or waive the screening requirement. 
(12)  The applicant in the course of preparing the final site plan for review by the city, shall submit a detailed cost estimate to the city for the installation of all public utilities, streets and any stormwater retention systems for the entire development. Detailed cost estimates shall also be required for any costs that may be incurred as the result of any mitigation measure(s) or structure(s) required to treat, retain, detain or remedy any environmental conditions on the property. If development is to occur in phases, cost estimates for each phase shall be submitted prior to that phase receiving final site plan approval. The city council may require submittal of surety in an amount equal to the costs estimated for each part of these improvements or measures, plus ten percent. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2105), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-437-110-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Planned unit development, MCL 125.584b, 125.584c. 

Sec. 110-451. - Intent. 
    The PD Planned Development Districts, are overlay zones that are intended to permit the redevelopment of specifically defined sites within the area historically identified as the Old Trenton area, which is generally bounded by Elizabeth Park on the south, the rail corridor on the west, King Road on the north and the Trenton Channel of the Detroit River on the east. Development or redevelopment within a specific overlay zone shall be in accord with the goals and objectives of the Future Land Use Plan for the City of Trenton. The reuse patterns of the area involved shall create a desirable living and/or working environment which shall be in harmony with surrounding land use while at the same time permitting a greater degree of flexibility in an overall development approach by ensuring that adequate safeguards and standards will be employed to maintain the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the area. 
    It is further the intent of the PD Overlay Zones to encourage quality design innovation by minimizing certain bulk, density and area requirements ordinarily associated with conventional zoning districts. The intent is to give the applicant more freedom to configure buildings, off-street parking and related site amenities in ways that might otherwise be curtailed by conventional zoning standards. Freedom from compliance with some conventional zoning standards is intended to encourage utilization of a site in ways that will more fully satisfy the overall intent and purpose of the overlay zones and the city's adopted master land use plan. It is critically important, however, that the applicant clearly understands that the absence of such restrictions and other conventional regulatory standards in no way implies, or is to be interpreted to imply that such critical site development and layout standards are excused or may be ignored in the general layout and composure of development in the overlay zones. To the contrary, proper building setbacks and the thoughtful location and the tasteful application of site amenities shall be considered and applied as crucial design elements of any development proposed in the overlay zones. Site development or redevelopment plans that minimize or demonstrate little regard for such amenities, or propose to intensify development on the site over providing such amenities, will be subject to rejection by the city. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2200), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-452. - Procedure for application. 
    Application to develop or redevelop land in Trenton using the PD Planned Development Overlay Zone approach shall be made to the city in the same manner and using the same application procedure set forth in Article XXI, section 110-434 in this chapter. Wherever in section 110-434 reference is made to The MD or mixed use district, for the purposes of this article, it shall also mean PD Planned Development. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2201), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-453. - Concept plan review procedure. 
    Except as specifically set forth in this section, the procedure for reviewing an application to develop land in Trenton using the PD Planned Development approach shall be the same procedure set forth in Article XXI, section 110-435, in this chapter. 
(1)  Upon completion of its review of the conceptual plan as outlined in section 110-435(a) in this chapter, city staff shall notify the recording secretary of the planning commission to schedule the concept plan for review by the planning commission. The recording secretary shall submit the concept plan and all related information to each member of the planning commission at the commission meeting preceding the meeting at which the concept plan is scheduled for review. 
(2)  When the city staff and the planning commission shall find the concept plan to be in order the planning commission shall so inform the applicant. Acceptance of the concept plan by the planning commission shall authorize the applicant to proceed with preparation and submittal of a preliminary site plan. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2202), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-454. - Preliminary site plan review, planning commission. 
    A preliminary site plan shall be prepared and submitted for review by city staff responsible for reviewing site plans and by the planning commission in accordance with the preliminary site plan review process set forth in Article XXI, subsection 110-435(b) in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2203), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-455. - Public hearing required. 
    The planning commission shall conduct its review of a preliminary site plan at a duly advertised public hearing, as set forth and regulated in Article XXX, in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2204), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-456. - Preliminary site plan review, city council. 
    A site plan that has received preliminary approval from the Trenton Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the city council for its review and action. The city council shall conduct its review and act on the preliminary site plan in accordance with the guidelines set forth in Article XXI, subsection 110-435(b), in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2205), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-457. - Final site plan review, planning commission and city council. 
    The planning commission and the city council shall follow the same procedure for reviewing and acting on a final site plan as set forth in Article XXI, subsection 110-435(3), in this chapter. Final site plan approval by the city council shall reflect the use patterns as approved in the preliminary plan and shall have no conditions attached thereto, except approval of any master deeds, by-laws, deed restrictions or protective covenants pertaining to the proposed development may be given as a condition of approval, provided all such documents are approved by the city within 60 days from the date of final approval by the city council. The final site plan shall assure access to all structures and areas for fire and police protection and for trash collection, as evidenced by review and approval from the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2206), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-458. - Duration of approvals. 
(a)  Preliminary site plan. The granting of preliminary site plan approval by the city council shall have a duration of one year commencing on the date of preliminary site plan approval by the city council. 
(b)  Final site plan. The granting of final site plan approval by the city council shall have duration of two years commencing on the date of final site plan approval by the city council. 
(c)  Duration of approval. If two years after final site plan approval has been granted by the city council, no diligent site improvements are underway on the property, final site plan approval by the city council shall expire and the approved site plan shall become null and void. Thereafter, no improvements shall be commenced or undertaken on the site until or unless final site plan approval has been reinstated by the city council after planning commission recommendation. 
(d)  Approval extensions. At least one month before termination of preliminary site plan approval the applicant may file a petition with the city requesting a one year extension of the preliminary site plan approval granted by the city council. At least one month before termination of final site plan approval the applicant may file a petition with the city requesting a one-year extension of final site plan approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2207), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-459. - Other site plan review standards and procedures. 
(a)  Phased development. Should the applicant elect to develop the site in phases, each phase shall be clearly delineated on the final site plan by phase development lines, and shall follow the requirements for phased development as set forth in Article XXI, subsection 110-435(d), in this chapter. 
(b)  Site plan revisions. Except as otherwise set forth in this subsection, revisions to a previously approved final site plan shall require review and approval by city staff and the planning commission with a recommendation from the planning commission to the city council for final site plan approval. Except, upon review of a revision to a previously approved preliminary or final site plan that the city staff responsible for reviewing site plans determines to be of: 
(1)  Such minor consequence that it does not alter the location of any buildings, or, 
(2)  Involves the relocation of not more than one or two parking spaces, or 
(3)  Diminish the number of planting materials approved for the site, or 
(4)  Does not create or establish new items or adds new elements to the layout that were not part of the previously approved site plan, then, 
    The city staff responsible for reviewing site plans may approve the change and inform the planning commission and the city council of the change. If the city staff responsible for reviewing site plans is uncertain if a revised site plan contains a significant enough change to warrant sending the revised plan or plans to the planning commission for review, the staff shall forward the revised site plan or plans to the planning commission for review and action. 
(c)  Modifications to application procedure. Modifications to the procedures set forth in this article may be made in strict accordance with the procedural modifications set forth in Article XXI, subsections 110-435(6) and (7), in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2208), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-460. - Development overlay zones. 
    Within the area of the city historically identified as the Old Trenton area in the intent section of this article, specific overlay zones have been established in which the redevelopment of land may take place in accordance with the guidelines and applicable standards set forth in this section and in this article. The mixing of residential land use with nonresidential land use may be permitted on a limited basis in those PD overlay zones provided herein. The mixing of various types of residential development modes is also permitted in the PD overlay zones. 
(1)  SHR Special Housing Redevelopment Overlay Zone. The SHR Special Housing Redevelopment Overlay Zone as depicted on the overlay zoning map in section 110-466, and on the Trenton Zoning Map, is designed to permit the occupation of vacant existing buildings and the redevelopment of land with more intense residential uses in mid-rise configurations and which may contain nonresidential land use on its lower floors. This type of potentially more intense residential living environment is intended for sites in or near the central business district or as new development or redevelopment on land with frontage along the Detroit River. 
(2)  CBDn Central Business District north. The CBDn Overlay Zone as depicted on the overlay zone map in section 110-466 and on the Trenton Zoning Map is designed and intended to permit a limited mix of residential and nonresidential uses that will permit the frontage along both sides of West Jefferson Avenue within the overlay zone to transition in an orderly manner. Land use permitted in this overlay zone is further intended to complement uses in the adjoining central business district while at the same time encouraging a mix of nonresidential and residential uses in a planned development type of orientation that will serve as an effective land use transition to residential homes in the adjoining single-family neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2209), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-461. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in their respective overlay zones: 
(1)  Special Housing Redevelopment Overlay District. In the SHR Overlay Zone no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses: 
a.  The principal permitted uses and the principal permitted uses subject to special conditions that are permitted in the RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential (High Rise) District, subject to the applicable limitations of this article pertaining to building height in this overlay zone. Dwelling density shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission and the city council, but in no instance shall dwelling density and any corresponding building bulk required for such density, be at the expense of adequate and appropriate building setbacks, the applicable numerical off-street and off-street parking layout standards required for the development, aesthetic site landscaping and any applicable landscape screening considerations. 
b.  The principal permitted uses and all principal permitted uses subject to special conditions except mortuary establishments that are permitted in the OS-1 Office Service District, subject to the requirements of the district including any conditions attached to each use. 
c.  The principal permitted uses and all principal permitted uses subject to special conditions except gasoline stations and veterinary medicine offices that are permitted in the B-1 Local Business District, provided all such uses are located within the principal building on the development site and provided further that whenever a permitted nonresidential use shall be located in a building containing residential dwellings, the requirements of Article XV, subsection 110-313(1), in this chapter shall apply. 
(2)  CBDn Central Business District north. In the CBDn Overlay Zone no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses: 
a.  Offices, including offices of a doctor or dentist, financial institutions with drive-through facilities when they are clearly ancillary to the principal permitted use. 
b.  Service oriented uses that perform services on the premises such as but not necessarily limited to small repair shops such as jewelry stores with repair facilities, small electronic items store with repair facilities, tailor shops, barber and/or beauty shops, and photographic and art studios. 
c.  Small retail commercial uses containing not more than 1,100 square feet of gross floor area, except upon request by the applicant, the planning commission may recommend up to a 50 percent increase in gross retail floor area, when the numerical off-street and the off-street parking layout standards of article XXVI, in this chapter can be met, and when the planning commission is satisfied that a larger building platform will not be out of character with land use next to it, including the single-family homes in the adjoining neighborhoods to the rear of the property. 
d.  Multiple-family residential dwellings in town house or town home configuration when that use is the principal use of the property with each dwelling unit having direct outdoor access through at least a front entrance, there being no common hall access permitted. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a covered parking space in the form of a completely enclosed garage, a carport structure, or in a parking deck. 
e.  Multiple-family residential dwellings in the upper floor, or floors, of a nonresidential building. 
f.  Sit-down restaurant, as defined in this chapter, including seasonal outdoor eating area, when the eating area will have no outdoor music or loudspeaker system and provided it will be located: 
1.  On private property directly in front of the building, between the front of the building and the front property line, or 
2.  In the public right-of-way directly in front of the restaurant, provided the building on the adjacent property contains a nonresidential use on the ground floor next to the outdoor restaurant, or 
3.  In an interior side yard on the same property with the restaurant, provided the building on the adjacent property contains a nonresidential use on the ground floor next to the outdoor restaurant, or 
4.  In an exterior side yard on the same property with the restaurant, provided the building directly across the street from the outdoor restaurant contains a nonresidential use on the ground floor, or 
5.  In an acceptable combination of not more than two of these locations. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2210), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-462. - Planned developments beyond the Old Trenton area. 
    Though the primary intent of the PD District is for the development and particularly the redevelopment of land within the Old Trenton area, it is recognized that a limited number of sites in the city may exist beyond the Old Trenton area that could accept a mixed-use development. Such an area shall be brought before the city for consideration only after proper application has been made to the city by private development or redevelopment interests. An area beyond the Old Trenton area, which has been submitted to the city for consideration as a planned development site, must meet the following conditions before the city shall establish a PD Overlay Zone on the site: 
(1)  The concept plan submitted for consideration demonstrates that the site is of sufficient size to properly accommodate the type of planned development proposed for the property. 
(2)  The site has direct frontage along a major thoroughfare, as designated on the city's adopted master plan for future land use map. 
(3)  The site can serve as a clear land use transition along the thoroughfare between the thoroughfare itself and single-family homes beyond, or between intense nonresidential uses, such as, but not necessarily limited to, commercial or industrial uses, or rail corridors, but not including office uses, and a more restrictive area such as a single-family neighborhood. 
(4)  The development will consist of a mix of land use types, consisting of multiple-family and single-family dwellings, which may include attached for detached dwellings in clusters, or a mix of residential and nonresidential uses that are acceptable to the city at the location where they are proposed. 
(5)  The mixed use development will achieve the overall intent of the city's master land use plan for the area by consisting of land use that is directly recommended for the site on the city's adopted master plan map, or, in the opinion of the planning commission, will consist of a mix of land use that will not be incompatible with the land use recommendations of the master plan, thereby serving as an acceptable land use alternative. 
(6)  The development will comply with all of the applicable requirements of the PD District pertaining to application, application procedures, building height, bulk and density limitations, and the overall review process. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2211), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-463. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions shall be applicable to all overlay districts outlined in this article: 
(1)  Provisions satisfactory to the city council have been made to provide for the financing of any improvements shown on the plan for open spaces and common use areas which are to be provided by the applicant and that maintenance of such improvements is ensured by a means satisfactory to the city council. 
(2)  The cost of installing all streets and necessary utilities has been assured by a means satisfactory to the city council. 
(3)  Proceeding with a planned development shall only be permitted if it is mutually agreeable to the city council and the administering developer. 
(4)  The location and size of the proposed use or uses to land use around them, the nature of the use and the intensity of the principal use or uses, the site layout and its relationship to streets giving access to the development shall be such that traffic to and from the use or uses will not be hazardous to traffic on the streets around the planned development, nor to the surrounding area. Consideration shall be given to convenient and safe routes for pedestrian traffic, the relationship of the proposed development to main traffic thoroughfares, and to street and road intersections, and in general, to the character and intensity of the existing and potential redevelopment of the neighborhood. Where appropriate, the possible detrimental impact that the proposed development could have on neighboring property, and on the surrounding neighboring in general. 
(5)  The location and height of buildings, the location and nature and height of walls and fences, and the nature and extent of landscaping of the site shall be such that they will not hinder or discourage the proper development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof. 
(6)  The number of parking spaces and their convenience by location with respect to pedestrian and vehicular circulation, the amount and location of open spaces, and the provisions of other amenities shall be in proportion to the anticipated needs and desirability for the proposed uses. 
(7)  All public and private streets and all drives, parking areas, drainage facilities, utility installations and other site improvements shall equal or surpass the applicable engineering standards of the city, as established by resolution of the city council, and the dedication of all public rights-of-way or public open spaces shall be made prior to any construction taking place on the site. 
(8)  In residential reuse areas, any prorated open space shall be irrevocably committed and retained as open space of park, recreation, and related uses. All such lands dedicated in fee or easement shall be approved by the city council. 
(9)  No accessory building or structure shall be permitted except in conjunction with a principal permitted use. 
(10)  All new single-family detached dwelling buildings shall comply with the applicable standards set forth in Article IV, subsection 110-84(2), in this chapter, or when development is permitted under the requirements of the R-4 District, the applicable standards set forth in Article V, subsections 110-103(3) through (9), and subsections 110-104(1) through (8), in this chapter. 
(11)  Any business establishment permitted in a planned development shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with customers. Any goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises. 
(12)  The schedule of regulations in Article XXIII, section 110-481, in this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, providing the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, providing the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum building setback requirements, and all other applicable provision this chapter shall apply, except as otherwise modified, in this article. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2212), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-464. - Required conditions applicable to specific overlay districts. 
    The following conditions are applicable to the particular overlay district they represent: 
(1)  Conditions applicable to the SHR Special Housing Redevelopment Overlay Zone. 
a.  Redevelopment in this overlay zone may be the most intense of any of the overlay districts provided in this chapter. Therefore special attention shall be given to the potential impact that certain land use types permitted in the SHR Overlay Zone, could have on adjacent land use, particularly to abutting single-family residential homes. 
b.  Between Riverside Drive and the Trenton Channel of the Detroit River, from St. Joseph Avenue to Truax Avenue, the maximum height of any building shall not project more than 25 feet in height above the highest established grade at the top of the east curb line of Riverside Drive along the subject property's frontage. This building height limitation shall extend east on a horizontal line equal to the maximum established building height limitation to the river bank along the east edge of the property, as illustrated on the accompanying page, except, this building height limitation may be exceeded by a building height equal to not more than one additional story of dwelling floor area when all of the off-street parking spaces required for the building will be provided within the building, or at least one-half of the total number of off-street parking spaces required for the building are provided within the building and the remaining parking spaces are provided within a parking structure attached to the building. 
c.  In those instances where the dwelling units in the upper floor or floors of a building along the site's Riverside Drive frontage may look down on to the roof of any other building nearer the site's water frontage, the roof of the water frontage building or buildings shall have a pitched or similar type of roof. If a flat roof building, the rooftop will be of an architectural nature, and will contain no climate control appliances, or other roof top appurtenances. 
d.  All buildings on the site shall be arranged so as not to unduly limit or restrict view of the Trenton Channel of the Detroit River. 


Building Height Limitations 
e.  When parking spaces shall be enclosed in the manner set forth in subsection (1)b., above, the total number of dwelling units allowed in the additional bonus floor shall not exceed the total number of dwelling units on the floor immediately below. 
f.  Building setbacks shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission and the city council but in no instance shall any building setback be less than one-half the height of the building, as building height is defined in this chapter. 
g.  All roof top climate control equipment and any communication systems that may be visible from Riverside Drive, from the river, or from dwellings west across Riverside Drive, shall be effectively and aesthetically screened from view in a manner acceptable to the planning commission and the city council. 
(2)  Conditions applicable to the CBDn Central Business District north Overlay District. 
a.  A minimum ten-foot front yard setback shall be provided for each multiple-family dwelling building. 
b.  A minimum 20-foot rear yard setback shall be provided for each multiple dwelling building, except the entire rear yard area of a dwelling unit may contain a required covered parking space, provided the rear yard terminates at the edge of an improved public alley right-of-way that may be used to access the covered parking space. 
c.  No private covered parking space shall have direct fronting access to West Jefferson Avenue, but may have direct fronting access to an intersecting side street. 
d.  A multiple dwelling building shall not exceed two stories in height, except when the ground floor area of the building is used as garage or covered parking area for the multiple dwelling located on the second floor of the building, or when the rear portion of the ground floor area is used as a garage or covered parking area for the dwelling unit above it and a nonresidential use will occupy the remaining ground floor area at the front of the building, one additional story of living area may be permitted, but no building shall exceed three stories in height. 
e.  When a multiple-family dwelling unit shall be located above a ground floor nonresidential use, the requirements of section 110-313(1) in this chapter shall apply. 
f.  All exterior walls of a multiple dwelling building shall observe the exterior building wall materials guidelines set forth in section 110-640 in this chapter. 
g.  All required lawn areas and any additional open space areas provided with any development in the CBDn Overlay District shall be landscaped and maintained in compliance with the applicable landscaping requirements of Article XXVII in this chapter. 
h.  Where site screening is required it shall be provided as required and in the manner set forth and regulated in Article XXVII in this chapter. 
i.  Parking for all uses permitted in the CBDn Overlay District shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article XXVI in this chapter, except if on-street parking is permitted along West Jefferson Avenue in front of the use, or along an intersecting side street frontage next to the property those parking spaces may be counted towards meeting the numerical off-street parking requirement for the use. 
j.  A nonresidential building need not provide a front yard setback, and when the sidewall of any building will have no openings (doors or windows) that wall of the building may be located directly on an interior side lot line and may be in common with the existing side wall of the building on the abutting lot even if that building is a multiple dwelling building. These setback requirements may apply to a nonresidential building even if it will house a multiple-family dwelling or dwellings on the upper floor or floors. 
k.  Seasonal outdoor eating areas to be used in conjunction with an approved sit-down restaurant shall comply with the applicable requirements of section 110-313(2) and (3), in this chapter. 
l.  The exterior wall of any nonresidential oriented building that will be visible shall observe the exterior building wall materials guidelines set forth in section 110-640 in this chapter, even when the building may contain dwelling units in its upper floor or floors. 
m.  The overall appearance of any building proposed in the CBDn Overlay District shall be subject to the review and recommendation of the planning commission. When conducting its review the planning commission will be satisfied that the size and appearance of the proposed building or buildings will be compatible with the appearance and scale of the building or buildings next to it, and with other buildings along the West Jefferson Avenue frontage in the CBDn Overlay District. 
n.  Exterior site lighting shall comply with the applicable requirements of section 110-631 in this chapter. 
o.  In order to create and maintain a uniform streetscape appearance along West Jefferson Avenue in the CBDn Overlay District, one freestanding sign or one wall sign shall be permitted for each nonresidential use in a building, except a corner building may have one wall sign on each street frontage or one freestanding sign and one wall sign, but not on the same frontage. No single wall sign shall exceed 50 square feet in display area and shall not project out from the wall to which it is attached more than eight inches. In those instances where two wall signs may be permitted, the second sign shall be limited in area to not more than 50 percent of the display area of the principal wall sign. A freestanding sign shall not exceed four feet in overall height, measured from the ground at the base of the sign structure to the top of the sign structure. A freestanding sign shall not exceed 28 square feet in display area per side and no such sign shall have more than two display sides. A sign may be lighted but all such lighting shall be exterior lighting, there being no internally lighted signs permitted. All luminary used to light a sign shall be low wattage luminary and shall be designed and placed so as to cast a soft light on only the display surface of the sign. 
p.  When reviewing the off-street parking area for a proposed development every effort shall be made to limit the number of access driveways along West Jefferson Avenue and along any intersecting street. Requiring adjoining parking lots to share a common central access point, or to use an improved abutting alley to access parking lots are ways to limit the number of access points. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2213), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-465. - Variance. 
    The city council shall have the authority to review, grant, or deny applications for variances in the case of planned development districts as defined in this section, including variances from the strict application of the provisions of this chapter where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, or area of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this chapter or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property where the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional conditions of such property the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in a peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon the owner of such property, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
    When granting a variance, the city council may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed use as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. 
    A variance may be allowed by the city council only in cases where the applicant can show just cause by virtue of a true physical hardship on the property, which compels the request for the variance, or when the applicant can demonstrate that a true practical difficulty exists, thereby warranting the variance. A variance shall be considered only when it can be found that: 
(1)  The alleged hardship or practical difficulty, or both, are exceptional and peculiar to the property of the person requesting the variance, and result from conditions which do not exist generally throughout the city. 
(2)  The alleged hardship or practical difficulty, or both, which will result from a failure to grant the variance, include substantially more than mere inconvenience, inability to attain a higher financial return, or both. 
(3)  Allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being done, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this article, the individual hardship that will be suffered by a failure of the city council to grant a variance, and the rights of others whose property would be affected by the allowance of the variance. 
(4)  The conditions and circumstances on which the variance request is based shall not be a self-imposed hardship or practical difficulty. 
(5)  A variance approved shall be the minimum variance that will make possible a reasonable use of the land or structure. 
    The above findings of fact shall be made by the city council. The city council shall grant a variance only after making an affirmative finding of fact on the preceding categories. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2214), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-466. - Map. 
    For the purposes of administering the standards of this article and the applicable standards of this chapter, the map outlining the location and extent of the two overlay zones set forth and regulated in this article, is provided below. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2215), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-467-110-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - RESERVED 

Secs. 110-481-110-510. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - HEIGHT, BULK, DENSITY AND AREA RESTRICTIONS; SPECIAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 110-511. - Schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning district. 
Minimum Yard Setback 
(per lot in feet) Minimum Zoning 
Lot Size per 
Dwelling Unit Maximum Height 
of Structures Front Side Rear Zoning District (p) Area in 
Square 
Feet Width in 
Feet In 
Stories In 
Feet Least 
One Total of 
Two Minimum 
Floor Area per 
Unit (square 
feet) Maximum 
Percent of 
Lot Area 
Covered by 
All 
Buildings R-1 One-family 
residential (p) 6,900 60 2 25 25(a) 5(b) 15 35 1,200 35 R-2 One-family 
residential (p) 6,325 55 2 25 25(a) 5(b) 13 35 950 35 R-3 One-family 
residential (p) 6,000 50 2 25 25(a) 4(b) 12 35 750 35 R-4 One-family 
residential (p) 4,350 2(d) 25(d) 25(a) 4(b) 9 25 1,200 45 R-T Two-family 
residential (p) 3,300 30 2 25 25 10(b) 20 35 750 30 Corner parcels (p) 3,343 RM-1 Multiple-family 
residential (p) (c) (c) 3 25 30(d) (e) 30(d) (e) 50(d) (e) 30(d) (e) Eff 
1BR 450 
600 25 RM-2 Multiple-family residential (p) None (c) No maximum 50(d) 50(d) 100(d) 50(d) 2BR 
3BR 
4BR 800 
1,000 
1,200 15 MH Manufactured housing district See Article VI OS-1 Office service None None 2 30 40(g) (h) (h) 50(i) None None B-1 Local business None None 1 20 5 (h) (h) 20(i) None None B-2 Community 
business None None 2 30 40(g) (h) (h) 50(i) None None B-3 General 
business None None 3 40 5 (h) (h) 20(i) None None CBD Central business None None None None (h) (h) None None None I-1 Light industrial None None 2 30 25(j) (k) (k) (k), (l) None None I-2 Medium 
industrial None None 2 60 50(j) (k) (k) (k), (l) None None I-3 Heavy industrial None None 2 100(o) 100(j) (o), (k) (k) (k), (l) None None WM Waterfront 
marina None None 2 30 (g), (m) (g), (m) (g), (m) (g), (m) None None P-1 Vehicle parking See Article XX MD Mixed use See Article XXI PD Planned 
development See Article XXII  
NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS: 
(a)  For all uses permitted other than single-family residential, the setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback required in section 110-83 in this chapter, whichever is the greater setback. 
(b)  In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the exterior side yard setback abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard setback of the district in which located and all regulations applicable to the front yard shall apply. In the R-4 district, when single-family homes are erected as attached dwelling units, the interior side yard setback requirements of the district shall not apply. Except as specifically permitted in the R-4 district, accessory buildings and accessory structures shall be subject to the applicable requirements of section 110-434, Accessory buildings, of this chapter as amended, and the applicable requirements of Chapter 18, Article IV, as amended, pertaining to fences. 
(c)  The minimum site area in the RM-1 district shall be 15,000 square feet (0.34 acre) 
In an RM-1 Multiple-Family District (Low Rise), the total number of rooms of 80 square feet or more (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the area of the parcel in square feet, divided by 1,600. All units shall have at least one living room and one bedroom, except that not more than ten percent of the units may be of an efficiency type. 
In an RM-2 Multiple-Family District (High Rise), the total number of rooms of 80 square feet or more (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the area of the parcel in square feet, divided by 400. All units shall have at least one living room and one bedroom, except that not more than ten percent of the units may be of an efficiency type. 
In both the RM-1 and RM-2 Districts, for the purpose of computing the permitted number of dwelling units per acre, the following room assignments shall control: 
Efficiency       = 1 room One Bedroom       = 2 rooms Two Bedrooms       = 3 rooms Three Bedrooms       = 4 rooms Four Bedrooms       = 5 rooms  
Plans presented showing 1, 2, or 3 bedrooms units and including a den, library or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing dwelling density. 
In an RM-2 Multiple-Family District (High Rise), multiple-family residential buildings three stories or less in height (low rise) shall conform to the requirements of the RM-1 district as set forth in this Article IX, Schedule of Regulations. 
(d)  In RM-1 and RM-2 districts, along Riverside Drive, the following standards shall be permitted as exceptions to the schedule of regulations: 
RM-1 (along Riverside Drive): Side yards of at least ten feet shall be provided on each side of the lot, with a one-half foot increase for each one foot or part thereof by which the length of the multiple dwelling exceeds 50 feet in overall dimension along the adjoining lot line. Parking shall not be permitted in a yard abutting Riverside Drive. The minimum lot area for any multiple-family along Riverside Drive shall be no less than 8,700 square feet. The density of development shall comply with section 110-511, notes to schedule of regulations: note (c) of these notes to the schedule of regulations. 
RM-2 (along Riverside Drive): Side yards shall be equal to a total of at least 60 feet with greater side equal to at least 40 feet. Spacing between two buildings on lots of separate ownership shall be arranged so that the buildings will be at least 60 feet apart. Front yards shall be equal to at least 25 feet. Parking shall not be permitted in a yard abutting Riverside Drive. 
The minimum distance between residential dwelling buildings in the same development shall be in accordance with the distance spacing formula provided on the accompanying diagram. 

Distance Spacing for Multiple Dwellings 
S  = ;hg;Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either. 
L A  = ;hg;Total length of building A. 
The total length of building A is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B. 
L B  = ;hg;Total length of building B. 
The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed from directly above, the lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall of building A. 
H A  = ;hg;Height of building A. 
The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 
H B  = ;hg;Height of building B. 
The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion of portions of a wall or walls along the length of building B. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 
(e)  For certain nonresidential uses and for independent and dependent senior housing developments, consult the text of Article VIII in this chapter for additional setback requirements as they may apply to these uses. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard provided that there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of ten feet between the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the nearest street or road right-of-way line. 
(h)  Except as otherwise permitted in this footnote, on both sides of West Jefferson Avenue within the CBD Central Business District, the front walls of all buildings shall be placed directly on the front property line. In the case of a corner lot, the front of the building may face the side street, but the side wall of the building facing West Jefferson Avenue shall be located directly on the front property line. Except, upon the recommendation of the downtown development authority, the planning commission may permit a building to set back from the front property line, so long as the area within any such setback consists entirely of a decorative masonry and/or concrete surface which may include live landscape planting materials and architectural accents, and which is designed and intended solely for pedestrian use and enjoyment. All walls facing West Jefferson Avenue in the CBD district shall be provided with at least one public entry. 
No side yards are required along the interior side lot line of the district, except as otherwise specified in the building code, provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than ten feet shall be provided. 
On a corner that has a rear yard abutting a residential district, there shall be provided a side yard setback of ten feet on the side street lot line. On an interior lot that has a common side lot line with a residential district, there shall be provided a side yard setback of ten feet on the side lot line abutting the residential district. On a corner lot that does not abut a residential district, there shall be provided a side yard setback of ten feet on the side street lot line. 


Side Yards Abutting a Street 
(i)  Loading and unloading shall be provided as set forth and regulated in Article XXVI in this chapter. 
(j)  Off-street parking for visitors, over and above the number of spaces required in Article XXVI in this chapter, shall be permitted within the required front yard setback of the district to a point not less than 20 feet from the front property line, except along Fritz Drive, where a minimum front yard setback of 35 feet shall be provided and wherein no off-street parking shall be permitted in the front yard. 
(k)  Except when a greater building setback is required as stipulated for a specific use in the text of the I-1 districts or as stipulated for a particular use or outdoor storage area as specified in the text of the I-3 districts, no building or open storage shall be located closer than 50 feet or the height of the building, whichever is the greater to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when said property line abuts any residential district. 
(l)  All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall not less than six feet high, or with a chain-link-type fence in combination with a heavy landscape planting screen, or by a landscaped earth berm the height of which shall not be less than six feet so as to obscure the view of any such storage area from any adjacent residential, office, or business district or from a public street. 
(m)  No building shall be closer than 50 feet to any adjacent residential district. 
(n)  Reserved. 
(o)  For every two feet of increased building height over 100 feet the front yard setback shall be increased one foot. The maximum required setback shall be 300 feet. 
(p)  For other than one single-family detached dwelling unit on one lot, or on one single-family detached condominium site, see section 110-512, One-family cluster housing option, regarding single-family residential flexibility allowances. 
(q)  In the R-4 districts, when one dwelling unit is attached to another on a block frontage, the minimum lot width, lot area and the minimum interior side yard setback requirements of the district need not apply. In no instance however, shall the maximum dwelling unit density limitations of the district be exceeded. 
(r)  When a garage is built into the principal building and not attached thereto, or detached therefrom, the number of stories in the principal building may be increased to three stories and the height increased to 28 feet. When a room shall have roof dormers, the full width of any roof dormer shall face only open areas and not onto any roof of an attached building, unless the ridge line of the attached roof shall be at least six feet below the bottom sill of the dormer window. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2400), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-512. - One-family cluster housing option. 
    To accomplish certain modifications to the one-family, two-family and multiple-family residential standards in this chapter and to permit the development of one-family residential patterns, which, through design innovation, will create a more desirable physical development of property, the following procedures and requirements shall be followed: 
(1)  Procedure: 
a.  Application: A request to develop land under the one-family cluster housing option shall first be made to the city. The request shall be submitted in writing by the applicant or the applicant's representative(s) and shall include statements detailing which site conditions set forth herein, qualifies the property for cluster housing development and why. A conceptual design layout depicting how the property could be developed under the one-family cluster housing option may, at the applicant's discretion, be submitted with the application, but is not an initial submittal requirement. 
b.  Hearing: An applicant to develop land under the one-family cluster housing option shall be reviewed by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing. 
c.  Review: After the duly advertised public hearing, the planning commission shall review the application to develop land under the one-family cluster housing option in order to determine if the property meets the qualifying conditions set forth in this section. 
(2)  Qualifying conditions: Before an applicant may develop land under the one-family cluster housing option, the planning commission shall find that the property: 
a.  Contains at least one net usable acre of land which may consist of one or more contiguous lots, and all property involved is under single ownership at the time of review by the planning commission. For the purpose of this section, net usable land area shall include the rights-of-way of all new public or private interior streets or drives, but shall not include any existing public road rights-of-way within or bordering the site. 
b.  Possess at least one of the following qualifying site conditions: 
1.  The property line has over 50 percent of its frontage along a major thoroughfare as designated on the Trenton Master Plan for Future Land Use Map. 
2.  The property is next to a nonresidential zoning district in a way that makes use of the one-family cluster housing option desirable for the purpose of serving as a land use transition. 
3.  The property is of such irregular shape that conventional development of the site would result in a less desirable layout. 
4.  The property contains natural features such as tree cover, wetlands or water courses, or combinations thereof, which, through application of this development option, will result in a greater opportunity to preserve more of the site's natural amenities. 
5.  The normal or conventional approach to development of the site would be unattainable or unreasonable restrictive, or would result in a less desirable layout than could be achieved by application of the development guidelines of this section. 
c.  Upon review of an application, the planning commission shall approve the site for development under the one-family cluster housing guidelines only if it finds that the site meets the qualifying conditions set forth in this section. 
d.  Approval of a site by the planning commission for cluster housing development shall cause the applicant to prepare a site plan in accordance with the following guidelines and requirements: 
(3)  Development guidelines: The applicant shall prepare a site plan depicting development under the one-family cluster housing option in accordance with the following guidelines and their applicable conditions: 
a.  The attaching of one-family dwellings in clusters shall be permitted, provided the following conditions are strictly adhered to: 
1.  Homes may be attached one to another, so long as not more than two exterior walls of a dwelling unit, and not more than 50 percent of each of those two exterior walls shall be attached to the exterior wall of any other dwelling unit. 
2.  Homes may be attached one to another by means of an architectural feature of detail which does not form interior room space. 
3.  A garage attached to a dwelling unit may have one wall fully in common with one wall of another garage, so long as not more than one other wall of the garage shall be in common with not more than 50 percent of the dwelling unit wall to which it is attached. 
4.  Except where dwelling units are attached together over a portion of a common party wall, no other part or portion of the roof of a dwelling unit shall be in common with the roof of any other dwelling unit, except where a garage shares one wall fully in common with one wall of another garage, a continuous roof line may extend over both garages. 
b.  The detaching of single-family dwellings in clusters shall be permitted, provided the following conditions are strictly adhered to: 
1.  Detached dwelling units within a cluster shall be no closer than six feet apart when opposing walls between any two dwelling units in the cluster have no openings (doors or windows). When either dwelling unit wall contains an opening, the walls shall be not less than ten feet apart. 
2.  The minimum distance between opposing garage walls in a cluster shall meet applicable local fire codes, but in no instance shall such walls be closer than six feet apart. 
3.  The minimum distance between a detached garage wall and any wall of a dwelling unit in the cluster shall be subject to applicable local fire codes, except in no instance shall a detached garage wall be closer than ten feet to a wall of any dwelling unit in the cluster. 
(4)  Required conditions: In addition to meeting the applicable guidelines of this section for attached or detached dwellings in clusters, the following required conditions shall also apply: 
a.  The area(s) in open space, including any bodies of water within the confines of the property, along with designated recreation open space areas that will be preserved or created through use of this option, shall represent at least 15 percent of the net usable area of the development site. All natural open space areas to be preserved on the property shall be legally described as out-lots or with metes-and-bounds descriptions and placed in irrevocable conservation easements. All other open space areas contained with the development which are intended for active or passive recreational use by the residents of the development, shall be maintained by the residents in accordance with the development's by-laws. 
b.  The maximum number of single-family dwelling units, permitted on the net usable area of the site, shall not exceed the following density levels by zoning district: 
R-1 One-Family Residential District 6.0 dwelling units per acre R-2 One-Family Residential District 6.8 dwelling units per acre R-3 One-Family Residential District 7.0 dwelling units per acre R-4 One-Family Residential District 7.5 dwelling units per acre RT Two-Family Residential District 6.0 dwelling units per acre RM Multiple-Family District 7.0 dwelling units per acre  
c.  Not more than four dwelling units shall be placed in a cluster. 
d.  The exterior walls of a dwelling unit including its garage walls shall not have exactly the same architectural appearance, or use exactly the same exterior building wall materials in exactly the same way as any other dwelling unit or attached garage in the cluster. 
e.  No dwelling unit or garage shall be located closer to a public street right-of-way or private drive at the front or exterior side of the dwelling unit than 25 feet, except when a private drive extends between two clusters for the sole purpose of gaining access to the rear of the two clusters only, a minimum exterior side yard setback of 15 feet may be provided between the dwelling unit and the drive. 
f.  A minimum rear yard setback of 35 feet shall be provided when the rear yard of a cluster of homes is located opposite the rear yards of a subdivision of single-family lots or single-family condominium sites. 
g.  Each cluster of one-family dwellings shall be separated from any other cluster of one-family dwellings by a landscaped open space of not less than 25 feet, except this minimum width may be increased or diminished by the planning commission in the interest of preserving or maintaining a natural feature on the site. 
h.  All public streets shall be built to applicable local public street standards and shall be located in public rights-of-way, the widths of which shall meet applicable local public street standards. 
i.  Private service drives shall be hard-surfaced drives built to applicable city requirements and shall have a paved width of not less than 27 feet wide. Such drives may permit parallel parking along one side only, which shall be clearly posted. 
j.  Any area within a cluster housing development that is to be dedicated to the City of Trenton for public park, recreation or open space purposes, and which was gained from use of this option, may first be subject to review and recommendation from the Trenton Parks and Recreation Commission or the planning commission, before approval from the Trenton City Council. 
k.  Plans submitted to the city for review by the planning commission under this section, shall provide all of the applicable information and shall comply with all applicable conditions set forth in section 110-435 of this chapter, the city's site plan review checklist, and the following: 
1.  Floor plans and exterior building wall elevation drawings of all exterior walls of a typical dwelling unit to be erected in a cluster, including any attached or detached garage associated with the dwelling unit. In the case of attached dwellings in a cluster, the exterior wall elevation drawings of a typical end unit shall be provided. 
2.  A landscape planting plan shall be submitted for the entire site. The plan shall depict the location of all planting materials. The planting plan shall also include a statement explaining how all landscaping will be maintained in a living, growing condition. 
(5)  Approval limitations: 
a.  Commencing on the date of site plan approval by the planning commission, the applicant shall have one year to begin development on the property. If development is not underway on the property by the end of one year from the date of site plan approval, the project shall be considered abandoned and site plan approval by the planning commission shall become null and void. 
b.  Commencing on the date of site plan approval by the planning commission, completion of the development project shall take place by the end of the second year of site plan approval. Failure to complete the development within the two-year site development limitation shall cause the applicant to reappear before the planning commission for evaluation of development progress to date. Upon review of project development to date, the planning commission may grant a one-year extension. An extension so granted shall permit development to be concluded in the third year of site plan approval by the board of zoning appeals. When granting a one-year extension the planning commission or the board of zoning appeals, may at its discretion, require the applicant to submit surety in an amount equal to the cost of completing the development. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2401), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-513. - Open space preservation option. 
    To provide an alternative means of single-family residential development in all of the city's residential districts with the intent of providing for the creation and preservation of open space areas within residential development as permitted by Public Act No. 179 of 2001 (MCL 125.584f). This is to be achieved by allowing for a reduction in the minimum lot area and lot width requirements by residential district, or through the attaching of one dwelling unit to another over a limited portion of a common party wall. This modification shall be accomplished without any attendant increase in the number of lots or dwelling units that would be permitted if the property were developed in the conventional manner. 
(1)  Discretionary use of this option. Development of residential zoned property in the city under the development alternatives offered in this section shall be at the option of the property owner or developer. 
(2)  Preapplication meeting. Prior to submitting an application to develop property under the guidelines of this option, the applicant shall request a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the meeting is to acquaint the applicant with how the option works and the potential advantages that may be gained from it. If the applicant is familiar with the option and has prepared a concept plan showing use of the option on the property, that plan may be presented at the preapplication meeting. The applicant and his engineer or designer shall attend the meeting along with city personnel and, if available, a member of the city's planning commission. 
(3)  Application. An application to develop land under the open space preservation option shall be obtained from the city. 
a.  Application form . The application form, which may be obtained from the city, shall include all information and plans requested on the form. 
b.  Existing conditions drawing . The applicant shall submit to the city an existing conditions drawing, prepared at an appropriate engineer's scale of one inch equals 100 feet, 200 feet, 300 feet, 400 feet, or 500 feet, by a registered land surveyor or registered civil engineer, showing in detail all the natural features on the site, including any streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands, stands of trees, or individual trees, topography at intervals deemed appropriate by the city engineering and building department, utility easements and other easements, along with all street and alley rights-of-way, driveways, buildings and structures. A breakdown of the general acres of the site that contain areas of environmental significance, including wetlands, lakes, ponds, stands of trees and steep topography shall be provided, along the percent each makes up of the total acreage of the property. 
(4)  Preliminary site plan . If the concept plan presented at the pre-application meeting was prepared as set forth in this subsection, it may be submitted as the preliminary site plan. The preliminary site plan shall: 
a.  Be superimposed over the existing conditions drawing, and prepared by a registered professional in accordance with the applicable laws of the state; 
b.  Show the location of all proposed streets and alleys and their rights-of-way, utility easements, individual lots or home sites and their individual size in square feet, or the building foot print for attached dwellings, scale of the drawing, a legal description, a vicinity sketch, a north point, the name, address and phone number of the developer and the designer, utility easements, peripheral property line dimensions, lot line dimensions, the building footprint for each lot, a typical detail drawing showing minimum required setback dimensions, the area to be set aside as open space along with the area of the open space in square feet or acres and the percent the open space makes up of the net usable property acreage; 
c.  Provide all other applicable information and comply with all the applicable conditions set forth in section 110-602(4), the city's site plan review checklist; 
d.  In the case of attached dwelling units, provide floor plans and exterior building wall elevation drawings of a typical dwelling unit showing its common wall relationship to the abutting dwelling unit or units, including any attached garages; and 
e.  Provide sufficient site data as required by the city to establish engineering feasibility for the development as proposed on such preliminary site plan. 
(5)  Application submittal . The applicant shall pay to the city all applicable review fees as established by the city at the time of submittal of the application for review. The city shall make certain that the application forms are complete and the required number of site plans has been submitted. If the application is in order the city shall review the plans in accordance with its established site plan review procedures. Acceptance of an application does not guarantee site plan review at the next planning commission meeting. 
(6)  Preliminary site plan review. 
a.  If the application is in order, the city shall stamp each site plan with the date received and forward the appropriate numbers of copies to applicable review personnel. 
b.  The applicable review personnel shall review the site plan and return its comments to the city in accordance with the city's review procedures. 
c.  Upon receipt of review comments from the review personnel, the city shall schedule the application for review by the planning commission, provided all review personnel have determined that the site plan is in sufficient order to receive preliminary site plan approval. 
d.  Review of the application by the planning commission shall be conducted at a regularly scheduled meeting and at a duly authorized public hearing. 
e.  Following its review of the application, the planning commission may: 
1.  Grant preliminary site plan approval. Preliminary approval may be conditioned on resolution of any concerns expressed by the city, its review personnel, or by the planning commission, before final site plan approval is considered. 
2.  Table approval pending further changes. If any of the review personnel do not recommend preliminary site plan approval, or if the planning commission determines after its review that too many critical or major concerns remain to be resolved, it may table its review pending the necessary changes being made to the application. If tabled, the applicant shall make the necessary changes and submit a proper number of revised site plans to the city for review. The procedure for reviewing a revised site plan shall be the same as outlined herein for the initial review. 
3.  Deny preliminary site plan approval. The planning commission may deny the applicant preliminary site plan approval if compliance with any technical requirement of this chapter is not met. The granting of preliminary site plan approval by the planning commission shall give the applicant leave to prepare a final site plan for review by the planning commission. 
(7)  Final site plan review. 
a.  All conditions attached to preliminary site plan approval by the planning commission shall be satisfactorily resolved prior to submittal of a final site plan for review, by the city. 
b.  A sufficient number of final site plans as required by the city shall be submitted. 
c.  Upon receipt of the final site plans the engineering and building department shall stamp the date of receipt on each site plan and forward a copy of the stamped site plan to the applicable review personnel for its review and comment. 
d.  The applicable review personnel shall examine the final site plan and forward its comments in writing to the engineering and building department. 
e.  When the engineering and building department finds the final site plan to be in order, it shall schedule the final site plan for review by the planning commission. 
f.  After reviewing the final site plan, the planning commission may grant final site plan approval, provided all conditions that may have been attached to preliminary site plan approval have been satisfactorily resolved. Except as set forth in this subsection, the granting of final site plan approval by the planning commission will be without any conditions. The exceptions are any final site engineering details that are normally worked out following final approval, and pending the city's review and approval of any required master deed, bylaws, protective covenants or deed restrictions associated with the development. The planning commission may table acting on the final site plan pending any changes or revisions that need to be made to the plan before final approval will be given, or it may deny final site plan approval if any technical concerns remain unresolved at the time of final review. 
(8)  Dwelling density limitations. Dwelling density shall be based on the number of dwellings permitted in each single-family district as outlined in this subsection. The area of the property that may be used to compute dwelling density shall be the gross area of the site, less any existing peripheral public road or alley rights-of-way. The number of single-family dwellings by zoning district is set forth as follows: 
R-1 district 6.0 dwellings per acre R-2 district 6.8 dwellings per acre R-3 district 7.0 dwellings per acre R-4 district 7.5 dwellings per acre RM districts 7.0 dwellings per acre  
(9)  Lot area, lot width and building setback requirements. The minimum lot area and width requirements of section 110-511 to the contrary notwithstanding, the following minimum lot area and lot width requirements shall apply: 
a.  Individual lots or home sites. 
1.  Lot area . The minimum area of each lot shall be not less than the minimum required to ensure that all the applicable building setback requirements of the district are met. 
2.  Lot width . No minimum lot width shall be required, except that each lot shall have sufficient width to allow the requirements of subsection (9)a.3 of this section to be met, and except further, the overall length of a lot shall not be more than four times its width. 
3.  Building setbacks . The minimum applicable building setback requirements of section 110-511 shall be met by zoning district. 
b.  Attached dwelling units . 
1.  Attachment limitations . A dwelling unit may be attached to another dwelling unit so long as not more than two exterior walls of the dwelling unit and not more than 50 percent of each such wall may be in common with the wall of another dwelling unit. A garage attached to a dwelling unit may have one wall fully in common with the wall of another garage, so long as the garage wall that is attached to the dwelling unit it is intended to serve, does not exceed the common wall limitation of this section. Dwelling units may also be attached one to another by means of an architectural feature or detail that does not form interior room space. Should the, planning commission determine that strict compliance with the roof line pitch requirement of subsection 110-104(9) may diminish the appearance, compatibility or structural integrity of attached single-family dwellings in the R-4 districts, the commission may permit a different roof line pitch. 
2.  Roof line limitations . When dwelling units are attached together over a portion of a common party wall, no other part or portion of the roof of a dwelling unit shall be in common with the roof of any other dwelling unit, except where a garage shares one wall fully in common with one wall of another garage, a continuous roof line may extend over both garages. 
3.  Building setbacks . The minimum applicable building setback requirements of section 110-511 shall be met by zoning district, except in the R-4 district the minimum front yard setback requirement may be reduced to 12 feet. 
(10)  Interior street system. A system of interior streets shall be designed, laid out and built to provide for the safe and convenient circulation of motor vehicles within the development in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  All public streets shall be built to applicable local public street standards and shall be located in public street rights-of-way, the widths of which shall meet applicable local public street standards. 
b.  When permitted by the city, private service drives shall be hard-surfaced drives built to applicable city requirements. The minimum width of a private service drive shall be 22 feet. A 27-foot-wide private service drive may allow parking along one side, so long as such parking is clearly posted. 
c.  Every effort shall be made by the applicant to create an interior system of streets that will have the least adverse impact on any asset of environmental significance on the property, including the loss of tree cover, impacts on wetlands or the cutting and filling of areas of steep topography. 
(11)  Open space preservation. Land to be placed in perpetuity as open space shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Land to be set aside as open space within the development shall comprise at least 20 percent of the net usable land area of the property used to compute dwelling density, as stipulated in Public Act No. 179 of 2001 (MCL 125.584f). Land so reserved shall not include any land designated as a lot or home site on the site plan, subdivision plat, nor any land within any minimum required building setback. 
b.  Land designated as open space within the development shall, to the extent practical, be located within convenient walking distance of a majority of the lots, or attached building envelopes. 
c.  All land set aside as open space shall be set aside for that purpose and that purpose only. Once established and reserved as open space, no part of any open space so established shall thereafter be converted to land for development or for any other use without the express approval of the city and the residents living within the development. In no event shall any reduction in open space area result in less than 20 percent of the net usable land area of the property being reserved as open space. 
d.  The open space portion of the property should include any lakes, ponds or streams, wetlands, woodlands or stands of timber, or areas of steep topography, but such features need not make up all the open space of the site. 
e.  Open space shall extend to as many lots and home sites as possible. In those instances where open space in an existing development extends to a common property line of a proposed new development, at least a portion of the open space in the new development shall join the open space in the abutting development. Such open space connections shall not be dead end open space areas, but shall be designed to allow pedestrian and bicycle riding access from one such development to another: When a residential open space preservation development abuts a commercial development, or undeveloped land that is zoned for commercial use, open space of sufficient width to permit connecting the two sites together, via a trail or pathway, shall be provided. 
All open space shall be clearly stipulated in any covenants placed on the development as area or areas to be set aside in perpetuity as open space. 
(12)  Assurance of open space preservation. The area of the property to be preserved as open space as set forth in subsection (10) of this section shall be subject to the following preservation assurances: 
a.  Single-family site condominiums. The location of all open space areas shall be described by legal description in the master deed. A general description of what the open space areas contain will be included. These areas shall be set forth as open space areas that are to be preserved as open space areas. Open space areas may be identified as common areas, as defined in Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.). All areas of any open space that will require maintenance shall be so identified in the master deed and the manner in which these areas will be maintained shall be clearly spelled out in the association's bylaws. 
b.  Single-family subdivision plat. The location of all open space areas shall be described by legal description, along with a general description of what the open space areas will contain. These areas shall be set forth as open space areas to be preserved as open space in the form of protective covenants, or deed restrictions. The covenants shall also require the forming of an association of homeowners who shall be governed by the association bylaws. The bylaws shall clearly spell out the responsibilities of the homeowners association, including how all open space areas required in subsection (11) of this section will be maintained by the association. 
c.  City approval. A master deed, protective covenants or deed restrictions, and the bylaws of the association of homeowners, as required in this subsection, shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission. Of particular importance to the city shall be assurance that all open space areas are properly set aside for such purposes and those elements of the open space areas that will require maintenance will be properly cared for. The city may refer such documents to the city attorney for review and comment. The city, at its discretion, may require the assigning of a second party to partner with the development in securing the open space areas. A second party could be a land conservancy or similar land preservation organization. 
(13)  Life of approvals. Preliminary site plan approval by the planning commission shall be valid for one year, commencing on the date of approval and terminating on the same date one year later. The granting of final site plan approval by the planning commission shall be valid for one year, commencing on the date of approval and terminating on the same date one year later. If after the granting of preliminary or final site plan approval but before the one-year termination date, a request for an extension is submitted and approved by the planning commission, a one-time one-year extension of the expiration date may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2402), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-514. - One-family site condominium option. 
    The intent of this section is to permit the development of single-family detached dwellings by site planning the layout of individual dwellings or condominium units as defined in this chapter, along with all streets, utilities, open spaces, etc., as permitted in MPA 59 of 1978, as amended, being the state condominium act. To accomplish development under this option, the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  In the one-family residential districts the site planning of individual single-family detached dwellings, or condominium units may be permitted after review by the planning commission of a site plan. The site plan shall be prepared in strict accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVIII in this chapter. The planning commission shall conduct its review at a public hearing. The hearing shall be advertised in the manner set forth in Article XXX in this chapter. 
(2)  In making its review the planning commission shall find that the following minimum requirements are fully met: 
a.  The maximum number of individual single-family detached dwellings per acre shall not exceed the dwelling unit density level of the one-family residential zoning district in which the site is located. 
b.  An area at least equal to the minimum lot area requirement of the zoning district in which the site is located shall be provided for each dwelling or condominium unit. This area may be called the limited common element, as defined in this chapter. 
c.  Setbacks equal to the minimum building setback requirements of the zoning district in which the site is located shall be provided for each dwelling or condominium unit. Each setback shall extend from the applicable wall of the dwelling or condominium unit to the corresponding limited common element line. 
d.  All streets shall be public streets in public rights-of-way, all such streets and rights-of-way shall be designed and constructed to the city's applicable public street and road rights-of-way standards. 
e.  All utilities shall be provided and constructed to applicable standards and shall be located in appropriate utility easements. 
f.  The maximum number of stories and the maximum building height limitations of the zoning district in which the site is located shall be met. 
g.  At least the minimum applicable square feet of floor area shall be provided as required in this chapter, for each single-family detached dwelling or condominium unit. 
h.  Any detached accessory building or structure shall comply with the applicable standards of this chapter. All such setbacks shall be measured from the applicable lot or limited common element line. 
(3)  When the planning commission finds that all of the requirements outlined in subsection 110-602(4) are met it shall grant the applicant preliminary site plan approval. The planning commission may at its discretion, grant preliminary site plan approval with conditions, provided the conditions are minimal and few. 
    The granting of preliminary site plan approval by the planning commission shall give leave to the applicant to prepare a final site plan. The final site plan shall include any conditions placed by the planning commission on the preliminary site plan. The planning commission may grant final site plan approval only after it is satisfied that all conditions have been met, and that the master deed and the association of homeowners bylaws are deemed by the city to be in order. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2403), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-515-110-530. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXV. - USE PERMITS 

Sec. 110-531. - Intent. 
    Because the uses hereinafter referred to possess unique characteristics making it impractical to place them in a specific district classification, they may be permitted by the Trenton City Council under the conditions specified, and after public hearing, and after a recommendation has been received from the planning commission. In every case, the uses hereinafter referred to shall be specifically prohibited from any residential districts, unless otherwise specified. 
    These uses require special consideration since they service an area larger than the city or require sizable land areas, creating problems of control with reference to abutting use districts. Land use falling specifically within the intent of this section, and their particular requirements are outlined as follows: 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2500), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-532. - Outdoor theaters. 
    Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristics of being used only after darkness and since they develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area, they shall be permitted in the I Industrial Districts only. Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  An application for an outdoor movie theater shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission. A site plan shall be submitted for review and shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, as set forth and regulated in this chapter. In conducting its review the planning commission shall consider the following: 
a.  The internal design shall receive approval from the city engineer as to adequacy of drainage, lighting, and other technical aspects. 
b.  Outdoor theaters shall abut a major thoroughfare and points of ingress and egress shall be available only from such major thoroughfare. 
c.  All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility shall be provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way. 
d.  The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major thoroughfares. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be installed in accordance with the exterior site lighting requirements of section 110-631 in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2501), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-533. - Commercial television and radio transmitting towers, public utility microwave towers and public utility television transmitting towers. 
    Any radio and television transmitting towers, public utility microwave transmitting towers and public utility television transmitting towers regarded as essential services, as defined in this chapter, and their ancillary facilities, shall be permitted in the I Industrial Districts, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Application to establish a use permitted in this section shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission. A site plan shall be submitted for review and shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVII, Site Plan Review, as set forth and regulated in this chapter. In conducting its review the planning commission shall apply the following standards: 
a.  The tower shall be located centrally on a continuous parcel of land that shall be of sufficient size to permit the entire vertical length (height) of the tower to fall fully within the property should the tower collapse. 
b.  All ancillary buildings and facilities shall be subject to the minimum applicable building setback requirements of the district for a principal use. 
(2)  The planning commission shall conduct its review of a site plan at a public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in Article XXX in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2502), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-534. - Nonessential wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Nonessential wireless telecommunication antenna arrays, and where permitted, related support structures, shall be permitted, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Approval. Nonessential wireless telecommunication antenna arrays and when permitted, their support structures and their ancillary equipment shall require approval by the City of Trenton in the manner set forth and regulated herein. 
(2)  Authorization. The City of Trenton shall authorize the establishment of a nonessential wireless telecommunications antenna array and where permitted in this section, a support structure and its ancillary equipment only when such facility is fully in compliance with the applicable requirements and guidelines of this section and only in a manner that will preserve the integrity, character, property values and esthetic quality of the site, the area around it and the city at large. 
(3)  Recognition. Recognizing the increasing number of providers authorized to establish and operate wireless telecommunication services within a defined area, it is the intent and purpose of this section to: 
a.  Facilitate adequate and sufficient provision of sites for nonessential wireless telecommunication facilities, 
b.  Establish predetermined locations for the placement of wireless telecommunication antenna arrays, and when permitted, the erection of support structures in accordance with the applicable requirements of this section, 
c.  Ensure that wireless telecommunication facilities are appropriately located so as to minimize any adverse impact they may have on other land use on the site or on surrounding properties, 
d.  Promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, 
e.  Provide adequate information about plans for the location of wireless telecommunication facilities in the city so that the city may determine the proper location and development of wireless telecommunication facilities in accordance with the location guidelines and applicable site requirements of this section, 
f.  Minimize the adverse impact of technological obsolescence of such facilities in a timely manner, including requirements to remove and restore sites where such facilities are no longer in use, or which have become unnecessary, and 
g.  Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless telecommunication facilities on residential areas, office, commercial and industrial sites, public and quasi-public sites, community landmarks including historic sites, natural beauty areas and in public rights-of-way. 
(4)  Existing facilities. Achieving this end contemplates the establishment of as few tower type of support structures as reasonably feasible, instead relying on the use of existing support structures, buildings and other existing structures in the city or in adjoining communities that can meet the applicant's service area needs. 
(5)  Adverse impact. The Trenton City Council believes that the presence of numerous wireless telecommunication support structures located throughout the city and particularly in residential neighborhoods, would diminish the attractiveness of the community, thereby destroying its character. This in turn, could have an adverse impact on property values. Therefore the city council believes it is necessary to minimize the adverse impact on the community that the presence of numerous relatively tall wireless telecommunication support structures with their characteristically low architectural and aesthetic appeal could have on the city, while at the same time recognizing that the absence of any regulation would likely result in a material impediment to the maintenance and promotion of property values, and further recognizing that this growing service is promoting economic gain and aiding in maintaining the health, safety and general welfare of the city. 
(6)  Location by order of priority. A nonessential wireless telecommunications antenna array shall be permitted in one of the following locations by order of priority. The first location set forth in this subsection shall be considered as the first or top priority location with each location thereafter descending in the order of priority: 
a.  On an existing nonessential wireless telecommunications support structure located on land in any zoning district in the city, subject to review and approval by the Trenton Building Department. 
b.  An internal nonvisible location within an existing building or structure in any zoning district, subject to review and approval by the Trenton Building Department. All equipment customarily accessory to an antenna array shall also be placed so as to not be visible beyond the exterior walls of the building, 
c.  An external location on an existing building or structure in an I industrial or B business zoning district, subject to review and approval by the Trenton Planning Commission. 
d.  An external location on an existing building or structure in an R Residential Zoning District, subject to review by the Trenton Planning Commission at a duly advertised public hearing, and approval by the planning commission. 
e.  On a proposed new nonessential wireless telecommunications support structure to be located on land owned by the City of Trenton in an I Industrial District, subject to review and approval by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing. 
f.  On a proposed new nonessential wireless telecommunications support structure to be located on privately owned land in an I Industrial District, subject to review and approval by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing. 
g.  On a proposed new nonessential wireless telecommunications support structure to be located on land owned by the City of Trenton in a B Commercial District, subject to review and approval by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing. 
h.  On a proposed new nonessential wireless telecommunications support structure to be located on privately owned land in a B Commercial District, subject to review and approval by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing. 
i.  On a proposed new nonessential wireless telecommunications support structure to be located on land owned by the City of Trenton in an R Residential District, subject to review and approval by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing. 
j.  On a proposed new nonessential wireless telecommunications support structure to be located on privately-owned land in an R Residential District, subject to review and approval by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing. 
(7)  Required conditions. The following standards shall apply where applicable, to all applications to locate a nonessential wireless telecommunications antenna array or support structure in the city: 
a.  Before an applicant may locate on a site of lower priority than site priority a. of subsection (6) of this section, the applicant shall prepare and submit sufficient information to clearly show why the applicant must locate at a lower priority site. For each location of lower priority than any higher priority location(s), sufficient explanation shall be provided as to why none of the higher priority locations can be used by the applicant. This information shall take into consideration any existing structure located beyond the City of Trenton's Corporate Limits that could serve the applicant's needs. 
b.  For priority sites a. and b. listed in subsection (6) of this section, plans, drawings and specifications requested by the Trenton Building Department shall be submitted by the applicant for review and approval by the building department. 
c.  For priority site c. listed in subsection (6) of this section, plans drawings and specifications drawn to scale and containing sufficient information for review, including exterior structural or building wall elevation drawings illustrating how the antenna array will appear on the structure or building and all other applicable information set forth in Article XXVII, Site Plan Review, as set forth and regulated in this chapter, shall be submitted for review and approval by the Trenton Planning Commission. This shall include the statements mandated in subsection (6)a. of this section. During its review the planning commission may request additional information be submitted that it deems reasonably necessary in conducting its review. 
d.  For priority sites d., e., f., g., h., i., and j., listed in subsection (6) of this section, all of the information outlined in subsection (7)c. of this section shall be submitted for review by the Trenton Planning Commission at a duly advertised public hearing. Planning commission approval of the application is required. 
1.  Any nonessential wireless telecommunications support structure as permitted in priority sites, e., f., g., h., i., and j., listed in subsection (6) of this section, shall: 
i.  Be a monopole structure only, 
ii.  Consist only of nonwood materials, 
iii.  Not exceed 199 feet in overall height measured from the ground at the base of the structure to the highest point of the structure or any antenna attached to the structure, 
iv.  Provide co-location capacity for not less, nor more than three antenna arrays, 
v.  Not require the use of any supporting guy wires, and 
vi.  Not be lighted in any way unless lighting is required to meet applicable Federal Aviation Association (FAA) guidelines, and if painted shall be light blue or light gray in color. 
vii.  A sufficient means of access shall be provided to any antenna array, support structure and to any ancillary structures used in conjunction with an antenna array. When the array is located in the interior of a property and access cannot be gained via a parking lot, alley or other driveway approach, a gravel lane shall be provided. When such a lane is necessary, care will be taken to make certain that its point of access to an alley, parking lot, street or other public way shall meet all applicable state and local requirements. Sufficient area shall be provided for the parking of a service vehicle, the location and extent of which will be subject to review and approval by the specified reviewing authority. 
viii.  Unless the antenna array and its ancillary equipment will be housed inside a building, or completely enclosed within an addition to the building, any outdoor or detached structures housing the equipment shall be placed within a fully enclosed compound. Enclosure may be provided by a wall or a fence. The wall or fence shall be not less than eight feet high measured from the ground at the base of the structure to the top of the structure. A wall shall consist of architecturally attractive masonry material approved by the planning commission. If a fence, it shall be a tightly woven wire (chain link) type of fence to discourage climbing. A fenced compound shall also be screened by evergreen planting materials in the manner set forth and regulated in Article XXVII, Screening Devices and Landscaping, in this chapter. The ground area of the compound will be of adequate size to house all of the necessary ancillary equipment for three antenna arrays. 
ix.  When a nonessential wireless telecommunications support structure shall be permitted as outlined in subsection (6) e., f., or g. of this section, the compound in which the support structure is located shall observe the minimum building setback requirements of the district it is located in, measured from the outside perimeter of the compound to all property lines, except when the support structure is located on property occupied by a residential dwelling, or is located on a site on property next to property containing a residential dwelling, the support structure, but only the support structure, shall be separated from the residential dwelling by a distance equal to one-half the full height of the support structure. This distance shall be measured from the outer face of the support structure nearest the residential dwelling to the nearest wall of the residential dwelling. When the support structure will be located on property occupied by a nonresidential use in a nonresidential oriented building, the support structure shall set back not less than ten feet from the nonresidential building, unless a greater setback is required by other applicable local, state or federal codes. 
x.  An applicant shall submit written assurances that the owner or operator of any nonessential wireless telecommunications facility permitted in this section shall at all times conduct all operations of the system in full compliance with all applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC) permits and conditions, including preventing any objectionable levels of interference. 
xi.  An applicant shall submit written assurances that the owner or the operator of any wireless telecommunications facility permitted in this section shall at all times conduct all operations of the system in full compliance with all current state or federal regulations pertaining to no ionizing electromagnetic radiation, and furthermore, the owner and/or operator agrees in writing that if more restrictive state or federal regulatory standards are adopted during the operating life of the facility, the applicant or owner shall commence efforts to bring the facility into compliance with the new standards within 60 days of adoption of any such standards, and the owner or the operator agrees that they will bear the costs of testing and verifying compliance with such standards. 
xii.  The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the site in a structurally safe and attractive manner and shall maintain all landscaping and lawn areas in a living, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(8)  Co-location sharing. The policy of the City of Trenton towards nonessential wireless telecommunication facilities is for co-location. Therefore, the entity that owns a wireless telecommunication support structure shall not fail or refuse to alter their structure so as to accommodate other antenna arrays on the support structure, particularly when such alteration would permit the support structure to remain within the structural guidelines of this section. 
Failure or refusal of the owner of a wireless telecommunications facility to alter their structure to accommodate co-location to the maximum extent permitted in this section, shall be deemed to be in direct violation and contradiction of the city's co-location first policy. Consequently, the owner shall be regarded by the city as having taken full responsibility for the violation and contradiction and shall be prohibited by the city from securing any additional approvals for the location of any more of their antenna arrays or related support structures in the city for a period of not less than seven years, commencing on the date of failure or refusal to permit co-location on their support structure or structures in the city of Trenton. The entity may seek a variance and obtain relief from the Trenton Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), provided the owner can clearly demonstrate entitlement to a variance. To that extent, the owner must demonstrate to the ZBA that enforcement of the seven-year prohibition would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent nonessential wireless telecommunication services, or that such enforcement would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of any personal wireless telecommunication services to the city. 
(9)  Surety. Sufficient surety acceptable to the city shall be provided by the applicant to adequately cover the cost of removing the facility, along with any accessory equipment, including compound walls or fencing, and restoring the site when its usefulness as a wireless telecommunications facility is concluded. Estimates to remove the entire facility and carrying out restoration of the site shall be prepared and submitted to the city for review and acceptance by the city. 
(10)  Permits. A use permit shall be issued by the city for an approved nonessential wireless telecommunications antenna array and where permitted for a support structure and related equipment cabinets, but only after review and approval of an application, in the manner set forth in this section, has been approved by the city or by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2503), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-535. - Outdoors athletic and entertainment facilities. 
    Outdoor athletic and entertainment facilities including, stadiums, amphitheaters, coliseums, arenas, golf driving ranges, golf courses, tennis courts, racquetball courts, football, baseball, softball, soccer, polo and similar athletic track and field events, including equestrian contests, but excluding any form or type of competitive motor vehicle contests, theme parks, or amusement parks, provided: 
(1)  An application to establish any use permitted in this section shall be subject to review and approval by the Trenton Planning Commission. A site plan shall be submitted for review and shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this chapter. In conducting its review the planning commission shall consider the following: 
a.  All such permitted uses shall be located in the I Industrial Districts only, 
b.  All such permitted uses shall have direct access to a major thoroughfare. 
c.  All exterior lighting shall be directed inward towards the use and away from adjacent uses. 
d.  Except for the green areas of golf courses and golf driving ranges, i.e., fairways, and open driving range areas, a minimum setback of 150 feet shall be provided for the principal use together with all accessory uses, except off-street parking which may be located no less than 50 feet from any residential district. Within these two setbacks, there shall be provided and maintained, earth berms and extensive landscape plantings of sufficient height and intensity so as to effectuate a substantial landscape planting screen between uses and the adjacent residential district. 
(2)  The planning commission shall conduct its review of a site plan at a public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in Article XXX, Public Hearings, in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2504), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-536. - Accommodations for helicopters. 
    Facilities for the accommodation of helicopters are considered separately under this section. For purposes of accommodating helicopters, the facilities are herein defined as the following: 
    Heliport. An area used by helicopters or by other steep-gradient aircraft which area includes passenger and cargo facilities, maintenance and overhaul, fueling service, storage space, tie-down space, hangars and other accessory buildings and open spaces. 
    Helistop. An area on a roof or on the ground used by helicopters or steep-gradient aircraft for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers or cargo; including fuel service, and tie-down space. 
    Helipad. An area on a roof or on the ground used by helicopters or steep-gradient aircraft for the purpose of picking up and discharging of passengers or cargo; but not including fuel service, maintenance or overhaul or tie-down space. 
(1)  An application to establish any use permitted in this section shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission. A site plan shall be submitted for review and shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXI, Site Plan Review, in this chapter. In conducting its review the planning commission shall apply the following conditions: 
a.  Heliports shall be permitted in the I Industrial Districts only. Helistops shall be permitted in all districts except the residential districts. Helipads shall be permitted in all districts. 
b.  When reviewing an application for a heliport, helistop or helipad, the Trenton Planning Commission shall require contemporary standards recommended by the Federal Aviation Agency and Michigan Department of Transportation for the proper operation of such facilities. 
c.  Adequate provision is made to control access to the facility. 
d.  The surface of the facility is such that dust, dirt or other matter will not be blown onto adjacent property by helicopter operations. 
e.  All applicable provisions of building, fire and health codes are met, including special provisions applicable in the case of rooftop heliports. 
f.  Appropriate provision is made for off-street parking. 
(2)  The planning commission shall conduct is review of a site plan at a public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in Article XXX, Public Hearings, in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2505), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-537. - Adult entertainment facilities. 
    In the development and execution of this section it is recognized that there are some uses, which, because of the very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics. Special regulation of these uses is therefore necessary in order to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this section. The primary control or regulation is for preventing such uses from intruding into residential districts or areas, or areas occupied by churches, parks or schools. No such use shall occupy an existing building or a proposed building that does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  No adult entertainment facility as defined in this chapter shall locate in any R Residential Zoning District. 
(2)  Except as otherwise set forth in this section no adult entertainment facility as defined in this chapter shall be located within 1,000 feet of a residential zoning district, any residential dwelling building, church, park or school. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2506), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-538. - Tattoo parlors. 
(a)  It has been demonstrated that the establishment of tattoo parlors in business districts which are immediately adjacent to and serve residential neighborhoods have a deleterious effect on both business and residential segments of the neighborhood resulting in blight. Prohibition against the establishment of more than two regulated uses within 1,000 feet of each other serves to avoid the clustering of certain business which when located in close proximity of each other, tends to create a deteriorating atmosphere. Such prohibition serves to avoid the deleterious effects of blight and devaluation to both business and residential property values resulting from the establishment of these businesses in a business district that is immediately adjacent to and serves residential neighborhoods. The orderly planning, development and preservation of neighborhoods should be encouraged and fostered by properties and persons that comprise the business and residential segments of each neighborhood. 
(b)  Tattoo parlors as defined in this zoning code shall only be permitted in the B-3 zoning district, subject to the following requirements and conditions: 
(1)  An application to establish any use permitted in this section shall be subject to review and approval of a site plan by the planning commission. 
(2)  A site plan shall be submitted for review and shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of article XXVIII, Site Plan Review, in this Ordinance Code. In conducting its review the planning commission shall apply the following conditions: 
a.  Not more than two such uses shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of each other. 
b.  It shall be unlawful to establish any such use in a B-3 district if any portion of the property upon which such business is situated is within 300 feet of either a residential zoning district, church or school, unless the prohibition is waived by the planning commission after presentment of a validated petition requesting such waiver signed by (51) percent of those persons residing in a home or homes; or 51 percent of those owning a businesses or businesses; or both if surrounded by both; or by any church or school; located within 300 feet of the proposed location. 
c.  The site shall abut a major thoroughfare right-of-way and all ingress and egress to and from the site shall be via that major thoroughfare. 
d.  The planning commission shall conduct its review of a site plan at a public hearing duly advertised in the manner set forth in article XXX, Hearings Procedures for Conditional Uses and Use Permits, in this Ordinance Code. 
(Ord. No. 705-7, § 1, 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 110-539. - Oil and gas drilling. 
(a)  The following requirements shall apply to the location, installation, drilling and operation of any well for the commercial extraction of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons in the city: 
(1)  May be allowed only in the I3 industrial district. 
(2)  It shall be situated on a minimum lot size of three acres. 
(3)  Spacing and well setbacks. In addition to the spacing and setback requirements of the state and regulations of its supervisor of wells, the drilling operation or operation of oil or gas wells, or well sites shall not be located within 300 feet from any road right-of-way, 500 feet of a residentially zoned or used property, or any property used for religious facility, public or private school, hospital, hospital clinic or healthcare facility and 100 feet from any other property line. No installation, drilling and operation of any well shall be located within 15 feet from another drilling operation or operation of oil or gas well, or well site. The proponent seeking to engage in activity shall also demonstrate to the city, a legal entitlement to drill on adjacent properties through mineral right acquisition or other means. Measurement of setback shall be made from the edge of the well site (in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects), to the closest exterior point of the adjacent parcel. 
(4)  Height. The completed well head structure shall not exceed 22 feet in height. Any temporary drilling derrick or other facility shall not exceed 110 feet in height. Temporary drilling derricks and rigs shall not be in place for longer than 60 days. A permit for an additional 30 days may be secured upon presentation to the supervisor of sufficient documentation demonstrating that reasonable progress has occurred throughout the initial 60 day period and that operations can be completed within an additional 30 days. 
(5)  Fencing, landscaping and lighting. An oil or gas well site shall be completely enclosed with a six feet high fence with materials compliant with ordinances. Staggered six feet tall Evergreen trees shall be placed around the perimeter of the fence with a minimum landscape greenbelt buffer of 25 feet in depth. This landscaping buffer shall be in place within 30 days of the removal of the temporary drilling deck/rig. Exterior lighting shall comply with the provisions of the city's ordinances and shall be shielded so as not to be disruptive to adjoining parcels. 
(6)  Nuisance mitigation. The drilling, completion, or operation of oil or gas wells or other wells drilled for oil and gas exploration purposes shall comply with the additional site requirements of the section and any other applicable ordinance provisions. Such standards address potential nuisances such as noise, smoke, dust, and the like. To the extent this section is more restrictive the provisions of this section shall control. 
(7)  Dust, noise, vibration, and odors. All operations shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize, as far as practicable dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices defined by the state department of environmental quality for the production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. All equipment used shall be constructed and operated so that vibration, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or effects will be minimized by the operations carried on at any time, or from anything incidental thereto, and to minimize the annoyance of persons living or working in the vicinity. Additionally, the site or structures on the property shall not be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly, or unsafe. The city may impose additional reasonable restrictions upon such operations as to reduce adverse impacts upon adjacent properties. 
(8)  Oil and gas processing facilities. Associated processing facilities that separate oil, gas and brine and hold said products for transport off-site for further refinement and processing are not permitted. 
(9)  Compliance with laws and permit issuance. The drilling, completion, or operation of oil and gas wells or other wells drilled for the purpose of oil or gas exploration shall be done in conformity with all state and federal laws, statutes, rules, and regulations pertaining thereto and particularly with the state and regulations of its supervisor of wells. This shall include obtaining the required permit from the supervisor of wells which permit shall be provided to the city prior to the city issuing special use approval under this section. This requirement applies to, but is not limited to the plugging of wells, the exploring for, producing, marketing and transportation of petroleum products and the disposition and removal of any byproducts utilized and associated with said activities. 
(10)  Associated permits and approvals. Special use approval for the drilling, completion, or operation of oil or gas wells or other wells drilled for oil or gas exploration purposes is in addition to and not in lieu of any permit or plan which may be required by any other provision of the city city zoning Ordinance, building and fire codes, or by any other governmental agency, unless expressly outlined. 
(11)  Operations. 
a.  Permitted construction activity hours. Site preparation and construction of well sites are limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Construction activities associated with establishing of well sites may be eligible for an exception by the building official if such activities are in compliance with applicable laws and permits and is demonstrated that noise and disturbance from such activities will not be annoying or disturbing to surrounding uses. 
b.  The movement of drilling rigs, tanker trucks or heavy equipment used in connection with drilling or operation of oil or gas wells over city roads and streets, shall require the approval of the supervisor in conjunction with a review by the city engineer. A proposed traffic route and the axel weight, vehicle weight and description shall be submitted in advance to the city by the applicant. 
c.  All brine, mud, slush, saltwater, chemicals, wastewater, chemical fluids or waste produced or used in the drilling of production of oil or gas shall be safely, lawfully and properly disposed of to prevent infiltration of or damage to any fresh water well, groundwater, watercourse, pond, lake or wetland. Such materials shall be promptly removed from the site and shall not be continuously stored upon the site. 
d.  The oil or gas well site shall be kept in a clean and orderly condition, free of trash and debris, with vegetation cut. Machinery which is not expected to be used on the site within a two week period, shall not be kept or stored at the well site. 
e.  An oil or gas well shall include measures or controls satisfactory to the city engineer to prevent migration, run-off or discharge of any hazardous materials, including but not limited to chemicals, oil or gas produced or used in the drilling of production of oil or gas, to adjoining property, or to the sanitary sewer system, storm water system or any natural or artificial watercourse, pond, lake, or wetland. There shall be no off-site discharge of storm water except to an approved drainage system in accordance with the city's engineering requirements. 
(12)  Inspection. The building official and any other designee of the supervisor shall have the right and privilege at any time during the construction phase and any drilling operation to enter upon the premises subject to special land use approval for the purpose of making inspections to determine if the requirements of this section and other applicable ordinances are complied with. 
(13)  Injection wells. Injection wells used for brine disposal or other chemicals from production of wells or from other sources are prohibited within the city. 
(14)  Pipelines. No operator shall excavate or construct any lines for the conveyance of fuel, water, oil, gas, or petroleum liquids under or through the streets, alleys or other properties owned by the city without an easement or right-of-way issued by the city. 
(15)  Submittal requirements. In addition to the requirements for a site plan and other submittal requirements under the general provisions of special land use, the following information shall be submitted as part of the application: 
a.  Environmental impact study. Applicant shall submit an environmental impact statement filed with the state department of environmental quality in connection with a well permit under the applicable provisions of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 524.61501 et seq. or as otherwise amended and administrative rules promulgated thereunder. 
b.  Hydrogeological analysis. 
c.  Emergency response plan. Pursuant to state and federal law, the operator shall provide any information necessary to the city department of emergency management, who will forward a copy to Wayne County Homeland Security and Emergency Management with an emergency response plan and hazardous materials survey establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from the operation. The emergency response plan shall include emergency contact information. 
d.  Reclamation plan. A written statement describing how the land will be returned to a stable and productive condition post drilling operations shall be furnished. Time for completion of reclamation shall be provided. The city shall require a bond calculated at the estimated cost of reclamation procedures which shall be returned following reclamation or may be drawn upon in the event reclamation is not completed if provided in a timely fashion. 
e.  The operations plan shall include identification of site ingress and egress, a haul route map, hours of operation, soil erosion, mud and dust control plan, noise control plan, identification of operational noise impacts including documentation of establishing noise levels and mitigating noise levels, shall provide topography, shall provide an odor and fume control plan, pollution prevention plan, impact mitigation plan, monitoring and control plan. 
(Ord. No. 705-16, § 2, 11-21-2016) 
Secs. 110-540-110-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - OFF-STREET PARKING, PARKING LAYOUT, AND LOADING, UNLOADING 

Sec. 110-551. - Numerical off-street parking requirements. 
    There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with unobstructed access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed: 
(1)  Off-street parking spaces may be located within a rear yard or within a side yard that is in excess of the minimum side yard setback unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant. 
(3)  Required residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, or driveway, provided each such space does not constitute an access point to another parking space, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and subject to the applicable provisions of section 110-630, pertaining to accessory buildings. 
(4)  Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall never be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 
(5)  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of adoption of this code in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or new use. 
(6)  Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
(7)  In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the Trenton Zoning Board of Appeals and Adjustments may grant an exception. 
(8)  The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 
(9)  For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use that the engineer and building department considers is similar in type. 
(10)  When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
(11)  For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of "Usable floor area" in Article II, Definitions, section 110-22 shall govern. 
(12)  The requirements of subsection (13) of this section shall not apply to the erection, alteration, or extension of any building or structure within that area zoned CBD Central Business District. 
(13)  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Use Minimum Spaces Required 1. Residential: a. Residential, one- and two-family Two for each dwelling unit. b. Residential, multiple-family Two for each dwelling unit, plus one visitor parking space for every four dwelling units, or fraction thereof. c. Housing for the elderly One for each dwelling unit. Should units revert to general occupancy, the requirements of subsection (13)1.b. of this section shall apply. d. Mobile home park Two for each mobile home site and one for each employee of the mobile home park. 2. Institutional: a. Churches or temples. One for each three seats or six feet of pews in the main unit of worship. b. Hospitals. One for each one bed. c. Homes for the aged and Convalescent homes. One for each four beds. d. Elementary and junior One for each one teacher, employee or administrator, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. e. Senior High Schools. One for each one teacher, employee, or administrator and one for each ten students, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. f. Private clubs or lodge halls. One for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building, or health codes. g. Private golf clubs, tennis clubs, or other similar uses One for each two member families or individuals plus spaces required for each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar. h. Golf courses open to the general public, except miniature or par 3 courses Six for each one golf hole and one for each employee, plus spaces required for each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar. i. Fraternity or sorority. One for each five permitted active members, or one for each two beds, whichever is greater. j. Stadium, sports arena, or similar place of outdoor assembly. One for each three seats or six feet of benches. k. Theaters and auditoriums. One for each three seats plus one for each two employees. l. Nursery school, day nurseries or childcare centers One for each 350 square feet of usable floor space. 3. Offices: a. Banks One space for each 100 square feet of usable floor area, plus any required vehicle stacking space as set forth herein. b. Business offices or professional offices except as indicated in the following item c. One for each 200 square feet of usable floor space. c. Professional offices of doctors, dentists, or similar professions. One for each 100 square feet of usable floor space. 4. Business and commercial: a. Planned commercial or shopping center One for each 150 square feet of usable floor area for the first 20,000 square feet, plus one space for every additional 200 square feet up to 400,000 square feet, and one space for every additional 250 square feet thereafter. b. Auto wash (automatic) One for each one employee. In addition, reservoir parking spaces equal in number to five times the maximum capacity of the auto wash. Maximum capacity of the auto wash shall mean the greatest number of automobiles possible undergoing some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length in feet of each wash line by 20. c. Auto car wash, self service or coin-operated One for each wash stall, plus vehicle stacking spaces equal to that required in section 110-532 in this chapter. d. Beauty parlor or barber shop. Three spaces for the first two beauty or barber chairs, and 1-1/2 spaces for each additional chair. e. Bowling alleys. Five for each one bowling lane plus spaces required for each accessory use such as a restaurant, bar, or billiard parlor. f. Dance hall, pool or billiard parlors, roller or skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats. One for each two persons within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building, or health codes. g. Establishments for sale, or consumption on the premises, of beverages, food, or refreshments. One for each 75 square feet of usable floor space or one for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building, or health codes, whatever is greater. h. Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, shoe repair, and other similar uses. One for each 800 square feet of usable floor area. (For that floor area used in processing, one additional space shall be provided for each two persons employed therein.) i. Gasoline Service Station. Two for each stall, rack, or pit, and one for each vehicle fueling terminal plus vehicle stacking space as follows: When more than one pump is placed on a common pump island, one-half vehicle stacking space per fueling placed on one pump island, one vehicle stacking space per fueling terminal. Each fueling space and each stacking space shall be 18 feet long by eight feet wide. When more than one pump is placed on a common pump island as in the first instance above, a ten foot wide vehicle pass through the lane shall be provided between vehicle fueling spaces. When only one pump shall be placed on a pump island as in the second instance above, a vehicle pass through lane is not required. Vehicle stacking space for each fueling terminal shall be placed as close to the fueling terminal as possible without diminishing traffic circulation within the site, or blocking access to any other vehicle fueling terminal, off-street parking space, other stacking space or loading, unloading area, and no vehicle parking space, fueling space, stacking space, or maneuvering lane, shall block or otherwise encumber in any way, clear access to any vehicle entry or exit driveways, or other vehicle circulation lanes or service areas. One parking space shall be provided for each employee in the largest work shift, plus one space for each 150 square feet of usable floor space in any retail store area. 1. Fueling space 2. Stacking space 3. Fuel pump 4. Fueling terminal j. Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners. One for each two washing and/or dry-cleaning machines. k. Miniature or "par-3" golf courses. Three for each one hole plus one for each employee. l. Mortuary establishments One for each 50 square feet of usable floor space. m. Motel, hotel, or other commercial unit plus lodging. One for each one occupancy one for each one employee. n. Motor vehicle sales service establishments. One for each 200 square feet of usable floor space of salesroom and one for each one auto service stall in the service room, plus one for each employee. o. Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein. One for each 150 square feet of usable floor space. p. Marina (private) One for every four boat slips or fraction thereof q. Marina (public) One and one-half (11/2) spaces per boat mooring slip, not to include area required for winter boat storage, plus one additional space for every four boat racks in a boat storage building providing in-out service. r. Boat launch ramp. Twenty-five spaces for each launch ramp. s. Drive-in restaurant. One for each ten square feet of usable floor space in patron self-service area. In addition, should a dining room or seating area be provided, there shall be one space for each 25 square feet of usable floor space in the dining area. t. Fast-food carry out (no drive-through). One space for each 50 square feet of usable floor space. u. Fast-food restaurant. One space for every two employees in the largest working shift and one space for every two seats, plus any required vehicle stacking spaces as set forth herein. v. Dry cleaning pickup. Four spaces. 4. Industrial: a. Industrial or research establishments, and related accessory offices. Five plus one for every 11/2 employees in the largest working shift. Space on site shall also be provided for all construction workers during periods of plant construction. b. Warehouses and wholesale establishments and related accessory offices. Five plus one for every one employee in the largest working shift, or one for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor space, whichever is greater.  
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2600), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-552. - Vehicle stacking spaces. 
    In addition to numerical off-street parking requirements of this section, wherever an accessory drive-up or drive-through window service is provided, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Stacking Space Requirements: 
(1) Fast food and fast food carry out. Ten spaces. (2) Banks, savings and loan, credit unions, ATM stations, and the like. Five spaces for each window or teller machine. (3) Other drive-up or drive-through facilities. Four spaces.  
    Each vehicle stacking space shall be eight feet wide by 18 feet long and shall be located independently of any parking space, vehicle maneuvering lane or loading, unloading area. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2601), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-553. - Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    Whenever the off-street parking requirements in this article necessitate the building of an off-street parking facility, or where P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts (Article XX) are provided, the off-street parking spaces shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
(1)  No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefore is issued by the building official. Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the building department in such form as may be determined by the building official and shall be accompanied with two sets of site plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. 
(2)  Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with the following minimum applicable requirements: 
a.  Automobile parking layout standards. 
Parking Layout Aisle Width 
(feet) Parking Space 
Width 
(feet) Parking 
Spaces Length 
(feet) Total Width of 
One Tier of 
Spaces Plus 
Aisle 
(feet) Total Width of 
Two Tiers of 
Spaces Plus 
Aisle 
(feet) 0° (1 way) 12 ft 8 ft 23 ft 20 ft 28 ft 0° (2 way) 20 ft 8 ft 23 ft 28 ft 36 ft 30° 12 ft 9 ft 20 ft 32 ft 52 ft 45° 15 ft 9 ft 20 ft 36.5 ft 58 ft 60° 18 ft 9 ft 20 ft 39 ft 60 ft 90° 20 ft 9 ft 20 ft 40 ft 60 ft  


Parking Layout Standards 
b.  Boat launch parking layout standards 
Parking Layout Aisle Width 
(feet) Parking Space 
Width 
(feet) Parking 
Spaces Length 
(feet) Total Width of 
One Tier of 
Spaces Plus 
Aisle 
(feet) Total Width of 
Two Tiers of 
Spaces Plus 
Aisle 
(feet) 30° 25 ft 10 ft 45 ft 70 ft 108 ft 45° 35 ft 10 ft 45 ft 80 ft 122 ft 60° 45 ft 10 ft 45 ft 90 ft 132 ft 90° Not Permitted  

c.  All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited except in the case of one-and two-family residences. 
d.  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. 
e.  All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the ninety-degree pattern may permit two-way movement. 
f.  Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least 25 feet distant from adjacent property located in any single-family residential district. 
g.  The off-street parking area shall be provided with a continuous and obscuring wall not less than four feet six inches in height measured from the surface of the parking area. This wall shall be provided on all sides where the next zoning district is designated as a residential district or there is an existing residence. When a front yard setback is required, all land between said wall and the front property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
h.  The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this section shall be provided with asphalt or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the city engineer. The parking area shall be paved in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. 
i.  All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only. 
j.  In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
k.  The planning commission, upon application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may modify the yard or wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2602), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-554. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  All spaces shall be provided as required in Article XXIV, Schedule of Regulations, under "Minimum Rear Yards" (footnote (h)), in this chapter, except as hereinafter provided for in the I Industrial Districts. 
(2)  Within an I Industrial District, all spaces shall be laid out in the dimension of at least ten by 50 feet, or 500 square feet in area, with a clearance of at least 14 feet in height. Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement having an asphaltic or Portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent, durable, dustless surface. 
All spaces in I-1 and I-2 districts shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to floor area: 
Gross Floor Area 
(In Square Feet) Loading and Unloading Space Required 
in Terms of Square Feet of Usable Floor Area 0-1,400 None 1,401-20,000 One space 20,001-100,000 One space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,001 square feet. 100,001-500,000 Five spaces plus one space for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 100,001 square feet. 500,001 and over 15 spaces, plus one space for each 80,000 square feet in excess of 500,001 square feet.  
(3)  All loading and unloading in an I Industrial District shall be provided off-street in the rear yard or interior side yard, and shall in no instance be permitted in a front yard. In those instances where exterior side yards have a common relationship with an industrial district across a public thoroughfare, loading and unloading may take place in said exterior side yard when the setback is equal to at least 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2601), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-555-110-570. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - SCREENING DEVICES AND LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 110-571. - Screening devices required. 
    There shall be provided and maintained between any nonresidential district and between any multiple-family and single-family residential districts and between certain uses listed in this section an obscuring screening device of the type set forth and regulated in this section. 
(1)  Screening devices permitted. 
a.  Architectural masonry screen wall with cap; 
b.  Landscaped earth berm; 
c.  Planting screen. 
(2)  Where required. An obscuring screening device shall be provided and maintained between: 
a.  Any one-family residential district and any mobile home park district; 
b.  Any one-family residential district and any multiple-family residential district; 
c.  Any residential district and any office district; 
d.  Any residential district and any commercial district; 
e.  Any residential district and any industrial district; 
f.  Any residential district and a parking district; 
g.  Any off-street parking areas of nonresidential uses permitted in a residential district when next to or across a street from any residential land use; 
h.  Any hospital emergency entrance and any residential district; 
i.  Any utility building, utility stations or substations and any residential or office district. 
(3)  Height requirements. The height of an obscuring screening device shall be in accordance with the following specifications: 
a.  In those instances outlined in subsections 110-571(2) a., b., c. and d., of this article, a minimum of six feet in height, including the cap. 
b.  In the instance outlined in subsection 110-571(2)f., of this article, a minimum of four feet six inches in height, including the cap. 
c.  In the instance outlined in subsections 110-571(2)g. and h., four feet six inches except in the case of a hospital or medical clinic emergency entrance, or ambulance delivery area, and in the case of public utility buildings with outdoor substations, eight feet. 
d.  In the instance outlined in subsections 110-571(2)e. and i., a minimum height of six feet, or to a sufficiently greater height to effectively screen outdoor storage areas from view; except, in no case shall a screening device designed and intended to screen outdoor storage exceed a height of 12 feet, unless the screen consists of natural features, such as sharp changes in topography or heavy natural foliage, all of which shall exist on the property of the use it is intended to screen. 
(4)  Location on property line. Required screen walls and landscaped earth berms shall be located on the property line, except where underground utilities interfere and except in those instances where this chapter requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential districts. Any request or necessity for locating a screen wall or landscaped earth berm other than along a property line shall require review and approval of an alternate location by the building department or by the planning commission. The building department or the planning commission, in making its review of alternate screen wall or earth berm locations, shall consider the following conditions: 
a.  The ability of the screen wall to maintain continuity beyond the property line. 
b.  The effectiveness of the screen wall or earth berm to screen effectively in an alternate location. 
c.  The impact an alternate location may have on site drainage, overall site appearance and the functional well being of the development proposed for the property. 
(5)  Replacing existing fences or screening devices. Whenever the location of a screening device shall require the removal or detaching of an existing wall, fence, planting screen or landscaped earth berm, that wall, fence, planting screen or landscaped earth berm shall be replaced, restored, attached or reattached to the new screening device by those responsible for erecting the new screening device, unless the screening device that was removed or detached is on an adjoining property and its owner will accept the new screening device and not require his to be replaced. 
(6)  Openings for pedestrian and vehicular traffic. A screening device may be constructed with openings that do not in any square section (height and width) exceed 20 percent of the surface. Where a screening device is so pierced the openings shall be spaced so as to maintain the obscuring character of the screen and shall not reduce the minimum required height of the screening device. The arrangement of the openings shall be subject to review and approval by the building department or by the planning commission. 
(7)  Landscape designer requirements. A registered landscape architect, certified arborist or botanist, or qualified landscape designer shall prepare any landscape plans required or permitted in this article. The designers name, seal or certification number and signature shall appear on the landscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2700), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-572. - Screen wall structures. 
    Whenever a screen wall structure is to be used as a screening device, it shall be an architectural masonry structure consisting of the following materials: 
(1)  Reinforced concrete or concrete block with face brick on both sides of the wall. If the exterior walls of the principal use on the property shall contain any face brick material, the face brick on the screen wall structure shall consist of the same brick. 
(2)  Reinforced concrete with a brick or stone etched appearance on both sides of the wall. 
(3)  Natural stone materials or reinforced concrete or concrete block with cultured stone on both sides of the wall. 
(4)  Reinforced concrete panel walls so long as the vertical posts are concrete as well and are the same color as the panels they will support. 
(5)  All masonry screen wall structures permitted in this section, including concrete panel walls and brick etched concrete walls, shall include a cap. The cap shall be a vee-type of cap that shall consistently extend along the entire top of the wall. The angle of the vee shall not be less than 45 degrees so that it will quickly shed water and discourage walking on top of the cap. The vee cap shall extend out beyond the vertical sides of the wall. 


Transition Wall Details 
(6)  Screen wall structures with exposed reinforced concrete surfaces may be stained or may be made colorfast by mixing the color into the concrete. They may not be painted. When stained or made colorfast the color shall be of an earth tone. 
(7)  Reinforced concrete panel walls shall be composed of heavy-duty panels the size and weight of which shall require installation by machine. 
(8)  No screen wall structure shall consist of exposed cinder or cement block also known as concrete masonry units (CMU). Wood or wood products are specifically prohibited as a screen wall material. 
(9)  All screen walls shall be found by the building department to consist of durable, weather resistant, rust proof and easily maintained materials. 
(10)  When a screen wall structure is placed next to an off-street parking space or parking spaces it shall be protected by bumper blocks, a guardrail constructed next to but physically independent from the screen wall structure, or by other means acceptable to the building department. 
(11)  All screen wall structures shall be maintained at all times in a structurally sound condition, neat, orderly and attractive in appearance. All screen wall structures shall be kept free of graffiti. Encouraging vine growth to take place on the screen wall structure may discourage wall graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2701), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-573. - Landscaped earth berm. 
    The building department or the planning commission may permit, in place of an architectural masonry screen wall, a landscaped earth berm, provided the earth berm shall have a minimum height of not less than that required for a screen wall. An earth berm shall also: 
(1)  Have a side slope no steeper than three on one (3 feet of horizontal plane for each foot of vertical rise); 
(2)  Consist of undulating top and side slopes; 
(3)  Have a crest at the top of the earth berm of not less than two feet in width; 
(4)  Include an adequately designed drainage swale on the property line side of the berm to accommodate stormwater runoff. The drainage swale shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer; 
(5)  Be seeded or covered with sod so as to prevent erosion of the sides of the earth berm and be attractively landscaped with plant materials acceptable to the city. The building department or the planning commission in making its review of the landscape planting plan for the earth berm may require installation of an automated irrigation system to properly maintain the landscaping materials on the earth berm. All landscape materials approved by the building department or the planning commission for the earth berm shall be maintained in a living, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 


Transition Berm Details 
(6)  In order to properly screen an area effectively, the ends of a landscaped earth berm may be required by the building department or the planning commission to include an architectural masonry screen wall extension at the ends of the berm structure. The structure would be made an integral part of the berm and would extend out from the top of the earth berm to a peripheral property line or driveway entrance. Any such extension shall be subject to the applicable requirements of this article pertaining to screen wall structures, and the restricted clear corner vision requirements set forth in section 110-634, Corner clearance, in this chapter. 
(7)  Wherever an earth berm abuts any part of an off-street parking space or parking spaces, or a service drive, it shall be placed behind a raised concrete curb. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2702), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-574. - Landscape planting screen. 
    The building department or the planning commission may permit, in place of an architectural masonry screen wall structure or a landscaped earth berm, the following screening alternative: 
(1)  The establishment of a dense planting screen, when one or more of the following conditions is deemed to exist on the property: 


Greenbelt Planting Screen Details 
a.  Severe soil or topographic conditions in the area of the property where a screening device is required which precludes erecting an architectural masonry screen wall structure or a landscaped earth berm, or 
b.  Dense foliage, which ought to be preserved, and which can augment an effective planting screen that exists on the property where a screening device is required, and which would be diminished or destroyed by the erection of a masonry screen wall structure or landscaped earth berm, or 
c.  For aesthetic purposes, a planting screen will create a more pleasing buffer between a one-family residential district and a multiple-family residential district than an architectural masonry screen wall structure or a landscaped earth berm. 
(2)  The planting screen where permitted, shall consist of densely placed evergreen planting materials, the minimum height of which, at the time of planting, shall be not less than the minimum height required for a screen wall structure, and shall be planted and maintained in accordance with the applicable landscape screening requirements of section 10-577, Landscape planting standards, in this article. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2703), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-575. - Building wall serving as a screen. 
    The building wall of an existing or proposed building may serve as a screening device or partial element of a screening device when the wall shall generally parallel the parcel line or district line along which a screening device is required by this article, and provided further that; 
(1)  The building wall shall be at least six feet in height along its entire length; 
(2)  Shall consist of architectural masonry materials, shall have no openings, and shall have no other accessory buildings, uses or functions including loading and unloading facilities or any outdoor materials storage located between the building wall and the property or zoning district line. 
(3)  The yard area between the building wall and the property line shall consist of a landscaped lawn area that may include trees and shrubs placed for aesthetic purposes. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2704), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-576. - Approvals and waivers. 
    After review, the building department or the planning commission may approve one of the screening alternatives set forth in this article or a combination thereof. The building department or the planning commission may also recommend to the Trenton Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) that the screening requirements of this article be varied or waived, provided it is determined that at least one of the following conditions exists on the property: 
(1)  The abutting residential district for which a screening device is required is determined to be an area in land use transition and which is likely to become a nonresidential district in the future. The building department or the planning commission shall rely on the land use recommendations of the Trenton Master Plan Map when evaluating the future use of the land abutting the subject property. 
(2)  Changes in topographic conditions between the nonresidential and residential lands that are to be screened is such that a screen wall structure or landscaped earth berm, as set forth and regulated in this article, will not screen effectively and therefore will serve no useful purpose. The planting screen alternative may be applicable in such instances. 
(3)  Sufficient natural vegetation exists along the common property line between the nonresidential district and the affected residential district to serve as an equally effective or better screen than the required screen wall or any of the other permitted screening devices would provide. The building department or the planning commission, in determining this alternative, shall: 
a.  Find the existing foliage to be extensive enough to create an effective yearround screen; and 
b.  Require documentation in writing from the landowner that the natural screen is fully on the development property and will be preserved and maintained as a natural screen for as long as a screening device shall be required by the city for the property. The building department or the planning commission in reviewing the effectiveness of a natural screen may require the placement of additional planting materials to augment the screening capability of the natural foliage. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2705), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-577. - Landscape planting standards. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for the development, installation and maintenance of pervious landscaped areas within all cluster housing, multiple-family and all nonresidential districts and for all nonresidential uses permitted in a residential district. This section further recognizes that the proper management and use of trees, plants and other types of vegetation will improve the appearance, value, character and quality of the living environment in the City of Trenton and promote resourceful site planning and creative design. To this end, the following regulatory standards of this section are established: 
(1)  Required conditions for landscape planting screens. Wherever in this article a landscape planting screen is permitted or landscape planting materials are required, such landscape planting materials shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  All planting screens and landscape planting materials shall be planted in accordance with an approved planting plan and planted to completion prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building department. If a use is ready for occupancy between April 1 and September 30, a certificate of occupancy may be issued. If a use is ready for occupancy between October 1 and March 31, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued; however, all required planting materials should be placed to completion within 60 days after March 31. Failure to have such required planting material placed to completion within 60 days after March 31 shall be grounds for termination or revocation of a temporary certificate of occupancy. No additional certificate of occupancy, either temporary or final, shall be issued thereafter until all required landscape planting materials are placed to completion. A period of establishment shall start at the completion of all planting and shall continue through the succeeding summer growing season of June, July and August as set forth in this section. 
b.  Whenever any aesthetic planting areas or permitted planting screens approach a street or driveway intersection, the restricted clear corner vision requirements of section 110-634, Corner clearance, in this chapter shall be observed. In all cases care shall be taken relative to plant material, height and location so as not to impede the view of pedestrians or motor vehicle traffic. 
c.  Trees of a species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public utilities shall not be planted closer than 12 feet to such roadway or public utility unless the tree root system is completely contained within a barrier, for which the minimum interior containing dimensions shall be five feet square and five feet deep, and for which the construction requirements shall be four inch-thick concrete reinforced with No. 6 road mesh (six inches by six inches by six inches) or equivalent. 
d.  Ground cover used in lieu of grass shall be planted in such a manner that it will not exceed spacing of eight to ten inches on centers depending on the material used and its growth rate, so as to provide reasonably complete coverage. 
e.  Grass (lawn) areas shall be planted and grown as permanent lawns. Lawns may be seeded and mulched or covered with sod and shall be protected from erosion until the coverage is permanently established. 
f.  To prevent vehicular encroachment, including vehicle overhang onto or into landscaped areas including lawns, planting materials in areas involving motor vehicles shall be protected by the use of wheel stops, raised concrete curbs, or other satisfactory and acceptable methods of barrier. 
g.  All open ground areas on any site, including pervious surfaces used in the calculation of lot coverage requirements, yard areas, open ground areas disturbed by construction, and other similar areas where such landscaping is appropriate and feasible, shall be provided with coverage of grass, ground cover, shrubs, or other approved landscaping material. Materials that prevent or inhibit to an unreasonable extent the percolation of water into the soil shall be considered unacceptable materials for the treatment of these areas. 
h.  Trees and shrubs shall be provided with a minimum thickness of at least two inches of mulch no less than at least 24 inches beyond the trunks or stems of all newly planted trees and shrubs. Such mulch shall be provided at the time of planting and shall be maintained and resupplied as needed thereafter. 
i.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained by an automated in ground irrigation system approved by the building department. Individual planters and isolated planting areas shall have appropriate irrigation sources provided within each separate planting area. 
j.  All irrigation systems shall be maintained in an operable condition capable of providing adequate irrigation to landscaped areas as required. Any inoperable irrigation system or components thereof shall be promptly repaired or replaced so that adequate coverage of landscaped areas is restored and maintained. 
k.  All planting materials shall be properly planted so as to be in a healthy, growing condition at the time of establishment. All planting material shall consist of permanent, living plant materials and, when planted to completion, shall thereafter be maintained in an attractive and presentable condition, free of weeds, refuse and debris, and shall be continuously maintained in a sound, healthy and vigorous growing condition, free of plant diseases and insect pests. Top pruning or other severe pruning or maintenance practices of landscaping materials that results in stunted, abnormal, or other unreasonable deviation from the normal healthy growth of trees, shrubs, and other required landscaping components shall be considered as the destruction of these materials, and replacement shall be required as described in this article. Failure of the property owner to maintain the premises in good condition, as set forth in this subsection and in section 110-584 in this article, shall make the owner liable for the applicable penalties set forth in this chapter. 
l.  All plant materials shall meet current American Association of Nurserymen standards. 
m.  No approved landscaped area shall be abandoned, paved over, encroached upon by vehicular traffic, or otherwise used without submission of a site plan and approval by the building department or the planning commission pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article. 
(2)  Planting plan. Whenever a landscaped earth berm or landscape planting screen is permitted under the provisions of this article, a detailed planting plan of such screen shall be submitted to the building department or to the planning commission for review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit. The planting plan shall be drawn to the same scale as the site plan and shall accurately depict the location, spacing, starting size and identification by botanical and common name of each type of plant material proposed for use within the required screening area. Detailed plans shall include at least the following information: 
a.  The minimum scale of the drawing shall be one inch equals 30 feet, or the same scale as the site plan involved, if a requirement for site plan approval. 
b.  Existing and proposed contours shall be depicted with contour intervals not to exceed two feet. 
c.  The planting plan shall indicate the location, size, spacing and root type (bare root, balled in burlap, or container-grown) of all plant materials. 
d.  Where an earth berm is used in conjunction with a planting screen, the planting plan shall provide typical cross-section drawings depicting the slope, height and width of the berm and the type of ground cover intended to be placed on it. If architectural masonry screen walls are used in conjunction with an earth berm, the height of the wall and the type of materials to be used in the construction of the wall, as well as the type of materials to be used in the wall footings, shall be detailed in cross-section format. 
e.  The planting plan shall depict significant construction details, where applicable, to reflect specific site conditions; e.g., tree wells to preserve existing trees, culverts to maintain natural drainage patterns, etc. 
f.  The planting plan shall indicate existing tree cover that is to be used in conjunction with or in place of the screen planting requirements of this article, including types of trees and overall tree height. 
(3)  Layout standards. Landscape planting screens when permitted as an alternative to a masonry screen wall structure or landscaped earth berm, or in conjunction with either, shall consist of diversified planting materials and shall be laid out in conformance with the following guidelines: 
a.  Plant materials, except creeping vine-type planting materials, shall not be located within four feet of the property line. 
b.  Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows, they shall be staggered in rows. 
c.  Except as otherwise specified in this paragraph, evergreen trees shall not be less than six feet in height. When planted in informal groupings, they shall be spaced no less than ten feet on centers. When spaced further apart, additional screen planting materials shall be used to achieve the desired screening effect intended by this article. When planted in rows, they shall be planted not less than ten feet on centers. Narrow evergreen trees shall not be less than six feet in height at the time of planting. When planted in informal groupings, they shall be spaced not more than ten feet on centers. When planted in rows, they shall be planted not more than four feet on centers. 
d.  Except as otherwise restricted in section 110-634, Corner clearance, in this chapter, large shrubs shall not be less than 30 inches in height. When planted in informal groupings, they shall be spaced not more than six feet on centers. When planted in single rows, they shall not be spaced more than four feet on centers. 
e.  Small shrubs shall not have a spread of less than 18 inches, and shall not be planted more than four feet on centers. 
f.  Deciduous trees shall not be less than 21/2 inches in trunk caliper. For the purpose of this division, the caliper of the trunk shall be taken six inches above ground level, up to and including four-inch caliper size and 12 inches above the ground level for larger trees. 
When placed in informal groupings they shall be planted not more than 30 to 35 feet on centers. 

Tree Caliper Size 
g.  Small deciduous trees shall not be less than two inches in trunk caliper, measured in the same manner as set forth in this subsection when planted in informal groupings, they shall be spaced not more than 15 feet on centers. 
Recommended distances between like and unlike plant materials: 
Plant 
Material 
Types Evergreen 
Trees Narrow 
Evergreen 
Trees Large 
Deciduous 
Trees Small 
Deciduous 
Trees Large 
Shrubs Small 
Shrubs Evergreen 
Trees Min. 10' 
Max. 20' Min. 12' Min. 20' Min. 12' Min. 6' Min. 5' Narrow 
Evergreen 
Trees Min. 12' Min. 5' 
Max. 10' Min. 15' Min. 10' Min. 5' Min. 4' Large 
Deciduous 
Trees Min. 20' Min. 15' Min. 20' 
Max. 30' Min. 5' Min. 15' Min. 3' Small 
Deciduous 
Trees Min. 12' Min. 10' Min. 15' Min. 8' 
Max. 15' Min. 6' Min. 3' Large 
Shrubs Min. 6' Min. 5' Min. 5' Min. 6' Min. 4' 
Max. 6' Min. 5' Small Shrubs Min. 5' Min. 4' Min. 3' Min. 3' Min. 5' Min. 3'  
Suggested (not required) plant material: 
Trees: 
Evergreen: Abies (fir), Picea (spruce), Pinus (pine), Psuedostuga (Douglas fir), Tsuga (hemlock) 
Note: Exceptions are dwarf, globe, pendulous specie/cultivars. 
Narrow evergreen: Juniperus (juniper), Thuja (arborvitae) 
Note: Exceptions are dwarf, globe, and spreading specie/cultivars. 
Large deciduous: Acer (maple, except Japanese), Betula (birch), Gleditsia (honey locust, thornless Cultivars only), Gingko (ginkgo), Platanus (sycamore, linden), Quercus (oak), Tulip Tree (Liriodendron), Linden (Tilia) 
Small deciduous: Amelanchier (juneberry), Cercis (redbud), Cornus (dogwood, tree form), Crataegus (hawthorn), Malus (crabapple, disease-resistant cultivars), Prunus (flowering plum, tree form), Pyrus (flowering pear), Sorbus (mountain ash), Syringa (lilac, tree form) 
Large shrubs: 
Deciduous/broadleaf evergreen: Cornus (dogwood, shrub form), Cotoneaster (cotoneaster), Forsythia (forsythia), Lonicera (honeysuckle), Philadelphus (mock orange), Prunus (flowering plum), Rhamnus (buckthorn), Rhus (sumac), Spiraea (spirea), Syringa (lilac), Viburnum (viburnum), Weigela (weigela) 
Note: Defined as plants maturing at five feet and up. 
Evergreen: Juniperus (hetzii), pfitzer, savin juniper), Taxus cuspidata 'Capitata' (pyramidal Japanese yew) 
Note: Defined as plants maturing at five feet and up. 
Small shrubs: 
Deciduous/broadleaf evergreen: Berberis (barberry), Buxus (boxwood), Chaenomeles (quince), Cotoneaster (cotoneaster) Euonymus (euonymus), Forsythia (forsythia), Hydrangea (hydrangea), Ilex (holly), Ligustrum (privet), Lonicera (honeysuckle), Potentilla (potentilla), Ribes (currant), Salix (willow), Spiraea (spirea), Syringa (lilac), Viburnum (viburnum), Weigela (weigela) 
Note: Defined as plants maturing less than five feet. 
Evergreen: Abies (fir), Chamaecyparis (false cypress), Juniperus (low spreading juniper), Picea (spruce), Pinus (pine), Taxus (globe, spreading, upright yew), Thuja (globe/dwarf arborvitae) 
Trees not suggested: 
Ailanthus (tree of heaven), Fraxinus SPP (Ash), Robinia (black locust), Ulmus americana (American elm), and Acer negundo (Box elder) 

Plant Sizes 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2706), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-578. - Landscaping for aesthetic purposes. 
    In addition to any landscaped earth berm or landscape planting screen that may be used on the property in place of an architectural masonry screen wall structure to satisfy any screening requirements of this article, further on-site landscaping shall be required, as follows. 
(1)  Landscaping for aesthetic purposes shall be placed throughout the property and shall be placed in compliance with the following guidelines: 
a.  Care shall be taken to make certain that the location and size at maturity of any landscaping materials will comply with the applicable restricted clear corner vision requirements of section 110-634, Corner clearance, in this chapter. Furthermore, care will be taken with regard to the location and the height of all planting materials placed throughout the site so as not to unduly impair the vision of pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic within the site. 
b.  Planting materials placed for aesthetic purposes shall consist of the suggested planting materials outlined in section 110-577 in this article or similar and equally acceptable nursery grown stock, but shall not include stock that is not suggested in the same section. 
c.  All landscaping including lawn areas placed for aesthetic purposes shall be maintained by an automated in-ground irrigation system approved by the building department. 
d.  Pedestrian walkways, plazas, planters and other decorative landscape features may be included in such landscape areas when they are made an integral part of a site's overall landscaping. 
e.  Stormwater detention or retention basins when required on site, shall be made an integral feature of the site's landscaping. When the side slopes of a stormwater basin will be steeper than a ratio of three to one, three feet of horizontal plane for each foot of vertical rise, the basin will be fenced with a six-foot-high black or green close link woven wire (chain link) fence to discourage climbing. Any part of a stormwater basin that must be placed in a front or exterior side yard next to a street, and which must be fenced, shall be fenced along the frontage by a decorative wrought iron fence of equal height. When a stormwater basin shall retain water, the water shall be circulated so as to prevent stagnation and pest infestation. A fenced stormwater basin shall be aesthetically landscaped along its fence line with a diversified mix of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs. 
f.  The area of a site that lies in a public road right-of-way between the property line and the back edge of the curb line of the pavement or the edge of the pavement when there is no curb, shall be landscaped with grass and/or other live planting materials. Wherever such landscaping shall be installed it shall comply the all applicable landscaping, clear vision or line of sight restrictions that are set forth and regulated by the superintending authority in control of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2707), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-579. - Aesthetic landscape areas. 
(a)  Screening between parking areas and public rights-of-way. Screening of off-street parking areas next to public road or street rights-of-way shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Except as otherwise permitted herein, a minimum ten-foot-wide landscaped lawn panel shall be provided between any off-street parking area and any public road or street right-of-way line; except upon review and recommendation from city staff, the planning commission may narrow the width of the lawn, but in no case shall the lawn be less than five feet wide. In making its determination city staff and the planning commission shall find that narrowing a frontage lawn is necessary due to one of the following conditions: 
a.  The small size of the property makes providing a full width frontage lawn impractical. 
b.  The particular configuration of the property does not warrant providing a full width lawn. 
c.  A particular topographic condition that exists in the area of the lawn precludes meeting the full width requirement. 
d.  It is necessary to reduce the width in order to provide sufficient land area to meet the minimum applicable numerical off-street parking requirements of the chapter. 
(2)  Screening device height. Except as otherwise specified within a restricted clear corner vision triangle, the height of any screening device or combinations of screening devices placed in a lawn lying between an off-street parking lot and a street right-of-way line shall be in accordance with the following guidelines: 
Screening device Minimum height Wall 3.0 Feet Earth berm 3.0 Feet* Planting materials Shall follow the applicable guidelines of section 110-577 in this chapter.  
* Would require berm to be part of a terraced or retaining wall screen structure in a 10-foot-wide or less lawn panel. See Transition Berm Details illustration in section 110-573 of this article. 
(3)  Permitted screening devices. The screening device may be in the form of an evergreen or planting materials hedge, an architectural masonry wall, or earth berm. Planting materials shall consist of species that will mature within a limited height. Where the width of the lawn panel permits, plant materials may be taller, except all screening devices shall observe the height restrictions pertaining to clear corner vision requirements. 
(4)  Screening accents. When an architectural masonry screen wall is erected, planting materials shall be placed between the screen wall and the road or street right-of-way line. The planting materials are to be placed in a manner that will create an aesthetic visual setting for the wall. When an earth berm is used, evergreen planting materials shall be placed at the ends of the berms to augment the screening effect of the berm. 
(5)  Additional landscaping required. Development that occurs in the I Industrial Districts shall provide in addition to the landscaped lawn panels required in this section, additional on-site landscaped areas. These additional landscaped areas shall be equal to not less than ten percent of the area of the site less any land in public rights-of-way and exclusive of land covered by buildings. Pedestrian walkways, plazas, planters and other decorative features may be included in such landscape areas when they are made an integral part of the site's overall landscaping. 
(b)  Landscaping parking lot areas. Parking lots shall provide landscaping in accordance with the following requirements and in accordance with the applicable requirements of subsection (a) of this section: 

(1)  One square foot of interior landscaping shall be provided for every 15 square feet of parking area. 
(2)  The minimum permitted size of any landscaped area within an interior landscaping area shall be 170 square feet. 
(3)  All parking lots shall provide one tree for every 2,800 square feet of paved parking lot area, or one tree for every 100 square feet of interior landscaping area, whichever generates the greater number of trees. 
(4)  All parking lot trees required by the standards set forth in subsection (b) (3) of this section, shall be large deciduous trees; except where special conditions or considerations may prevail, the planning commission may permit the use of evergreen trees. 
(5)  Parking lot trees generated by the standards set forth in Subsection (b)(3) of this section, shall be distributed as evenly as possible throughout the parking lot. At a minimum the islands shall be located at the ends of parking rows so as to offer not only a visually attractive and shading effect, but to help provide for improved traffic circulation. The islands shall also be placed in as uniform a manner as possible so as to facilitate snow removal. 
(6)  Upon recommendation from city staff, or the planning commission may give credit for existing trees if the trees meet the minimum requirements for parking lot trees. 
(7)  Trees at the time of planting shall not be located closer than four feet from any raised curb line in a parking lot. 
(8)  All interior parking lot landscaping shall consist of live plant material and mulch. Mulch shall not include lava, pebbles, stones or rocks. 
(9)  Pedestrian walkways, plazas, planters and stormwater basins, and other decorative features, may be included, in such landscape areas when they are made an integral part of a site's overall landscaping. 
(10)  All interior or exterior landscape planting areas that abut off-street parking spaces, service drives, loading and unloading areas, or any other area where motor vehicles will be parked or moving, shall be protected by raised curbs. Every off-street parking space which fronts into a landscaped planting area, shall be: 
a.  Provided with a concrete wheel stop which shall be placed within each off-street parking space not less than two feet from the front of the parking space, or; 
b.  In place of a concrete wheel stop the minimum required length of an off-street parking space, with city staff approval, may be reduced by two feet in length, provided two feet of concrete shall abut the rear of the raised curb line at the front of the parking space for the full width of the parking space; Except the two feet of concrete shall be in addition to, and shall not be any part or portion of any minimum landscape planting area requirements of this section. 


Parking Spaces 
(c)  Required conditions for aesthetic landscape planting. Wherever in this article aesthetic landscape planting materials are proposed or required, they shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All landscape planting materials shall be planted in accordance with an approved planting plan and planted to completion prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building department. If a use is ready for occupancy between April 1 and September 30, a certificate of occupancy may be issued. If a use is ready for occupancy between October 1 and March 31, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued; however, all proposed and required planting materials should be placed to completion within 60 days after March 31. Failure to have such required planting material placed to completion within 60 days after March 31 shall be grounds for termination or revocation of a temporary certificate of occupancy. No additional certificate of occupancy, either temporary or final, shall be issued thereafter until all required landscape planting materials are placed to completion. A period of establishment shall start at the completion of all planting and shall continue through the succeeding summer growing season of June, July and August as set forth in this section. 
(2)  Whenever any aesthetic planting areas approach a street or driveway intersection, the restricted clear corner vision requirements of section 110-634, Corner clearance, in this chapter shall be observed. In all cases care shall be taken relative to plant material, height and location so as not to impede the view of pedestrians or motor vehicle traffic. 
(3)  Trees of a species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public utilities shall not be planted closer than 12 feet to such roadway or public utility unless the tree root system is completely contained within a barrier, for which the minimum interior containing dimensions shall be five feet square and five feet deep, and for which the construction requirements shall be four-inch-thick concrete reinforced with No. 6 road mesh (six inches by six inches by six inches) or equivalent. 
(4)  Ground cover used in lieu of grass shall be planted in such a manner that it will not exceed spacing of eight to ten inches on centers depending on the material used and its growth rate, so as to provide reasonably complete coverage. 
(5)  Grass (lawn) areas shall be planted and grown as permanent lawns. Lawns may be seeded and mulched or covered with sod and shall be protected from erosion until the coverage is permanently established. 
(6)  To prevent vehicular encroachment, including vehicle overhang onto or into landscaped areas including lawns, planting materials in areas involving motor vehicles shall be protected by the use of wheel stops, raised concrete curbs, or other satisfactory and acceptable methods of barrier. 
(7)  All open ground areas on any site, including pervious surfaces used in the calculation of lot coverage requirements, yard areas, open ground areas disturbed by construction, and other similar areas where such landscaping is appropriate and feasible, shall be provided with coverage of grass, ground cover, shrubs, or other approved landscaping material. Materials that prevent or inhibit to an unreasonable extent the percolation of water into the soil shall be considered unacceptable materials for the treatment of these areas. 
(8)  Trees and shrubs shall be provided with a minimum thickness of at least two inches of mulch no less than at least 24 inches beyond the trunks or stems of all newly planted trees and shrubs. Such mulch shall be provided at the time of planting and shall be maintained and resupplied as needed thereafter. 
(9)  All landscaped areas shall be maintained by an automated in-ground irrigation system approved by the building department. Individual planters and isolated planting areas shall have appropriate irrigation sources provided within each separate planting area. 
(10)  All irrigation systems shall be maintained in an operable condition capable of providing adequate irrigation to landscaped areas as required. Any inoperable irrigation system or components thereof shall be promptly repaired or replaced so that adequate coverage of landscaped areas is restored and maintained. 
(11)  All planting materials shall be properly planted so as to be in a healthy, growing condition at the time of establishment. All planting material shall consist of permanent, living plant materials and, when planted to completion, shall thereafter be maintained in an attractive and presentable condition, free of weeds, refuse and debris, and shall be continuously maintained in a sound, healthy and vigorous growing condition, free of plant diseases and insect pests. Top pruning or other severe pruning or maintenance practices of landscaping materials that results in stunted, abnormal, or other unreasonable deviation from the normal healthy growth of trees, shrubs, and other required landscaping components shall be considered as the destruction of these materials, and replacement shall be required as described in this article. Failure of the property owner to maintain the premises in good condition, as set forth in subsection 110-581 of this section, and in section 110-584 in this article, shall make the owner liable for the applicable penalties set forth in this chapter. 
(12)  All plant materials shall meet current American Association of Nurserymen standards. 
(13)  No approved landscaped area shall be abandoned, paved over, encroached upon by vehicular traffic, or otherwise used without submission of a site plan and approval by the building department or the planning commission pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2708), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-580. - Planting plan review. 
(a)  Planting plan. The planting plan shall be reviewed by the building department or by the planning commission for conformance with the following guidelines: 
(1)  The proper types, spacing, height, placement and location of plant materials relative to the length and width of the screen so as to insure that the required horizontal and vertical obscuring of the land use it is intended to screen will be at least 60 percent obscured at the time of planting. 
(2)  The choice and selection of plant materials so as to ensure that root systems will not interfere with public utilities and so that fruit and other debris, except leaves, will not constitute a nuisance within public rights-of-way or to abutting property owners. 
(3)  The choice and selection of plant materials so as to ensure that the type of planting materials selected will be of a type that will thrive in the area in which they are to be located. 
(4)  The proper relationship between deciduous and evergreen plant materials exists so as to assure that the desired obscuring effect will be accomplished. 
(5)  The size of plant material (both starting and ultimate) is sufficient to ensure adequate maturity and optimum screening effect by the proposed plant materials. 
(6)  Compliance with the applicable landscape design principles set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2709), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-581. - Maintenance and replacement. 
    Whenever in this article landscape planting materials are called for, or are to be installed either as part of a planting screen or as an aesthetic landscaping feature, once installed, all landscaping shall be maintained in an attractive and presentable condition, free of weeds, refuse and debris, and shall be continuously maintained in a sound, healthy and vigorous living condition, neat and orderly in appearance, and free of plant diseases and insect pests. Should any live planting or group of live planting materials, including sod and other live lawn cover become distressed, diseased or die, the single planting or group of planting materials, including sod and other live lawn cover shall be replaced. Replacement shall take place within 30 days from the date of notification from the city that replacement is required. If deemed justified, the city may extend the replacement time period, which shall be specified on the notice. Any dead or dying planting material shall be removed from the property and replaced by the same type of planting material, unless an acceptable alternative planting material has been approved by the city. Any breakdown or malfunction of any part of an irrigation system shall cause the entity responsible for the maintenance and proper operation of the irrigation system to immediately correct the problem so that adequate maintenance of all live plant materials will be continued. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2710), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-582. - Cost estimates and surety. 
    Whenever a landscape planting plan is called for in this article, cost estimates prepared by a licensed landscape architect or certified nurseryman shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the site plan review package. The cost estimate shall cover the cost of all new planting materials proposed on the approved landscape planting plan, the cost of their installation, including the cost of installing the automated in-ground irrigation system required in this article. Verification by the building department or its representative of the correctness of the cost estimate or estimates submitted shall cause surety in a form acceptable to the city to be submitted by the applicant in an amount sufficient to insure completion within the time specified in this article and in accordance with the approved planting plan. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2711), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-583. - Exterior utility equipment screens. 
    All exterior climate control equipment and any other exterior mechanical equipment including utility outlets, transformers, other electrical equipment, gas regulators, etc., serving any single-family cluster housing development, multiple-family residential development, or any nonresidential use are regarded as accessory uses and shall be restricted to locations on the property for accessory uses as set forth in section 110-630, Accessory uses, in this chapter and shall be effectively screened from view from any abutting residential district or from any street in the following manner: 
(1)  Ground level equipment shall be screened from view by any screening device permitted in this article. The screening device need be no higher than necessary to effectively screen the equipment from view. When the exterior walls of the principal use of the property for which the equipment is intended to serve contains any brick material and the screening device is to consist of an architectural masonry screen wall structure, its exterior sides shall consist of the same exterior masonry materials that appear on the principal building. When a landscaped earth berm or planting screen is to be used, except for minimum height limitations, they shall comply with the applicable requirements of this article. 
(2)  Rooftop equipment that will be visible from the ground on the property or from any abutting residential district or street shall be screened from view by material that shall extend upwards at least one-eighth times higher than the equipment it is intended to screen. Rooftop screening materials may consist of lightweight weather resistant metal or structurally ridged vinyl or glass fiber materials approved by the building department. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2712), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-584. - Trash receptacle screens. 
    Whenever a trash receptacle or receptacles will be used in conjunction with any use in any district, the receptacle shall be screened from view in the following manner: 
(1)  They shall be placed in architectural masonry screening structures as such structures are permitted and regulated in this article, except the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  The exterior walls of the structure shall consist of the same masonry materials used in the front facade of the principal building when such materials are structurally applicable as a screen wall material and accepted by the building department as such; except concrete masonry units (CMU) shall be prohibited and except when the receptacle screen wall structure is to be made an integral part of an approved architectural masonry screening wall structure, it may consist of the same materials that are to be used in the screen wall structure. 
b.  The minimum height of the screen wall structure shall be six feet. 
c.  The screen wall enclosure shall include a gate consisting of opaque material. 
d.  Posts of adequate size and strength shall be placed at the outside edge of the gates next to the enclosure structure to protect the structure. 
e.  The floor of the enclosure shall be constructed of reinforced concrete in a manner acceptable to the building department and shall extend outward from the gate a distance of ten feet and shall be one foot wider than the width of the gate on both sides. 
f.  Wherever a trash receptacle screen wall structure is erected the area inside the structure and around the outside of the structure shall be maintained in an orderly and structurally sound condition, clean and free from refuse clutter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2713), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-585-110-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVIII. - SITE PLAN REVIEW (ALL DISTRICTS)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Site plans, MCL 125.584d. 

Sec. 110-601. - Intent. 
    Site plan review and the procedure for reviewing them is intended to provide an essential vehicle for the design and expeditious review of new land development proposals, redevelopment proposals, and for the occupation of vacant existing buildings in the city. These procedures are further designed and intended to promote compatibility between land use with respect to their internal and external functions and for compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter, and other local codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2800), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-602. - Procedure and requirements. 
    For the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Trenton, and for the preservation and management of its land resources, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  When a site plan is required. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval. Every site plan submitted to the planning commission shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code. A site plan shall be required for the following uses: 
a.  Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of this code. 
b.  Any development, except single-family and two-family residential, for which off-street parking areas must be provided as required in article XXVII in this chapter. 
c.  Any use permitted subject to special conditions in any zoning district, including nonresidential uses permitted in the single-family districts. 
d.  Any principal permitted use in the MH, RM, OS-1, B business, I industrial, WM, P-1, PD, MD, or overlay district. 
e.  All public-related uses in all districts, including but not limited to schools and municipal buildings. 
f.  Building additions or accessory buildings that require more off-street parking in addition to that already provided on the site. 
(2)  Public hearing required. All uses permitted in any zoning district as a conditional use, or a use permitted subject to the conditions attached to it, shall require review and approval by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing. 
(3)  Departmental review. 
a.  Every site plan submitted to the planning commission shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. No site plan shall be approved until the plan has first been reviewed by the building department in coordination with the engineering department, fire department, police department, and the department of public services for compliance with the applicable standards of their respective departments. 
b.  Site plan approval and administrative site plan approval. To improve efficiency and remove unnecessary review procedures, the zoning code provides for two site plan approval processes. The term "site plan review" and "approval" are used in this zoning code to indicate the site plan review process that requires approval by the planning commission. 
The terms "administrative site plan review" and "approval" are used to indicate a plan review process that requires approval by the city's administrative site plan review committee. The administrative site plan review committee shall be composed of the building official, planning consultant, and the planning commission chair or their delegate. 
The terms "site plan review standards" and revisions to an approved site plan" shall refer to both the administrative site plan review and site plan review. 
c.  Site plan review requirements by use or development activity. The list of uses or development activities in table 2 below indicates which activities require site plan approval or administrative site plan approval and which activities are exempt from review. 
d.  The building official in conjunction with the planning commission chair shall determine if the project is eligible for administrative site plan review, and/or whether a pre-application meeting is necessary. 
e.  Any member of the ASPR committee may at his/her discretion bring site plans that meet the requirements of the administrative site plan review process to the planning commission for their review under the site plan approval process. 
(4)  The following information shall be included on the site plan: 
a.  Name of the development, including the name, address and telephone number of the developer, designer/firm, and designer's registration number and seal. 
b.  Scale of drawing: 
1.  If less than three acres - 1? = 50'. 
2.  If more than three acres - 1? = 100'. 
3.  Sheet size shall not exceed 24? by 36?. 
4.  Legend. 
c.  Date, north point, and scale. 
d.  A complete legal description of the entire site, i.e.; metes and bounds description if an acreage parcel, or lot number(s) and subdivision name. All legal descriptions shall include the gross number of acres and section number(s). The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties. 
e.  Vicinity sketch or site location map, which does not have to be drawn to scale. 
f.  Topographic survey of the site and adjacent properties in sufficient detail to accurately indicate the existing contour, drainage pattern of the site and immediate vicinity. The survey shall be referenced to Wayne County datum or the City of Trenton datum and to include: 
1.  Reference and site benchmark. 
2.  The location of all existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, ditches/swales, gas mains, power/telephone poles and wires, trees and sidewalks. Indicate all pipe sizes and the diameter of trees at breast height (DBH). 
3.  Rim and invert elevations of the existing upstream and downstream sanitary and storm manholes with the lineal footage between manholes, including the proposed tap invert elevation and the percent of fall, on both the sanitary and storm leads, minimum of one percent required. On all proposed sanitary and storm sewer work that is more than six inches lead installation, include all proposed rim and invert elevations on all manholes, catch basins and inlets, with the proposed pipe sizes, type of pipe, lineal footage between the proposed structures, and the percent of fall. 
4.  Rim and invert elevations, with pipe sizes of all existing catch basins and inlets. 
5.  Rim and top of pipe elevations of all existing gate wells. On all proposed water main installation indicate all proposed gate well rim elevations, lineal footage between gate wells and fire hydrant locations. All proposed water mains shall have a minimum of six feet of cover. Should the City of Trenton Fire Department require the installation of a fire suppression line, "hydraulic calculations" must be submitted with the site plan for review. 
6.  The location of all adjacent buildings that is closest to the parcel or lot being developed. 
7.  Elevations of the existing top of curb, gutter and the road centerline on the lot. Where any road or service drives are to be installed, indicate the proposed top of curb grades, the road width, the right-of-way width, and the percent of fall on the curb. 
8.  Dimensions of all existing and proposed underground utilities off of the property lines. 
9.  Electric supply (above and below ground). 
10.  Telephone (above and below ground). 
11.  Gas supply. 
12.  Cable TV. 
13.  Other. 
g.  The existing zoning classification of the parcel, and the existing zoning classification of adjacent property. 
h.  Existing land use on adjacent parcels. 
i.  The location of all buildings and structures on the site, and the location of all existing buildings and structures within 100 feet of the parcel. 
j.  All building and structure heights. 
k.  The location of all off-street loading and unloading facilities. 
l.  The location of all driveways, drives and turning lanes. 
m.  The location of all drives, driveways and intersections across abutting streets from the parcel. 
n.  The names, locations, right-of-way widths, centerlines, and pavement widths of all bordering roads, streets, and easements. 
o.  The location of all sidewalks. 
p.  Critical site dimensions: 
1.  Along property lines. 
2.  Between buildings. 
3.  Between parking spaces and buildings. 
4.  Between principal and accessory buildings. 
6.  Typical parking space width and length. 
7.  Vehicle maneuvering lane and service drive widths. 
8.  Curb radius of entrances. 
9.  Between buildings and property lines. 
10.  Between buildings and any retention or detention basins. 
q.  Building layouts (typical floor plan) including: 
1.  Principal entrances and service entrances. 
2.  The relationship between units in a building. 
3.  Exterior building wall elevation drawings of all exposed walls. 
r.  Exterior building wall elevation drawings showing the type and color of exterior building wall materials to be used on all exterior walls and the area(s) to be covered by any signs to be attached to building walls. 
s.  The location, size and types of signs to be utilized shall be provided for the site and buildings on the site. In those instances where signs are not determined due to unknown occupants at the time of site plan review, it shall be required that all signs receive the review and approval of the Trenton Planning Commission prior to occupancy of a structure. 
t.  The location and extent of any outdoor storage areas, including the type, height and extent of screening. 
u.  The type and height of screening device for trash receptacles. 
v.  The location, type and extent of any required screening devices. 
w.  The location and type of all outdoor site lighting. 
x.  A landscape planting plan when prepared as a separate drawing shall be at the same scale as the plan view drawing. A qualified person as stipulated in article XXVII in this chapter shall prepare all landscape plans and shall contain all applicable information and meet all applicable requirements of that article. 
y.  For multiple-family dwelling developments: 
1.  The maximum lot coverage of all buildings shown. 
2.  Site dwelling density computations, including the total number of dwelling units proposed and the number of bedrooms per unit. 
3.  When development will be in phases, the requirements shall be shown for each phase. 
z.  For nonresidential uses: 
1.  Proposed use. 
2.  The gross and net usable square feet of floor area. 
3.  Seating capacity or maximum occupancy permitted. 
4.  Number of medical examining rooms, dental chairs, and square feet of waiting rooms or number of beds. 
5.  The number of employees in the largest working shift. 
(5)  Site plan review standards. The following criteria shall be used by the planning commission as a basis upon which site plans will be reviewed and approved. The commission shall adhere to sound planning and design principals, yet may allow for design flexibility in the administration of the following standards: 
a.  All elements of the site shall be harmoniously and efficiently designed in relation to the topography, size, and type of land, and the character of the adjacent properties and the proposed use. The site will be developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding properties for uses permitted on such property. 
b.  The site plan shall comply with the district requirements for minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, yard space, density and all other requirements as set forth in article XXIV in this chapter unless otherwise provided in the code. 
c.  The existing natural landscape shall be preserved in its natural state as much as possible, by minimizing tree and soil removal and by topographic modifications that result in maximum harmony with adjacent properties. 
d.  There shall be reasonable visual and sound privacy. Fences, walks, barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and the safety and privacy of occupants and users and the conservation of energy. 
e.  All buildings or groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit convenient and direct emergency vehicle access. 
f.  Where possible and practical, drainage design shall recognize existing natural drainage patterns. 
g.  There shall be a pedestrian circulation system that is insulated as completely as possible from the vehicular circulation system. In order to ensure public safety, pedestrian underpasses or overpasses may be required in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, local shopping facilities, and other uses that generate considerable amounts of pedestrian movement. 
h.  The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the vicinity of the site. Streets and drives that are a part of an existing or planned street system serving adjacent developments shall be of an appropriate width to the volume of traffic they are planned to carry and shall have a dedicated right-of-way equal to that specified in a recognized source of reference. 
i.  Appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure that the removal of surface waters will not adversely affect adjoining properties or the capacity of the public storm drainage system. Provisions shall be made for the construction of stormwater facilities, and the prevention of erosion and dust. Surface water on all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct the flow of vehicles or pedestrian traffic and will not create nuisance ponding in paved areas. 
j.  Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas and outside refuse storage areas, or other storage areas that face or are visible from adjacent homes, or from public thoroughfares, shall be screened by walls, fencing, or landscaping of affective height. 
k.  Exterior lighting shall be so arranged that it is deflected away from adjoining properties and so that it does not impede vision of drivers along adjacent streets. 
l.  Adequate services and utilities and improvements shall be available or provided, located and constructed with sufficient capacity and durability to properly serve the development. 
m.  Any use permitted in any zoning district must also comply with all applicable federal, state, county and city health and pollution laws and regulations with respect to noise, smoke and particulate matter, vibration, noxious and odorous matter, glare and heat, fire and explosive hazards, gasses, electromagnetic radiation and drifting and airborne matter, toxic and hazardous materials, erosion control, floodplains, and requirements of the state fire marshal. 
n.  In those instances wherein the planning commission finds that an excessive number of ingress and/or egress points may occur with relation to major or secondary thoroughfares, thereby diminishing the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare, the planning commission may recommend marginal access drives. For a narrow frontage, which will require a single outlet, the planning commission may recommend that money in escrow be placed with the municipality so as to provide for a marginal service drive equal in length to the frontage of the property involved. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until the improvement is physically provided or monies have been deposited with the clerk in accordance with subsection 110-621(e), in the City Code. 
(6)  Revisions to an approved site plan. A revision in the approved site plan prior to the issuance of a building permit or during construction shall be subject to review and re-approval in accordance with the procedure as required under subsections (1) through (4) of this section. 
(7)  Procedure for site plan approval. For the purpose of this chapter, a revision in a site plan shall include such things as but not limited to a change in building location or configuration causing the buildings to be located closer to the property line; a change in the location, layout or number of off-street parking spaces provided; a change in curb cut locations; a change in intended tenancy, thereby affecting residential requirements, in the case of multiple-family residential development; a change in density or number of units. The procedure for obtaining site plan approval is outlined in the following requirements: 
a.  If the project requires site plan review: 
1.  Seven copies of the site plan, including all items required, together with site plan review fees as established by the city council, shall be forwarded to the city review agencies and they shall forward their review comments in writing to the engineering department within seven calendar days from receipt of the site plan. 
2.  If all departmental comments are positive and no concerns are expressed by the review agencies relative to the site plan, the engineering department shall notify the applicant that the site plan is in order. If departmental concerns are expressed relative to the site plan, copies of the departmental comments shall be forwarded to the applicant for correction, compliance or preparation for appeal. 
3.  Revised site plans shall be submitted to the engineering department for referral to the city review agencies in the same manner as followed for initial site plan review. The designated agencies shall review the revised site plans and forward their comments to the engineering department within seven days from receipt of the revised site plans. 
4.  Upon receipt of 13 additional copies of the site plan from the applicant, the engineering department shall forward 11 copies to the planning commission's clerk to be hand-delivered to the commission members and the planning consultant at a regular planning commission meeting, for review at their next regularly scheduled commission meeting. 
5.  Site plans shall be reviewed by the planning commission and approved, disapproved, or approved with conditions. If the planning commission finds a site plan is not in conformance with the provisions set forth in this section, it may, at its discretion, return the site plan to the applicant with a written statement of the modifications necessary to obtain approval. Upon submission of the modified site plan, the planning commission shall review the plan and approve, disapprove, or approve with specific conditions in writing. 
b.  If the project is eligible for administrative site plan review: 
1.  The engineering department shall schedule at least one meeting with the applicant. The engineering department shall schedule a meeting of the administrative site plan review committee, as described in section 110-602(3). The applicant may be invited to attend the meeting. The administrative site plan review committee shall either approve, table, or deny the site plan. A vote of a majority of the members of the committee shall be required for action. The engineering department shall then submit a report of administrative action on administrate site plans to the planning commission at the next meeting. 
2.  If the site plan is tabled by the administrative site plan review committee, the applicant may submit a revised site plan addressing all required concerns for further review of the administrative site plan review committee. 
3.  If the site plan is denied by the administrative site plan review committee, the applicant can request a review by the planning commission. 
4.  Any member of the ASPR committee shall have the option to require a complete site plan review and approval by the planning commission for sites which do not comply with previous approved site plans, for sites with parking deficiencies, for sites abutting residential districts and for sites with potential problems with drainage, traffic, noise aesthetics or other general health and safety issues. 
c.  If the site plan requires a pre-application meeting: 
1.  The engineering department shall determine whether a preapplication meeting is necessary based on the scope of the plan, the type of use proposed, and other similar circumstances. 
2.  The applicant, building official, city engineer, fire department and planning consultant may be invited to the meeting. 
3.  Notes or minutes of the meeting, if taken, shall be saved with the file. 
4.  Following the meeting, the proposed site plan or a revised site plan addressing concerns of the meeting shall go through the steps of planning commission review. 
d.  If the site plan requires planning commission review: 
1.  The engineering department shall first transmit the site plan to appropriate city departments for a review and written report to the planning commission. 
2.  If the site plan contains the required submittal information, the site plan shall be placed on the agenda of a regular planning commission at the next available meeting. 
3.  The planning commission, by majority vote of a quorum, shall review the site plan for compliance with the standards set forth in section 110-602(7) after a public hearing is held and take action to table, approve, or deny the approval of site plans submitted for its review. 
4.  If the site plan is tabled by the planning commission, the applicant may submit a revised plan addressing all required concerns for further review of the planning commission. 
5.  If the site plan is denied, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for denial. 
(8)  Building permits time limitations. Following approval of a site plan the building department shall issue a building permit submission of proper architectural plans, and shall ensure that the development is undertaken and completed in accordance with the approved plans. For any approved site plan, building permits must be obtained encompassing a minimum of at least 25 percent of the gross floor area shown on the site plan within six months of the date of site plan approval or the site plan shall be deemed null and void without any further action by the city. 
(9)  Site plan approval time limitations. Except as otherwise set forth and regulated in the PD and MD districts, approval of any site plan under the provisions of this article, shall be for one year commencing on the date of site plan approval. With or without issuance of a building permit as specified in subsection (8) of this section, if no construction or development takes place on the property within the one-year time period, and an approval extension is not requested by the applicant in the manner set forth in this subsection, site plan approval shall terminate and no construction or development shall take place on the property until site plan approval is again granted by the building department or the planning commission. The applicant may request one one-year approval extension, provided the request is submitted at least 30 days before the date the site plan will expire. If actual construction and development commences within the initial one-year time period and continues without lapse, and the improvements are in conformity with the approved site plan, site plan approval shall continue until all construction and development is completed and accepted by the city. In the event that a lapse in development and construction on the property shall take place, site plan approval shall continue for a period of one year from the last inspection date registered on the building permit. One year after that date, if no construction or development has commenced on the property, site plan approval shall expire and no further construction or development shall thereafter take place on the property until site plan approval has been requested by the applicant and granted by the building department or the planning commission. When site plan approval of a proposed development shall expire for any reason, the site plan shall not again receive approval until or unless the following conditions are met: 
a.  Any subsequent amendments to the standards of this chapter, site engineering standards, or city council policies that may be applicable to the proposed development shall be met before site plan approval may be granted. 
b.  Any change in use not part of any previously approved site plan proposed for the development or any part thereof, shall meet all of the requirements of this chapter, site engineering standards or city council policies that may be applicable to the new use before site plan approval may be granted. 
The building department shall not issue a building permit for any type of development or construction on the basis of any previously approved site plan when that approval has expired, unless the site plan has received an extension from the planning commission or is a re-approved site plan whose approval had previously expired. 
(10)  Fees. Fees for the review of an expired site plan may be waived by the city when it shall find that no substantial changes have been made to the previously approved site plan or to abutting land use. In those instances where conditions have changed, the fee for review of an expired site plan shall be the same as charged for the initial review submittal. 
Table 2 
Uses or Activities Requiring Site Plan Approval 
Use or Activity Planning 
Commission 
Approval Administrative 
Site Plan 
Review 
Committee Exempt 
from 
Site Plan 
Review 1. Construction or erection of permitted accessory buildings and structures for two-family dwelling units and mobile homes within an approved mobile home park X 2. Construction, reconstruction, erection and/or expansion of one- or two-family dwelling on parcel used solely for residential purposes X 3. Development regulated by the, Land Division Act. See MCL § 560.101 et seq. 4. New construction of a permitted industrial, commercial, office or multiple-family development X 5. All special land uses X 6. Change in use to a special land use X 7. Changes of use to a permitted use X 8. An increase in floor area over 1,000 square feet or over 25 percent of existing gross floor area, whichever is less, in a special land use X 9. Increase in floor area not covered by Item 8 above X 10. Cellular telephone tower, essential service substations, transmission lines, utility company buildings and storage yards X 11. Improvements to outdoor public recreational uses and public parks X 12. Expansion, replacing or alteration of landscaping areas consistent with this chapter X 13. Improvements or installation of walls, lighting, or curbing X 14. Alterations to off-street parking layout or installation of pavement provided the total number of spaces shall remain constant and the construction plans and lot construction are approved by the city staff X 15. Relocation of a waste receptacle to more inconspicuous locations or installation of screening X 16. Changes to facade, architectural features or wall signs (elevation plan showing changes and construction materials is required) X 17. City-approved changes to private utility systems X 18. Grading, excavating, filling, soil removal, creation of swimming pool, creation of ponds, or tree clearing over 100 square feet in horizontal area X 19. Change from a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use X 20. Modifications to upgrade a building to improve barrier-free design or comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act or other federal, state or county regulations X 21. Construction of accessory building or structure for the keeping of animals X 22. Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds, installation of a swimming pool X 23. Preliminary plans for a mobile home park X 24. Erection of essential public service local distribution lines X 25. Construction, erection or relocation of permitted accessory buildings and structures less than 200 square feet in area accessory to a multiple-family, commercial, office, essential public service, or municipal or industrial use X 26. Permitted family foster care homes, family day-care homes and adult day-care homes in single-family zoning districts X 27. Internal construction or changes in the floor plan that do not increase gross floor area, increase the intensity of use or affect parking requirements on a site X 28. Repairing or restriping of parking lots X 29. Construction or erection of directional signs, retaining walls, fences, sidewalks, antennas, lights, piles, cooling/heating or other mechanical equipment, telephone booth, newspaper boxes or similar structures which conform to other city standards X 30. A change in permitted use within an approved shopping center (if parking is adequate and signs and landscaping are conforming) X 31. Uses and facilities which use, store, or generate hazardous substances in quantities greater than 250 pounds per month or 25 gallons per month, whichever is less X 32. Industrial development within 500 feet of a residential district (whether a permitted or special land use) X  
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2801), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-9, § 1, 12-16-2013) 
Secs. 110-603-110-620. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIX. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 110-621. - Review and approval procedures for principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
(a)  Intent and applicability. It is the intent of this section to establish and provide procedures and standards for uses identified in this chapter as principal permitted uses subject to special conditions in a particular zoning district, subject to review and approval by the planning commission, and where so required, by the city council. All uses which are permitted subject to special conditions shall be subject, unless otherwise required by the planning commission, to all of the minimum, general and special conditions standards and procedures of this section regarding each use. 
(b)  Notice of request for special land use approval. Upon receipt of an application for a principal use permitted subject to special conditions, a public hearing to be held by the planning commission shall be duly advertised in the manner set forth and regulated in Article XXX in this chapter. The hearing may be called at the initiative of the planning commission, or upon receipt of a request by the applicant for approval of a principal use permitted subject to special conditions, or by a property owner or by the occupant of a structure located within 300 feet of the boundary of the property being considered for the conditional use. In either case, notice of a public hearing shall be advertised in the manner set forth and regulated in Article XXX in this chapter before a decision or a recommendation shall be made by the planning commission. 
(c)  Decision. The planning commission or, when specified elsewhere in this chapter, the city council, shall deny, approve or approve with conditions request for approval of a principal use permitted subject to special conditions. The decision on a conditional use shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to the conditional use under consideration. The decision shall specify the basis for the decision, and any conditions imposed thereon by the planning commission or the city council. 
(d)  Site plan required and duration of approval. For all uses permitted subject to special conditions as set forth in the various zoning districts, a site plan shall be required. The site plan shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article XXVIII in this chapter. An approved site plan with or without conditions shall remain valid for the specific time period or periods set forth and regulated in Article XXVIII. 
(e)  Performance guarantees. Performance guarantees may be required by the planning commission or by the city council to ensure compliance with the applicable requirements of this code pertaining to any conditional use approval, including any conditions that may be attached to an approval. 
(f)  Standards. In addition to or in conjunction with any specific standards which may be applicable to a conditional use, the following standards shall also serve the planning commission and the city council as the basis for decisions involving the review of any principal permitted subject to special conditions, and any discretionary decisions that may be involved in the review of a principal use permitted subject to special conditions in this chapter. Each such use or activity shall: 
(1)  Be compatible with adjacent uses and the zoning of the land around it. 
(2)  Be consistent with and promote the intent and purpose of this code. 
(3)  Be compatible with the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy. 
(4)  Be consistent with existing and future capabilities of public services and facilities that will be affected by the proposed use. 
(5)  Protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare as well as the social and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity, residents, businesses and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity and the city as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2900), 2-20-2007) 
State Law reference- Performance guarantees, MCL 125.584e. 
Sec. 110-622. - Nonconforming lots, nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming uses of structures and premises. 
    It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted, lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
    It is further recognized that certain nonconforming uses and structures do not significantly depress the value of nearby properties and are not contrary to the public health, safety and welfare and that such use or structure was lawful at the time of its inception and that no useful purpose would be served by the strict application of requirements for nonconformities under this chapter and, therefore, two classes of nonconforming use and structure are designated, being class A and class B. All nonconforming uses and structures are classified as class B nonconforming uses or structures unless designated class A nonconforming uses or structures. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2901), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-8, § 2, 12-16-2013) 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses and structures, MCL 125.583a. 
Sec. 110-623. - Class B nonconforming uses and structures. 
    All nonconforming uses or structures not designated class A shall be class B nonconforming uses or structures. Class B nonconforming uses and structures shall comply with all the provisions of this article relative to nonconforming uses and structures. 
(Ord. No. 705-8, § 2, 12-16-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 705-8, § 2, adopted December 16, 2013, in effect repealed the former § 110-623, and enacted a new § 110-623 as set out herein. The former § 110-623 pertained to nonconforming lots and derived from Ord. No. 705, adopted February 20, 2007. 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses and structures, MCL 125.583a. 
Sec. 110-624. - Class A nonconforming uses and structures. 
    Nonconforming uses or structures shall be designated class A providing that the planning commission finds all of the following exists with respect to the use or structure: 
(1)  The use or structure was lawful at its inception. 
(2)  Continuance of the use or structure is not likely to significantly depress property values of nearby properties. 
(3)  Continuance of the use or structure would not be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or the spirit of the chapter. 
(4)  No useful purpose would be served by strict application of the provisions of this chapter with which the use or structure does not conform. 
(Ord. No. 705-8, § 2, 12-16-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 705-8, § 2, adopted December 16, 2013, in effect repealed the former § 110-624, and enacted a new § 110-624 as set out herein. The former § 110-624 pertained to nonconforming uses of land and derived from Ord. No. 705, adopted February 20, 2007. 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses and structures, MCL 125.583a. 
Sec. 110-625. - Class A conditions. 
    The decision to grant a class A designation shall be made in writing setting forth its findings of fact and basis for the designation. For changes or improvements to a class A use or structure, site plans shall be required and the planning commission may condition its approval on the following, and by the following procedure to assure the public health, safety or welfare or the spirit and purpose of this chapter: 
(1)  Conditions. 
a.  Screening and landscaping in keeping with community standards to provide compatibility with adjacent uses. 
b.  Restrictions on lighting, noise, or visual impact. 
c.  Prohibition of curbside parking to an extent greater than the immediate property frontage of the nonconforming use, where such use is in close proximity to homes. 
d.  Signage in compliance with zoning district requirements. Existing nonconforming signs may be required to be eliminated or reduced in size and number. 
e.  Exterior building materials utilized in any alteration or rebuilding of the building shall be harmonious with materials on abutting properties whenever practical. 
f.  Enlargement or replacement of a building that does not create a more nonconforming yard setback condition which would impact on conforming properties in the immediate vicinity. 
g.  Other reasonable safeguards and improvements imposed to protect conforming uses in the surrounding area. 
(2)  Procedure. 
a.  A class A designation shall be deemed temporary until the planning commission has received written verification from the building official that the party requesting the class A designation has complied with all of the conditions set forth by the planning commission. 
b.  Once the planning commission has received written verification from the building director that the party requesting the class A designation has complied with said conditions, the class A designation shall become final, subject to other provisions of this chapter as hereafter prescribed. 
c.  No class A nonconforming use or structure shall be resumed if it has been discontinued for six consecutive months, or 18 months total in any three-year period. No class A nonconforming use or structure shall be used, altered or enlarged in violation of any conditions imposed in its designation. 
d.  A temporary class A nonconforming use or structure designation shall be void after six months if any conditions imposed by the designation remain unmet, unless the planning commission grants a written request for an extension of six months. No more than two extensions may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 705-8, § 2, 12-16-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 705-8, § 2, adopted December 16, 2013, in effect repealed the former § 110-625, and enacted a new § 110-625 as set out herein. The former § 110-625 pertained to nonconforming structures and derived from Ord. No. 705, adopted February 20, 2007. 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses and structures, MCL 125.583a. 
Sec. 110-626. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 705-8, § 2, adopted December 16, 2013, in effect repealed the former § 110-626, which pertained to nonconforming uses of structures and land and derived from Ord. No. 705, adopted February 20, 2007. 
Sec. 110-627. - Repairs and maintenance. 
    On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this code shall not be increased. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2906), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-628. - Uses under exception provisions not nonconforming uses. 
    Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2907), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-629. - Change of tenancy or ownership. 
    There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and land in combination. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2908), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-630. - Accessory uses. 
(a)  Accessory buildings. Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this code applicable to the main building. 
(2)  Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any minimum side yard setback or in any front yard. 
(3)  Any accessory building shall not occupy more than 25 percent of a required rear yard, plus 40 percent of any nonrequired rear yard, provided that in a residential district, the accessory building shall not exceed the ground floor area of the main building. 
(4)  No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to any main building nor shall it be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall not be closer than three feet to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory building be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
(5)  No accessory building in R-1 through R-4, RT, RM-1, OS-1, B-1 and P-1 districts shall exceed 15 feet in height if a flat roof building and may only be a flat roof building if the principal building it is intended to serve is a flat roof building. An accessory building with a sloping or pitched roof shall not exceed a height of 20 feet, or the maximum building height of the principal building it is intended to serve, whichever results in the lesser height. For an accessory building over 144 square feet, the slope of the roof shall be the same in pitch and appearance as that of the principal building it is intended to serve. Accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to a height equal the permitted maximum height of the principal building it is intended to serve, except when an accessory building in the other districts will exceed 20 feet in height, they shall require review and approval by the planning commission. 
For the purpose of this subsection, building height shall be measured from the finish grade at the base of the building, or from the average grade, as defined in this chapter, to the top, or ridgeline of the roof. 
(6)  When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard setback required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot. In no instance shall an accessory building be located nearer than ten feet to a street right-of-way line. 
(b)  Accessory structures. Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, accessory structures shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Accessory structures shall not be erected in any minimum side yard nor in any front yard. 
a.  Flagpoles may be located in any minimum required front or exterior side yard. 
b.  Canopy or canopies covering gasoline pump islands may extend into the required front or exterior side yard to a point not less than ten feet from a street or alley right-of-way line. 
(2)  Ground mounted private communication antennas shall be located in the rear yard, except when it can be shown that such antennas will not be highly visible from a street, or adjacent residential oriented property, they may be located in a nonrequired interior side yard. No private communications antenna, including so called extendable antennas shall exceed the maximum building height limitations of the district in which it is located when fully extended and shall be placed so that a horizontal distance at least equal to the vertical height of the antenna shall be provided between the base of the antenna and the nearest property line; except, in those instances where an antenna extending upward from the ground is also securely attached elsewhere to a building, the required distance to the nearest property line may be measured from the building attachment to the top of the antenna. All such antennas may be attached to a pole, tower, or rooftop of a principal or an accessory building, provided all applicable structural and electrical code requirements are met. 
(3)  Wind-powered generators shall be permitted, provided: 
a.  They are located in the rear yard only; 
b.  They do not exceed the maximum building height limitation of the district; 
c.  They are located on the premises so that a distance at least equal to the height of the generator blades at their apogee is provided to the nearest property line; and 
d.  The meet all applicable structural and electrical codes. 
(4)  Solar energy panels when located on the ground shall observe all applicable electrical codes and all applicable requirements pertaining to an accessory building. When roof mounted they shall not project more than four feet outward from the roof, measured from the surface of the roof where affixed, to the farthest outward projection of the panel or unit. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2909), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 705-1, § 1, 9-21-2009) 
Sec. 110-631. - Exterior site lighting. 
    The intent of this section is to encourage site lighting that will be attractive to the eye while at the same time adequately illuminate a site for safety and convenience. It is further the intent of this section to discourage excessively bright and harsh site illumination that creates undesirable halo effects on the property, diminishes the visual environment of nearby land use and presents a potential hazard to traffic on abutting roads. 
    All exterior site lighting designed and intended to light private property shall comply with the following applicable requirements: 
(1)  Exterior lighting for nonresidential uses in any zoning district. Nonresidential site lighting shall comply with the following applicable standards: 
a.  Freestanding light poles. Freestanding light poles shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Light poles shall be constructed of metal, concrete, wood laminates or composite materials and shall be of an architectural nature. 
2.  Light poles for any nonresidential use in a residential zoning district shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
3.  Light poles for any nonresidential use in a nonresidential zoning district that are located 60 feet or less from a residential zoning district shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
4.  Light poles for a nonresidential use in a nonresidential zoning district that will be located more than 60 feet from a residential zoning district may extend to a maximum height of 20 feet. 
5.  Pole height shall be measured from the surface (ground or pavement) at the base of the structure, including any supporting pedestal, to the top of the fixture. 
b.  Lighting fixtures. All light fixtures shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Any light fixture attached to a pole shall not exceed the maximum applicable pole height limitations of this section. 
2.  Except as otherwise permitted in this subsection, all light fixtures shall be of a type that will contain its luminary completely within the interior area of the casing or hull of the fixture, and no part of any luminary shall extend outward or downward beyond or below the opaque surfaces of the hull of the fixture, except luminary housed in a fixture designed to light the underside of a canopy structure may extend below the ceiling of the canopy provided it complies with the conditions of subsection (1)d. of this section. 
3.  Except as otherwise permitted in this section, the lens of the fixture shall be flush with the bottom of the fixture so that no part of the lens shall extend outward or downward beyond the outside opaque surface of the fixture, except the lens of a fixture housing a luminary that is permitted to extend below the ceiling of an under canopy fixture may also extend below the bottom of the fixture so long as the lens shall consist of a shaded (milk white) material. 
c.  Luminary or point sources of light. All luminary shall be oriented to cast its light directly downward onto the property it is intended to light, and shall comply with the following light intensity standards. 
1.  Luminary located 60 feet or less from a residential zoning district shall not generate more than 250 watts per fixture, except no luminary in a fixture shall generate light intensity that will exceed the maximum applicable overall site illumination limitations set forth in subsection d., of this section. 
2.  Luminary located more than 60 feet from a residential zoning district may generate up to a maximum of 400 total watts per fixture, except no luminary in a fixture shall generate light intensity that will exceed the maximum applicable overall site illumination limitations set forth in subsection d., of this section. 
d.  Overall site illumination limitations. No property shall exceed 4.5 footcandles of maximum overall light intensity, except no property shall exceed 1.0 footcandles of maximum light intensity along any residential zoning district line. Light intensity along a residential district shall be measured at a point four feet above the ground. Site illumination shall not consist of flashing, blinking or moving lights. 
e.  Wiring requirements. All electrical service to any exterior light source shall be placed under ground and inside of any canopy structure and shall meet all applicable electric codes and ordinances. 
f.  Architectural exterior lighting. All lighting designed to enhance the architectural appearance of a building or to highlight an architectural feature of a building shall consist of: 
1.  A low-wattage luminary designed to cast only a soft light on the subject, and 
2.  A luminary that when directly visible from a fixture, shall not be an irritant to pedestrians, or to vehicle traffic on adjacent roads, or to residents in any adjacent residential zoning district. 
g.  Exterior site lighting in multiple-family residential districts. All such lighting shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Exterior lighting may consist of a low-wattage incandescent luminary contained in a decorative light fixture attached to the wall next to the door of each exterior entry to a dwelling unit. 
2.  Exterior lighting may also consist of a low-wattage incandescent luminary contained in a decorative light fixture attached to the top of a low profile yard type of light pole. All wiring to pole fixtures shall be underground and shall comply with all applicable electric codes and ordinances. 
3.  Carports in a multiple dwelling complex may be lighted so long as all such lighting is limited to the underside of the carport. The fixtures shall be placed no closer to the front of the underside roof structure than half the distance from the rear roofline to the front roofline. 
4.  Luminary shall be limited to not more than 100 watts and shall be housed in fixtures. 
h.  Exterior building wall lighting. Exterior building wall lighting shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Wall lights intended to illuminate service areas, particularly service areas at the rear of buildings next to residential districts, shall not consist of wall packs that cast light outward as well as downward. All such lighting shall meet the requirements of subsection b.2, of this section. 
2.  Exterior building wall lighting shall not exceed a height of 12 feet measured from the surface (ground or pavement) at the base of the wall to the top of the fixture on any building wall that faces into a residential zoning district. 
3.  Luminary contained within any light fixture attached to a wall of a building shall not exceed the applicable wattage limitations set forth in subsection c.1., of this section. 
4.  No light fixture shall extend upwards above the parapet or eave line of a roof, and no light fixture shall project out from the wall of a building into any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2910), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-632. - Signs. 
    Signs shall be subject to all applicable streetscape standards of this code pertaining to signs and to all applicable requirements of the building code. In those instances where the standards of this code are more restrictive than other sign-oriented standards applied by the city, the standards in this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2911), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-633. - Entranceways for residential developments. 
    In all Residential Districts, so-called entranceway structures, including but not limited to walls, columns, and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects, may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in section 110-634, Corner clearance, in this chapter, provided that such entranceway structures shall comply to all codes of the City of Trenton and shall be approved by the building department and a permit issued. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2912), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-634. - Corner clearance. 
    The following standards are designed to provide for clear corner vision areas and shall be complied with where applicable: 
(1)  Street intersections. No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, or other obstruction to vision above a height of three feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines to a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. Except a freestanding pole sign/pylon sign supported by only one pole the diameter of which shall not exceed ten inches and which has at least eight feet of unobstructed clearance from the ground at the base of the pole to the bottom of the sign, may be permitted; 
(2)  Driveway and alley intersections. Wherever a driveway intersects a public right-of-way serving multiple-family residential building, or a nonresidential use, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or any other obstruction to vision above the height of three feet measured from the established street grade shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of the driveway with a street or alley by a straight line drawn between said driveway and the intersecting street or alley right-of-way lines to a distance along each line of 15 feet from their point of intersection. For a driveway serving a single-family or two-family dwelling building the minimum distance for computing the clear vision triangle shall be six feet. The same distances shall apply when a driveway or alley right-of-way a public right-of-way near an abutting lot line. 
(3)  Public safety exception. In the interest of public safety, the minimum corner clearance requirements of this section may be increased at the recommendation of the Trenton Police Department. 


Restricted Clear Corner Vision Areas 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2913), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-635. - Frontage on a public street. 
    No lot shall be used for any purpose permitted in this chapter unless said lot abuts a public street, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2914), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-636. - Access to major thoroughfare or collector street. 
    For uses making reference to this section 110-636, vehicular access shall be provided only to an existing or planned major thoroughfare or collector street; provided, however, that the planning commission may grant an exception to this requirement where the commission finds that the properties on both sides of the street between the site and the major thoroughfare, freeway service drive or collector street are developed, zoned or planned for multiple-family residential or nonresidential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2915), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-637. - Fences. 
    Fences shall be subject to the conditions set forth in Chapter 18, Article IV, as amended, which regulates fences in the city. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2916), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-638. - Roofs, awnings and canopies. 
    Fixed roofs, awnings, canopies or other shading or decorative devices, whether freestanding or structurally attached, which are intended to cover a porch, patio or door wall opening and not otherwise provided in section 110-630 accessory uses, shall be subject to all of the setback and lot coverage limitations set forth and regulated in this chapter. Window awnings shall be excluded from these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2917), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-639. - Parking and storage of recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
(a)  Restrictions. The off-street parking or storage of any recreational vehicle, including, but not limited to, boats, jet skis, snowmobiles, truck camper bodies, travel trailers, off-road or other altered vehicles, motor homes, and utility trailers (as well as their trailers for carrying or storage) shall not be permitted in residential districts, except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Parking. A recreational vehicle may be parked on a public street or in any driveway on a residential lot with the permission of the owner of such lot for the purpose of loading or unloading the vehicle or for general maintenance of the vehicle not to exceed 72 hours. Parking of the vehicle for other purposes shall be considered storage under this section and shall be subject to the limitations provided in this section. 
(2)  Storage. Recreational vehicles may be stored on a residential lot, provided: 
a.  Each vehicle shall be stored fully within the rear yard, or within an interior side yard. 
b.  When stored within a rear yard, the vehicle shall meet the setback requirements of an accessory building as set forth in section 110-630 accessory uses, and the vehicle may be stored within any portion of a dedicated easement provided the vehicle shall be maintained so that it can be readily move in case of an emergency. 
c.  When stored in an interior side yard, the vehicle shall not project beyond the front wall of the house, or extend above a height of six feet, measured from the surface of the driveway to the highest point of the vehicle, including the trailer, but excluding vehicle masts, antennas and open windshields extending upwards from the main deck; Except a vehicle may exceed this maximum height limitation provided the vehicle shall be stored no closer to the nearest wall of the principal building on the adjoining lot than a distance which shall be the remaining height of the vehicle above six feet, plus four feet in the R-3 districts, or plus five feet in the R-1 and R-2 districts. 
d.  The storage of such vehicles as indicated in this section shall not occupy more than 25 percent of a required rear yard, or 40 percent of any nonrequired rear yard, or exceed the ground floor area of the main building. 
e.  When a storage area is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, the storage area shall not project beyond the front yard setback required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot. In no instance shall a storage area be located nearer than ten feet to a street right-of-way line. 
f.  Vehicles shall not be used to store flammable or explosive fuels or materials that are contrary to federal, state or local regulations. 
g.  Vehicles shall be fully operable and kept in good repair, and shall display the current license plate and/or registration as may be appropriate under state law for the particular type of vehicle. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "current" shall mean having an expiration date not more than six months old in the case of a semiannual or seasonal license. 
h.  At no time shall a recreational vehicle be used for living or housing keeping purposes, nor shall it be connected to water, gas, electrical or sanitary sewer facilities, except for the purpose of heating, cooling or battery charging preparatory to departure, or for general vehicle maintenance purposes. 
(3)  Requests for exceptions or special approvals; variances. Not withstanding the provisions of Article XXXI, Zoning Board of Appeals and Adjustments, in this chapter, no requests for exceptions or special approval shall be heard or granted by the zoning board of appeals and adjustments regarding the enforcement of the provisions of this section. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or prevent persons from bringing administrative or variance appeals to the zoning board of appeals and adjustments in accordance with the applicable sections of Article XXX in this chapter. 
(4)  Violations. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine shall be $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2918), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-640. - Nonbinding exterior building wall materials guidelines. 
    The purpose of this section is to serve as a guideline for the establishment of a harmonious building wall appearance on all exterior walls of a building so as to create, enhance and promote a uniform and quality visual environment throughout the city. The reader is encouraged to follow the guidelines to the extent possible to create a more attractive building in the City of Trenton, thereby sustaining the city beautiful efforts currently enjoyed by the residents of the city. The guidelines presented herein are just that, guidelines. They are not a mandatory requirement. The reader may chose to follow all, or any part, of the exterior building wall appearance guidelines presented in this section. 
(1)  To encourage proper and effective attention will be given to the visual appearance of both residential and nonresidential buildings, the exterior building walls of a new building should consist of the same uniform exterior building wall finish materials as the front wall of the building. The building department must recognize all materials as acceptable finish materials. 
a.  Whenever the exterior building wall materials standards set forth in this section are chosen to be followed, they should include a brief written statement describing how the exterior building wall material, or combination of materials, as set forth in this section, will be consistent with the materials on a majority of the same type of buildings in the surrounding area. For the purpose of this subsection, the reader is encouraged to apply the following guidelines: 
b.  When four or more new single-family or two-family dwelling buildings are erected on contiguous lots on condominium home sites, they shall consist of face brick materials as defined in section 110-28 (definition of Face brick ) in this chapter, on all exterior building walls. 
c.  When three or less single-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwelling buildings are erected on contiguous lots or condominium home sites, they should consist of the same exterior building wall materials as a majority of the single-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwelling buildings in the surrounding area. 
d.  A residential dwelling building should be provided with basically the same or similar exterior building wall and roof designs and roofing materials found on of a majority of the residential dwelling buildings in the surrounding area. 
e.  A residential dwelling building shall be provided with exterior finish materials, such as doors and windows that are like or similar to a majority of the residential dwelling buildings in the surrounding area. 
f.  For the purpose of determining the surrounding area, the same procedure may be applied as set forth in subsection 110-84(2)e. in this chapter. 
g.  In the case of a nonresidential building in a residential zoning district, all of the exterior walls of the building should consist of face brick materials as defined in section 110-28 (definition of Face brick ) in this chapter. 
h.  In the case of a nonresidential building in a nonresidential zoning district, the exterior walls of the building should consist of the same materials as exists on a majority of the nonresidential buildings in the surrounding or nearby area as set forth and regulated in subsection 110-84(2)e. in this chapter. 
(2)  The exterior building wall materials guidelines the reader is encouraged to follow are outlined below. 
a.  New single-family, two-family or multiple-family residential dwelling buildings. 
1.  These buildings should have exterior walls that consist mostly of face brick material, as defined in this chapter, or a similar type of acceptable material that is consistent with the majority of the residential buildings in the surrounding area. A second story may consist of the same exterior building wall materials as the first floor, or if the first floor walls consists mostly of approved masonry materials, the second floor walls may consist of a different type of exterior building wall material, so long as the material and its appearance is like or similar to a majority of the residential buildings in the surrounding area. 
2.  New single-family, two-family or multiple-family residential dwelling buildings with basements and/or chimneys whose exterior walls will extend upwards above the grade at the base of the wall should consist of the same exterior masonry or cementitious materials as appears on the first floor of the building. In the instance of a new residential building that will be erected without a basement, the first, or ground floor, should be elevated to resemble a majority of the residential buildings in the surrounding area, if those residential buildings have basements. 
b.  Nonresidential buildings. 
1.  Except where otherwise outlined in this section, the exterior building walls of a nonresidential building and any related accessory building should to the extent possible, consist of the exterior building wall materials and/or combinations of materials outlined in this section that are like or directly similar to the exterior walls of a majority of the nonresidential buildings in the surrounding area, and no exterior building wall should consist of any materials that are outlined in this section. 
2.  The exterior building walls of a nonresidential building should to the extent possible, consist of the following materials or combinations of materials: 
3.  Face brick for nonresidential buildings as defined in section 110-28 in this chapter. 
4.  Glazed kiln baked clay or shale ceramic masonry units, or cut stone or fieldstone, when these materials are used only in limited proportions as accent materials. 
5.  Precast concrete in form and pattern that may consist of its natural color or may be treated (impregnated, not painted) with earth tone colors, as defined in this chapter. 
6.  Finished cementitious materials, including finished systems and stucco. The use of architectural masonry block such as split face, ribbed, and rough-hewn masonry units may be used only as accent materials but the reader is encouraged to limit the use of such materials so that they will not make up more than 25 percent of any exterior wall, except when used in conjunction with E.I.F.S. (so called dryvit) material, such block materials should be placed from the ground upwards a minimum height of three feet, even if their use may exceed the 25 percent coverage limitation for this material on an exterior building wall. 
7.  Metal materials, including flat sheets, standing seamed or ribbed panels, stainless steel and porcelain clad materials. The reader is encouraged to limit the use of these materials to 25 percent of the exterior building walls. 
8.  Materials other than those specifically outlined in subsection (2) of this section are expressly prohibited. Expressly prohibited materials shall include: 
(1)  Standard smooth face concrete masonry units (CMU). 
(2)  Tarred paper products, felt, tin and corrugated iron. 
(3)  Pressed or laminated wood products. 
(4)  Similar products or materials. 
9.  After review and approval by the building department, other materials not discouraged in subsection (2)b.8. in this section, may be substituted in place of, or in combination with, the materials set forth in subsection (2)a. and b. in this section. 
The building department may approve alternative materials only when it determines that such materials will: 
i.  Be in direct harmony with the intent and purpose of this section and will stand to further promote the uniform and quality visual environment of the city. 
ii.  Meet all applicable requirements of federal, state and local building codes. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(2919), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-641. - Textile recycling and donation bins. 
(1)  Bins shall not be placed on any property without express written permission from the property owner and after receiving approval and a permit (sticker) from the city. 
(2)  Bins shall only be allowed in the B-1, B-2, and B-3 zoning districts. 
(3)  There shall be not more than two bins per property. 
(4)  Bins shall not be located adjacent to any public rights-of-way, public sidewalks or greenways, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(5)  Bins shall not be located within required parking spaces or landscape areas. 
(6)  Each bin shall be placed on a concrete pad not to exceed eight feet wide by five feet long and in a manner that is publicly accessible. 
(7)  Except for a secure safety chute in which donations are deposited, bins shall remain locked at all times to prevent access by animals or unauthorized persons. 
(8)  Bins shall be emptied and refuse around them collected and removed promptly. 
(9)  Bin operator and property owner on which bins are located shall have two business days after receipt of a notice from the city to correct any violations of this section. 
(10)  Applicant for a bin shall: 
a.  Provide a plan detailing 
(i)  The access route of the vehicle used to unload the contents of the bin 
(ii)  The dedicated parking space used for patrons to unload donations. 
b.  Provide a schedule for normal pick up of donations. 
c.  Provide written permission from the property owner, owner's agent or an officer, director, member, or manager of an entity owning the property. 
d.  File an application with the city each year. The filing of an application does not designate approval of a bin. Approval of a bin is only received after an application is submitted, reviewed, and stamped "approved" by the engineering department of the city if all requirements are met. Upon approval of an application the applicant will receive a sticker from the city to be placed in the appropriate location on the bin. 
(11)  Aesthetic standards: 
a.  Bins shall not exceed six and one half feet in height. 
b.  Bins shall be constructed of a durable metal, UV-resistant molded hard plastic or fiberglass material. 
c.  Bins shall prominently display the name, address, and telephone number of the owner/operator of the bin in characters no less than one half inch in height and not greater than six inches in height. 
d.  Bins shall at all times be maintained in good repair, and clean condition, and shall remain free of graffiti, or other markings. 
e.  Bins shall not be utilized for the display of any advertising, signage or promotional materials other than the information of the owner/operator/charitable organization of the bin as stated in subsection (11)c. above. 
(12)  Fee required per bin: 
a.  Initial application (one year period) $110.00, or such other amount determined by council. 
b.  Renewal application (one year period ) $60.00, or such other amount determined by council 
(Ord. No. 705-10, § 1, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 110-642. - Dumpsters and temporary storage containers. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be prohibited to store dumpsters or temporary storage containers on private property except as hereinafter provided. Dumpsters and temporary storage containers shall include, but are not limited to, the following illustrative examples, construction dumpsters, roll-offs, portable on demand storage containers, shipping containers, over-seas containers, inter-modal containers, moving containers. 
(b)  Limitations. Dumpsters and temporary storage containers are allowed on private property or private streets provided the following: 
(1)  Line of sight shall not be obstructed, as defined in this chapter, section 110-634. 
(2)  Dumpsters and temporary storage containers shall not be located in a public right-of-way and shall not obstruct public sidewalks. 
(3)  Dumpsters and temporary storage containers shall clearly identify the providing company's name and phone number. 
(4)  Only one dumpster or temporary storage container may be placed on a property at any one time. 
(5)  Dumpsters and temporary storage containers are allowed on a property for a period of an accumulative period not to exceed 21 days within a six month period. 
(6)  Dumpsters and temporary storage containers shall not be used to store household trash or other items or waste that will cause offensive odors, attract insects or vermin, and/or create a nuisance in general. 
(7)  Open containers shall not be filled beyond the top edge. 
(8)  When not in use, open containers shall be securely tarped. 
(9)  Dumpsters and temporary storage containers shall comply with all other applicable codes, ordinances and zoning requirements of the city. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  In cases where the physical limitations of a property prevent a dumpster or temporary storage container from being stored on private property, the city engineer or his/her designee may, upon application, permit a dumpster or temporary storage container to be located on public property, provided however, that such approval is in writing and in compliance with all other regulations. In granting this exemption, the timeframe for which the placement may be allowed can be restricted below that otherwise permitted, or extended beyond that specified in section 110-642, if approved and individual circumstances warrant. 
(2)  Construction dumpsters are allowed on a property for a period of six months, provided that a valid construction permit exists for the same location and compliance with all other regulations occurs. 
(3)  Dumpsters required for demolitions are allowed on a property for the term of a valid demolition permit for the same location and there is compliance with all other regulations. 
(d)  Violations. Violations of the provisions of this section are a municipal civil infraction for which the fine is $50.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 705-17, § 1, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 110-643. - Conditional rezoning. 
(a)  It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of the city, as well as advantageous to property owners seeking a change in zoning boundaries, if certain conditions attach as part of a request for rezoning. It is the intent of this section to provide a process consistent with the provisions of section 405, Michigan Zoning Enabling Act 110 of 2006 (MCL125.3405) by which an owner seeking a rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of land as part of the rezoning request 
(1)  Application and offer of conditions. 
a.  An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for rezoning is filed, or may be made at a later time during the rezoning process. 
b.  The required application and process for considering a rezoning request with conditions shall be the same as that for considering rezoning requests made without any offer of conditions, except as modified by the requirements of this section. 
c.  The owner's offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the property for which rezoning is requested. 
d.  Any use of development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a special land use permit under the terms of the Ordinance may only be commenced if a special land use permit for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
e.  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that require variance under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if a variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require site plan approval under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
f.  The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of rezoning consideration provided that any amended or additional conditions are agreed to by the owner. An owner may withdraw all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action provided that, if such withdrawal occurs subsequent to the planning commission's public hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred to the planning commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice, new recommendation, and fees. 
(2)  Planning commission review. Planning commission, after public hearing and consideration of the factors for rezoning, may recommend approval, approval with recommended changes or denial of the rezoning, provided, however, that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner. 
(3)  City council review. After receipt of the planning commission's recommendations, the city council shall deliberate upon the requested rezoning and may approve or deny the conditional rezoning request. The deliberations shall include, but not be limited to, a consideration of the factors for rezoning of this Ordinance. Should the city council consider amendments to the proposed conditional rezoning advisable and if such a contemplated amendments to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner, then the city council shall, in accordance with section 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (MCL125.3405), refer such amendments to the planning commission for a report thereon within a time specified by the city council and proceed thereafter in accordance with said statute to deny or approve the conditional rezoning with or without amendments. 
(4)  Approval. 
a.  If the city council finds the rezoning request and offer of conditions acceptable, the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written statement of conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the provisions of this section. The statement of conditions shall be incorporated by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the ordinance adopted by the city council to accomplish the requested zoning. 
b.  The statement of conditions shall: 
1.  Be in a form recordable with the register of deeds of the county or, in the alternative, be accompanied by a recordable affidavit, or memorandum prepared and signed by the owner giving notice of the statement of conditions in a manner acceptable to the city council. 
2.  Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains. 
3.  Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of conditions runs with the land and is binding upon successor owners of the land. 
4.  Incorporate by attachment or reference any diagram, plans or other documents submitted or approved by the petitioner that are necessary to illustrate the implementation of the statement of conditions. If any such documents are incorporated by reference, the reference shall specify where the document may be examined. 
5.  Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of conditions or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof may be recorded by the city with the register of deeds of the county. 
6.  Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the subject land preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained within the statement of conditions. 
c.  Upon rezoning taking effect, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect the new zoning classification along with a designation that the land was rezoned with a statement of conditions. The city clerk shall maintain a listing of all lands rezoned with a statement of conditions. 
d.  The approved statement of conditions or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof shall be filed by the city with the register of deeds of the county. The city council shall have authority to waive this requirement if it determines that, given the nature of the conditions and/or the time frame within which the conditions are to be satisfied, the recording of such a document would be of no material benefit to the city or to any subsequent owner of the land. 
e.  Upon the rezoning taking effect, the use of the land so rezoned shall conform thereafter to all of the requirements regulating use and development within the new zoning district as modified by any more restrictive provisions contained in the statement of conditions. 
(5)  Compliance with conditions. 
a.  Any person who establishes a development or commences a use upon land that has been rezoned with conditions shall continuously operate and maintain the development or use in compliance with all of the conditions set forth in the statement of conditions. Any failure to comply with a condition contained within the statement of conditions shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Ordinance, result in a reversion of the zoning classification to its previous designation and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law. 
b.  No permit or approval shall be granted under this Ordinance for any use or development that is contrary to an applicable statement of conditions. 
(6)  Time period for establishing development or use. Unless another time period is specified in the Ordinance rezoning the subject land, the approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and other required permits must be commenced upon the land within 18 months after the rezoning took effect and thereafter proceed diligently to completion within a pre-determined time period. This time limitation may upon written request be extended by the city council if (1) it is demonstrated to the city council's reasonable satisfaction that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion and (2) the city council finds that there has not been a change in law or surrounding development that would render the current zoning with statement of conditions incompatible with other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound zoning policy. 
(7)  Reversion of zoning. If approved development and/or use of the rezoned land do not occur within the time frame specified under subsection (6) above, or the conditions of zoning are violated, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as set forth in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (MCL125.3405). The reversion process shall be initiated by the city council requesting that the planning commission proceed with consideration of rezoning of the land to its former zoning classification. The procedure for considering and making this reversionary rezoning shall thereafter be the same as applies to all other rezoning requests. 
(8)  Subsequent rezoning of land. When land that is rezoned with a statement of conditions is thereafter rezoned to a different zoning classification or to the same zoning classification but with a different or no statement of conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to the subsection (7) above or otherwise, the statement of conditions imposed under the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. The city clerk shall record with the register of deeds of the county that the statement of conditions is no longer in effect. 
(9)  Amendment of conditions. During the time period for commencement of an approved development or use specified pursuant to subsection (6) above or during any extension thereof granted by the city council, the city shall not add to or alter the conditions in the statement of conditions. 
(10)  City right to rezone. Nothing in the statement of conditions nor in the provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit the city from rezoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a statement of conditions to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with this chapter and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (MCL125.3405). 
(11)  Failure to offer conditions. The city shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect an owner's rights under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705-19, § 1, 8-21-2017) 
Secs. 110-644-110-660. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXX. - HEARING PROCEDURES FOR CONDITIONAL USES AND USE PERMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Special uses, MCL 125.584a, 125.584c. 

Sec. 110-661. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to establish public hearing procedures and standards for those uses identified as principal uses permitted subject to special conditions in the various zoning districts in this chapter, and for special land use requests that may be approved on discretionary grounds, including specific types of land use that require issuance of a use permit, as set forth and regulated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3000), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-662. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    Uses identified in various zoning districts as principal uses permitted subject to special conditions shall comply fully with all of the standards of the zoning district in which they are permitted and the conditions attached to each such use, unless such standards and conditions have been varied by the zoning board of appeals and adjustments. Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions shall be subject to review by all applicable city departments and by the planning commission. In those zoning districts that allow mixed land use, which may be approved based on discretionary grounds, the planning commission at its discretion, may attach such conditions to its recommendation to the city council and the city council at its discretion, may attach those conditions, as well as its own, to its approval. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3001), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-663. - Specific land use requiring issuance of a use permit. 
    Specific land use identified in Article XXV in this chapter as uses requiring issuance of a use permit shall fully comply with all standards of this chapter applicable to them, and to review by all applicable city departments who shall submit their reviews to the planning commission for their review and recommendation to the city council. Since discretionary review latitude is given by statute to the planning commission and the city council, the planning commission at its discretion, may attach conditions to its recommendation to the city council and the city council at its discretion, may attach those conditions, as well as their own, to its approval. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3002), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-664. - Public hearing notice. 
    Upon receipt of an application for approval of a principal use permitted subject to special conditions, or an application for approval of a mixed use development, or an application for approval of a use requiring issuance of a use permit, and upon completion of the review by all applicable city departments, but before forwarding its review comments to the planning commission, the building department shall prepare and forward an official notice to a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Trenton, and shall send same by general mail or by personal delivery to the owners of the subject property, and to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the peripheral boundaries of the subject property, and to the occupants of all buildings within 300 feet of the peripheral boundary of the subject property. Such notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a building, except that if a building contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single building containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the building who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the building. The notice shall: 
(1)  Describe the nature of the special land use request. 
(2)  Indicate the property that is the subject of the particular land use request. 
(3)  State when and where the particular land use request will be considered. 
(4)  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(5)  Indicate that a property owner may request a public hearing on the particular land use request or the occupant of a building located within 300 feet of the peripheral boundary of the property being considered for a particular land use. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3003), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-665. - Public hearing. 
    At the initiation of the planning commission, or upon request of an applicant for approval of a principal use permitted subject to special conditions, or a conditional approval use which permits discretionary approvals by the city council, or upon the request of an applicant for approval of a specific use that requires issuance of a use permit, or a property owner or the occupant of a building located within 300 feet of the peripheral boundary of the subject property, a public hearing with notification, as required in section 110-664 in this article, shall be held before a decision may be made on any request involving a principal use permitted subject to special conditions, or on any special land use request that may be approved based on discretionary grounds. A decision on a principal use permitted subject to special conditions, or a decision on a special land use request that is based on discretionary grounds, or a decision that requires issuance of a use permit, will not be made unless notification of the request for a principal use permitted subject to special conditions, or for special use approval, is given as required in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3004), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-666-110-680. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXI. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Board of appeals, MCL 125.585, 125.585a. 

Sec. 110-681. - Board established; membership. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals and adjustments shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Article VI of Public Act 110 of 2006 and in such a way that the objectives of this code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The Trenton Zoning Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall be composed of not less than five persons nor more than six members, and two alternate members. One regular member of the board shall also be a member of the Trenton Planning Commission. The remaining regular members and the alternate members shall be selected from the electors of the local unit of government residing within the zoning jurisdiction of that local unit of government. The members selected shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests present in the local unit of government. The mayor with the consent of the city council shall appoint all members. One regular member may be a member of the Trenton City Council but that member shall not serve as the chair of the board. An employee or contractor of the city council may not serve as a member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(b)  The terms of office for members appointed to the zoning board of appeals and adjustments shall be for three years, except for members serving because of their membership in the planning commission or city council, whose terms shall be limited to the time they are members of those bodies. Appointments shall be as follows: Two members appointed for a period of one year, two members appointed for a period of two years, two members appointed for a period of three years, one alternate appointed for two years, and one alternate appointed for a period of three years, respectively. Thereafter, each member or alternate is to hold office for a full three-year term. 
(c)  Each member and each alternate of the board shall have been a resident of the city for at least two years prior to the date of his appointment and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the city on such day and throughout his tenure of office. Appointed members and alternates may be removed for cause by the city council during their term only after consideration of written charges and a public hearing. Any appointed vacancies on the board shall be filled by the mayor with the consent of the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The board shall annually elect its own chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary. The compensation of the appointed members and alternates of the board shall be fixed by the city council. 
(d)  The mayor or his designee may call the alternate members of the board on a rotating basis whenever a regular member of the board has indicated that they will be absent from a scheduled meeting. The mayor or his designee may also call an alternate to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a matter in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of a conflict of interest. 
(e)  If an alternate is seated for any portion of a public hearing on a matter, he shall serve in that matter in lieu of the regular member, until a final determination has been made on that matter. The regular member, replaced by an alternate, may reclaim his position on the board at any time during the course of a meeting, except with respect to those matters which were the subject of a public hearing held in the presence of his alternate, if any, during the regular member's absence. 
(f)  Each alternate member when seated shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3100), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-682. - Meetings of board. 
    All meetings of the zoning board of appeals and adjustments shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such times as such board may determine. All hearings conducted by the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of its business. The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, and compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3101), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-683. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person, officer, department, board or bureau affected by a decision of the city engineer, may appeal that decision to the zoning board of appeals and adjustments. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the board by general rule, by filing with the city engineer and with the board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The city engineer shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from were taken. 
(b)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the city engineer certifies to the board after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the zoning board of appeals and adjustments or by a court of record on application, on notice to the city engineer and on due cause shown. 
(c)  The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. 
(d)  A fee, established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city at the time the notice of appeal is filed, which fee is to assist in defraying the expenses of the hearing, such as newspaper advertising and postage and other incidental expenses. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3102), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-684. - Jurisdiction of board. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals and adjustments shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, or to make any change in the terms of this code, nor to allow a use not otherwise permitted in a zoning district, but does have power to act on those matters where this code provides for an administrative review, interpretation, exception or special approval permit and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and laws of the state. Such powers include: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the city engineer or any other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Variances. 
a.  Except in the case of planned development districts regulated by Article XXII in this chapter to authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this code where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional undue hardship upon the owner of the property, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed uses, as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting. 
b.  The zoning board of appeals is not bound by past precedent and shall decide all matters properly before it on an independent basis. 
c.  No such variance or modification of ordinance provisions shall be granted unless it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that all four of the following facts and conditions exist: 
(3)  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved or to the intended use of the property that do not apply generally to other properties or class of uses in the same district or zone. 
(4)  Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone and vicinity. 
(5)  The granting of such variance or modification will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or district in which the property is located. 
(6)  The granting of such variance will not adversely affect the purpose or objectives of the master plan of the city. 
(b)  Exceptions and special approvals. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this code, requests for exceptions, for interpretations of the zoning map, and for decisions on special approval situations on which this chapter specifically authorizes the board to pass. 
(c)  Any exception or special approval shall be subject to such conditions as the board may require to preserve and promote the character of the zoning district in question and otherwise promote the purpose of this chapter, including the following: 
(d)  Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the zoning map fixing the use districts, accompanying the ordinance codified in this chapter and made part of this code, where street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map. 
(e)  Permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for public utility purposes, upon recommendation of the planning commission. 
(f)  Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements. 
(g)  Permit such modification of the height and area regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot, which is of such shape, or so located with relation to surrounding development or physical characteristics, that it cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without such modification. 
(h)  Permit temporary uses for periods not to exceed two years in undeveloped sections of the city and for periods not to exceed six months in developed sections. 
(i)  Permit, upon proper application, the following character of temporary use, not otherwise permitted in any district, not to exceed 12 months, with the granting of 12 month extensions being permissible: uses which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature. The zoning board of appeals and adjustments, in granting permits for such temporary uses, shall do so under the following conditions: 
(1)  The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district or on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted. 
(2)  The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of the temporary permit. 
(3)  All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city shall be made at the discretion of the zoning board of appeals and adjustments. 
(4)  In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the zoning board of appeals and adjustments shall determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of the land; recreation developments, such as, but not limited to golf driving ranges and outdoor archery courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections. 
(5)  The use shall be in harmony with the general character of the district. 
(6)  No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided in Article XXX in this chapter. Further, the zoning board of appeals and adjustments shall seek the review and recommendation of the planning commission prior to the taking of any action. 
(j)  In consideration of all appeals and all proposed variations to this code, the board shall, before making any variations from this code in a specific case, first determine that the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the city engineer, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is authorized by this chapter to render a decision. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to give or grant to the board the power or authority to alter or change this chapter or the zoning map, such power and authority being reserved to the mayor and the city council, in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3103), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-685. - Issuance of orders. 
    In exercising the powers specified in this division, the zoning board of appeals and adjustments may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the city engineer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3104), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-686. - Notices. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals and adjustments shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after a public hearing conducted by the board. It shall, by general rule or in specific cases, determine the interested parties who, in the opinion of the board, may be affected by any matter brought before it, which shall in all cases include all owners of record of property and the occupants of all single-family and two-family dwellings within 300 feet of the premises in question, such notices to be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners at the address given in the last assessment roll. 
(b)  If the tenant's name is not known, the term "occupant" may be used. The board may require any party applying to the board for relief to give such notice to other interested parties, as it shall prescribe. A notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the city not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall contain the address if available and the location of the property for which the variation or other ruling by the board is sought, as well as a brief description of the nature of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3105), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-687. - Expiration of orders. 
(a)  No order of the board permitting the erection of a building shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(b)  No order of the board permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for the erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3106), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-688-110-700. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXII. - PERMITS, CERTIFICATES AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 110-701. - Duties of city engineer. 
(a)  The city engineer shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, and to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the city engineer to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform to this code. 
(b)  Under no circumstances is the city engineer permitted to make changes to this chapter or to vary the terms of this code in carrying out his duties as city engineer. 
(c)  The city engineer shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this code are complied with by the applicant, despite violations of contracts such as covenants or private agreements that may occur upon the granting of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3200), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-702. - Plot plan. 
    The city engineer shall require that all applications for building permits to be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
(1)  The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot. 
(2)  The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
(3)  The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
(4)  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this code are being observed. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3201), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-703. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1)  Permits not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this chapter, unless the zoning board of appeals and adjustments has granted a variance. 
(2)  Permits for new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(3)  Permits for new use of buildings. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(4)  Building permit required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. For purposes of this subsection, the terms altered and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, or means of ingress and egress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the building code, housing law, or this code, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of such features. 
(5)  Zoning permits. No fence, driveway, building or other structure shall be erected, moved or added to, or structurally altered, without a zoning permit issued by the engineering and building department. No zoning permit shall be issued by the engineering and building department for a fence, building or structure that is not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter unless the board of appeals has granted relief in the form of a variance. Application in the form determined by the chief building inspector and fees as determined by city council from time to time shall be completed and paid by all applicants for a zoning permit. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3202), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-704. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No land, building or part thereof shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
(1)  Certificates not to be issued. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this code, unless the zoning board of appeals and adjustments has granted a variance. 
(2)  Certificate of occupancy required. Any building or structure, or part thereof, which is hereafter erected, or altered, or when a change of use for any building or structure or part thereof is proposed, or a when a change of ownership of any building or structure, or part thereof shall occur, the building or structure or part thereof, shall not be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
(3)  Applicability of certificates required by building code. Certificates of occupancy as required by the building code for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this chapter. 
(4)  Temporary certificates. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building or structure in process of erection or alteration, provided that such temporary certificate shall not be effective for a period of time in excess of six months, and provided further that such portion of the building, structure or premises is in conformity with the provisions of this code. A six month extension may be granted provided actual building construction has been diligently carried on. 
(5)  Records. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the city engineer, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(6)  Certificates for buildings accessory to dwellings. Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy, but may be included in the certificates of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
(7)  Application. Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the city engineer on forms furnished by the engineering and building department. Such certificates shall be issued within ten working days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land, is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefore shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof within the ten-day period. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3203), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-705. - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair or moving of any building, structure or part thereof shall notify the city engineer immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3204), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 110-706. - Fees. 
    Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter may be collected by the city engineer in advance of issuance. The amount of such fee shall be established by the city council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this code. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3205), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 110-707-110-720. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXIII. - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 110-721. - General exceptions. 
    The regulations in this chapter shall be subject to the following interpretations and exceptions: 
(1)  Essential services. Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other codes and ordinances of the municipality, it being the intention of this subsection to exempt such essential services from the application of this chapter. 
(2)  Voting places. The provisions of this code shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
(3)  Height limit. The height limitations of this code shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flagpoles, public monuments or wireless transmission towers; provided, however, that the zoning board of appeals and adjustments may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a conditional use, or a use requiring issuance of a use permit as set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  Lot area. Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this code is derived may be used for any principal use permitted in the district, other than conditional uses for which special lot area requirements are specified in this chapter, whether or not such lot complies with the lot area and width requirements of this code. Such use may be made provided that all requirements, other than lot area and width, prescribed in this chapter are complied with, and provided that not more than one dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions of this code for required lot area for each dwelling unit. 
(5)  Lots adjoining alleys. In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an alley for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of this code, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot. 
(6)  Yard regulations. When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, or where their application cannot be determined on lots of peculiar shape, topography or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified or determined by the zoning board of appeals and adjustments. 
(7)  Porches and patios. Upon review and approval by the city, an open, unenclosed porch or paved terrace may project from the main structure into a minimum required front yard setback for a distance not to exceed seven feet. This porch or paved terrace may be fully or partially covered with a permanent roof structure, which may be an integral projection of the roof of the main building or may be a canopy or awning, provided: 
a.  The covered projection is intended solely for appearance or to protect the open porch or terrace from the elements and shall not in any way enclose the porch or terrace, or any part thereof; 
b.  The projection will not significantly diminish light and air to the main building or to homes on either side of the main building; and 
c.  The projection will not significantly alter or diminish the visual impression of the minimum required front yard setback as an open, unobstructed lawn panel in common with other front lawn panels along the block frontage. 
d.  The covered porch or terrace will continue to create a uniform visual impression of a common front yard area along the block frontage. 
e.  The projection of the covered porch or terrace into the minimum required front yard will be such that it will not become a visually predominant structural feature along the block frontage, diminishing the common front yard appearance of the block frontage. 
(8)  Projections into yards. Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side yard, and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three feet. 
(9)  Access through yards. For the purpose of this code, access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement servicing a like function, and not in excess of nine inches above the grade upon which placed, shall for the purpose of this code not be considered to be a structure, and shall be permitted in any required yard. 
(10)  Lots having water frontage. On those lots or parcels having water frontage, a covered and/or uncovered boat well shall be permitted after review and approval of plans by the planning commission. 
(11)  Private swimming pools. The lot coverage limitations of this chapter shall not apply to private aboveground swimming pools less than 113 square feet in area or 12 feet in diameter and 42 inches in depth at the pool side. Aboveground pools larger than 113 square feet in area or 12 feet in diameter and 42 inches in depth at the pool side and in-ground pools shall be subject to the lot coverage limitations of this chapter. 
(12)  Parking requirements on existing business lots. Lots of record in B-1 and B-3 districts, at the time this chapter became effective, and platted as 20-foot frontage lots, and those business lots abutting lots of record and having a depth of 100 feet or less, shall provide at least two off-street parking spaces for each 20 feet of frontage. The number of spaces required in Article XXVI in this chapter shall not represent the minimum requirement on these lots. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1(3300), 2-20-2007) 
APPENDIX A - FEES AND CHARGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. A-1. - Publications and documents. 
    Upon payment of the following charges, the city shall furnish copies of the following documents: 
(1)  Zoning ordinance ..... $15.00 
(2)  Zoning or city maps ..... 5.00 
(3)  Engineering standard details (reproducible, per sheet) ..... 15.00 
(4)  Fire and ambulance reports ..... 5.00 
(Code 1974, § 13-1; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-2. - Dishonored checks. 
    Service charge for any negotiable instrument, including bank check, accepted by the city for payment, which is dishonored after being presented for payment ..... $35.00 
(Code 1974, § 13-62; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-3. - Appeals and rezoning requests. 
    The following fees shall be charged for a zoning appeal or request pursuant to chapter 110 of the Code of Ordinances, a construction code board of appeals request, or a rezoning request: 
(1)  Residential zoning appeal ..... $200.00 
(2)  Commercial, multiple residential and industrial appeal ..... 500.00 
(3)  Rezoning request ..... 500.00 
(4)  Construction code board of appeals request ..... 200.00 
(Code 1974, § 13-2; Ord. No. 691, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-4. - Curb cuts, sidewalks and drive approach replacement. 
    Prior to issuance of any permit for a curb cut or sidewalk or drive approach excavation, the following charges shall be paid as costs incurred by the city: 
(1)  For making a driveway curb cut, per foot ..... $5.00 
with a $50.00 minimum 
(2)  Sidewalk and driveway approach replacement ..... $50.00 
(Code 1974, § 13-3; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Cross reference- Construction and repair, § 82-31 et seq. 
Sec. A-5. - Pavement excavations generally. 
    The following charges shall be made for pavement excavations (for the purpose of utility, water or sewer taps/installation). Pavement excavations include the cutting of concrete pavement, asphalt with a concrete base, or asphalt with an aggregate base: 
(1)  Permit fee (includes an initial inspection and one final) ..... $75.00 
(2)  Payment of a $1,000.00 (or cost to cover the pavement replacement, whichever is greater) cash bond to the city to ensure restoration of the disturbed pavements, lawns and sidewalks to their original conditions within 30 days of the project completion, which sum shall be fully refundable upon complete restoration to the satisfaction of the city, or partially refundable after deduction for the costs incurred by the city in completing the restoration. 
(Code 1974, § 13-4; Ord. No. 691, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-6. - Sewer and drain installations. 
    Prior to issuance of any permit for the installation of any sewer or drain, the following fees and charges shall be paid: 
(1)  Permit based fee: for each connection, when a new sewer and/or main is installed, a minimum permit fee of $75.00 shall be charged in addition to the following: 
(2)  Sanitary sewer installations between main line and buildings: 
a.  Lines not exceeding 6 inches in diameter ..... $45.00 
b.  Lines not exceeding 12 inches in diameter ..... 75.00 
c.  Lines not exceeding 16 inches in diameter ..... 95.00 
d.  Lines over 16 inches in diameter ..... 110.00 
e.  Manholes, each ..... 25.00 
(3)  Storm drains underground or aboveground to the building sewer: 
a.  Lines not exceeding 6 inches in diameter ..... $45.00 
b.  Lines not exceeding 12 inches in diameter ..... 75.00 
c.  Lines not exceeding 18 inches in diameter ..... 95.00 
d.  Lines over 18 inches in diameter ..... 110.00 
e.  Catch basins, each ..... 25.00 
(4)  Subsoil drains (outside drain tile) ..... 40.00 
(5)  Sewer extension due to building addition ..... $40.00 
(6)  Laboratory tests: For the testing of materials, devices, and various equipment not specifically listed in this section. To cover the cost of service incidental to the laboratory testing involved, a charge of $30.00 for each man-hour or fraction thereof shall be made. 
(7)  Sanitary sewer (use fee): 
The maximum fee for a new isolated single family residence, regardless of size of the city sanitary sewer main, shall be $6,500.00. 
Size based on the inside diameter of the city sanitary sewer main being tapped: 
a.  12 inches or smaller ..... $2,000.00 
b.  15 inches ..... 2,500.00 
c.  18 inches ..... 3,000.00 
d.  21 inches ..... 4,000.00 
e.  24 inches ..... 5,500.00 
f.  27 inches ..... 7,500.00 
g.  30 inches ..... 10,000.00 
h.  36 inches ..... 15,000.00 
i.  Sanitary sewer mains in excess of 36 inches diameter ..... 20,000.00 
(8)  Storm drain (use fee). Size based on the inside diameter of the city storm sewer main being tapped or the inside diameter of the discharge pipe at the manhole or catch basin: 
a.  Not exceeding 6 inches in diameter ..... $40.00 
b.  Not exceeding 12 inches in diameter ..... 60.00 
c.  Not exceeding 18 inches in diameter ..... 100.00 
d.  Over 18 inches in diameter ..... 110.00 
(Code 1974, § 13-5; Ord. No. 691, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 793, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. A-7. - Water distribution and tapping. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit for the installation of any water distribution system or the tapping of any such system to the city water system, the following charges shall be made (the plumbing permit base fee shall be charged for water distribution systems): 
(1)  Water distribution systems: 
Size 
(inches) Fee 11/4 and smaller ..... $40.00 21/2 and smaller ..... 50.00 4 and smaller ..... 60.00 Over 4 ..... 80.00  
(2)  For the replacement of piping when no increase in size is made and when made in conjunction with the installation or replacement of fixtures, a fee of $40.00 shall be paid. 
(3)  Fees for complete new systems shall be based on the size of the distribution pipe at the meter. 
(4)  Fees for alterations, enlargements and extensions shall be charged for each new branch or extension according to its size at its connection with an existing water distribution system. 
(5)  The charge for tapping a water service or supply pipe, one inch or smaller shall be $2,500.00 For pipes over one inch, the charge shall be $2,500.00 or the cost of labor, materials and restoration expenses, whichever is greater. The charge for disconnecting any size water service from the main or service shut-off will be $1,500.00 or the actual cost of labor, materials and restoration expenses, whichever is greater. Such fees are to be paid in advance, except in the case of abandoned buildings, for which the charge will be placed as lien on the property. 
(Code 1974, § 13-6; Ord. No. 690, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 691, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 755, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 98. 
Sec. A-8. - Cable communications systems franchises. 
(a)  Initial request. The fee for an initial request for a franchise to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system in the city or to furnish a cable communications service shall be $5,000.00. 
(b)  Sale or transfer. The fee for a request for approval of sale or transfer of a cable communications company shall be $3,000.00. 
(Code 1974, § 91/2-10(b), (e)(1)) 
Sec. A-9. - Emergency medical services. 
(a)  The following fees shall be assessed to and paid by any person utilizing the services of an emergency vehicle owned or operated by the city for purposes of transporting that person to a facility for emergency medical treatment: 
(1)  Basic, non-emergent ambulance service ..... $425.00 
(2)  Basic, emergent ambulance service ..... 550.00 
(3)  Advance life support system (1, non-emergent) ..... 600.00 
(4)  Advance life support (emergent) ..... 650.00 
(5)  Advance life support system (2) ..... 825.00 
(6)  Reimbursement for mileage, per loaded mile ..... 13.50 
(7)  Reimbursement to City for extrication equipmen ..... 500.00 
(8)  Reimbursement to City for oxygen treatment ..... 50.00 
(b)  Medical treatment of those confined. Any person held in custody, confined or incarcerated by the city, including but not limited to: individuals who are i) under arrest, ii) incarcerated, iii) imprisoned, iv) escaped from confinement, v) under supervised release, vi) on medical furlough, vii) residing in a mental health facility or halfway house, viii) living under home detention, ix) or confined completely or partially in any way under a penal statute or rule; shall be solely responsible for the payment of any medical services rendered to, and received by, that person during the course of his or her confinement with the city, or at the city's or court's direction, including without limitation, transportation to and from a medical treatment facility, and any treatment deemed necessary by his or her treating physician, whether or not requested by the prisoner; and shall be required to reimburse the city, in full for any fees or charges incurred for such services, if not paid directly to medical facility or practitioner by the prisoner or his or her insurance carrier. 
(Code 1974, § 13-8; Ord. No. 672, § 1, 6-7-2004; Ord. No. 692, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 714, § 1, 5-27-2008; Ord. No. 716, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 722, § 1, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 756, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 767, § 1, 1-7-2013) 
Sec. A-10. - Vehicle daily storage fee. 
(1)  Passenger vehicle, seizure or forfeiture ..... $25.00 
(2)  Commercial truck tractor or trailer, seizure or forfeiture (over 10,000 pounds GVW) ..... 25.00 
(3)  Commercial truck, tractor and trailer, seizure or forfeiture ..... 50.00 
    Fees are waivable by chief of police in the event of acquittal in associated criminal charges. 
(Code 1974, § 13-9; Ord. No. 678, § 1, 11-15-2004) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Sec. A-11. - Animal pound fees. 
(a)  The fee for the care, custody and feeding of an animal while in custody at the city pound shall be $25.00. 
(b)  If an animal is impounded for straying a second or any subsequent time within one year, the fee payable for release shall be $25.00, plus a housing fee of $10.00. 
(c)  If an animal is impounded by reason of biting a person or other domestic pet, and the animal is claimed by the owner or other authorized person following the ten-day quarantine period, the impoundment fee shall be $10.00 per day for a resident, $12.00 per day for a non-resident of the city. 
(d)  If an animal is voluntarily surrendered to the pound for care or placement, the owner shall pay a fee of $30.00. 
(e)  If an animal is presented for, or subjected to, a euthanasia procedure by the pound, the owner shall pay to the city a fee of $75.00. 
(f)  The fee for disposal of a euthanized animal is $25.00 
(g)  The rental fee for an animal trap is $50.00, per month. 
(h)  The fee for disposal of the contents of a private trap is $5.00. 
(Code 1974, § 6-10; Ord. No. 727, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14. 
Sec. A-12. - Solid waste collection. 
(a)  Loader pickups. The fee for loader pickups of solid waste shall be $50.00 per cubic yard of material collected, with a $50.00 minimum charge. Debris, such as concrete, dirt, bricks, sod, or loose leaves collected other than during the free fall pickup, is collected by front loader. Debris from work performed by a commercial contractor is not eligible for this service. 
(b)  Collection from commercial establishments and churches. The collection charge for each container of commercial and church garbage emptied by the city pursuant to chapter 74, article II, division 3 shall be as follows: 
(1)  First pickup: $6.00 monthly, per cubic yard of container capacity with two cubic yard minimum of $12.00. 
(2)  Additional pickups: $12.00 per cubic yard, with two cubic yard minimum of $24.00. 
(c)  Collection from condominiums and individual apartment units and public schools: No charge. 
(d)  Purchase of residential trash carts from city by commercial establishment: $75.00 each, limit two. Used trash carts may not be returned for credit. 
(e)  Special pick-ups from residential property: $ 20.00 per load. 
(Code 1974, §§ 16-39(a), 16-47(a); Ord. No. 689, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 738, § 1, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 739, § 1, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 764, § 1, 6-4-2012) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 74. 
Sec. A-13. - Refuse transfer station drop-off rates. 
    Persons and businesses located within the city shall be allowed dumping privileges at the refuse transfer station (excluding recyclables,) at the following rates: 
(1)  Business rate: 
a.  $35.00 per ton, with a $75.00 minimum charge per dump. 
(Shingle dumping is not permitted.) 
(2)  Resident rate: 
a.  $5.00 per car, van or SUV; 
b.  $10.00 per pickup truck, trailer (eight-foot max. length). 
(3)  Non-resident rates, when authorized by city council: 
a.  $30.00 per car, van or SUV; 
b.  $45.00 per pickup truck or trailer (eight-foot maximum length), inclusive of any lawful materials. 
(Code 1974, § 16-40; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 764, § 1, 6-4-2012) 
Sec. A-14. - Water reconnection fee. 
(a)  Whenever water is turned off for any premises because of any violation of chapter 98, article II, pertaining to water service, a foreclosure, or a resident request, the fee to cover the cost of labor for turning the water "off" or "on" during normal business hours, shall be $35.00, or $125.00, if undertaken during holidays or outside normal business hours. In the event both the "turn off" and "turn on" are accomplished within any one regular shift, or within any one four-hour over-time shift, a single charge shall be applied. 
(b)  The fee for a "final read" of a meter shall be $35.00. 
(c)  The fee for a final read in conjunction with a shutoff shall be $45.00. 
(Code 1974, § 33-22; Ord. No. 691, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 749, § 1, 3-7-2011) 
Sec. A-15. - Charge for delinquent water bills placed on tax roll. 
    A charge of $25.00 shall be levied per account for placing delinquent water bills on the tax roll. 
(Code 1974, § 33-45) 
Sec. A-16. - Minimum use charge. 
    The minimum fee for water service, per billing cycle shall be $20.00 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-16.5. - Police department fees. 
(a)  Gun registration, notarization ..... $5.00 
(b)  Finger prints ..... 25.00 
(c)  Incident report ..... 5.00 
(d)  Accident report ..... 5.00 
(e)  Records check ..... 10.00 
(f)  PBT test ..... 10.00 
(g)  Bond posting ..... 10.00 
(h)  Prisoner processing ..... 20.00 
(i)  VIN verification ..... 10.00 
(j)  Vehicle inspection (waivable) ..... 10.00 
(k)  Sign off for waivable citations ..... 10.00 
(l)  OWI stop, cost recovery with conviction (actual) minimum ..... 125.00 
(m)  Sexual offender registration fee ..... 10.00 
(n)  Liquor license transfer ..... 250.00 
(o)  Temporary liquor license ..... 25.00 
(p)  False alarms ..... TBD 
(q)  Vehicle impound fee ..... 10.00 
(Ord. No. 728, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-17. - Cemetery services. 
    The following fees shall be assessed to and paid by any person utilizing the services of the department of public services or burials in the city's cemetery: 
(1)  Burial of cremains, weekdays ..... $400.00 
(2)  Burial of cremains, weekends and holidays ..... 550.00 
(3)  Burial of full body receptacle, weekdays ..... 950.00 
(4)  Burial of full body receptacle, weekends and holidays ..... 1100.00 
(Ord. No. 729, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-18. - Tree planting services. 
    The following fees shall be assessed to and paid by any person utilizing the services of the department of public services for planting of trees selected by it for placement at residences between the curb and sidewalk area: 
(1)  Cost per tree ..... $50.00 
(Ord. No. 730, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-19. - Reclamation services. 
    The following fees shall be assessed to and paid by any person utilizing the services of the department of public services for reclamation services: 
(1)  Recovery of refrigerant materials, per section 74-48, inclusive of any special pick-up fee set forth in section A-12. 
(Ord. No. 731, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 739, § 1, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. A-20-A-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. A-41. - Generally. 
    The following fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license required by this code: 
(1)  Bicycle registration: 
a.  Permanent license ..... $1.00 
b.  Transfer of license ..... 0.75 
(2)  Bowling alleys ..... 100.00 
(3)  Circuses: 
a.  First day ..... 75.00 
b.  Each subsequent day ..... 20.00 
(4)  Sideshow in connection with circus: 
a.  First day ..... 40.00 
b.  Each subsequent day ..... 10.00 
(5)  Massage parlors: 
a.  Each non-certified establishment, annually ..... 500.00 
b.  Each certified establishment, annually ..... 100.00 
c.  Roominghouses, per room ..... 3.00 
d.  Motor courts, per cabin or unit ..... 15.00 
(6)  Mechanical amusement devices: 
a.  Owner-operator applicant fee: $100.00 each year, or portion thereof, due on January 1 for the first mechanical equipment device covered by the license, plus $25.00 for each additional amusement device covered under such license, including juke boxes. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  A penalty of 4% per month shall be applied to any payment received after January 31. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Open air markets including farmers market, annually ..... 50.00 
(9)  Outdoor assemblies, per event ..... 200.00 
(10)  Peddlers, ice cream vendors and hawkers, per person, per calendar quarter, or portion thereof, when operating ..... 100.00 
(11)  Pool and billiard rooms, annually ..... 100.00 
(12)  Private patrol service: 
a.  Application fee, per application ..... 50.00 
b.  License fee, annually ..... 300.00 
(13)  Public dances, daily ..... 750.00 
(14)  Reserved. 
(15)  Taxicabs: 
a.  First vehicle ..... 50.00 
b.  Each additional vehicle ..... 15.00 
c.  Driver's permit ..... 5.00 
(16)  Transient merchants: 
a.  Registration and first day ..... 250.00 
b.  Each additional day per calendar year ..... 25.00 
(17)  Cat or dog license: 
a.  For each cat and dog license, annually ..... 12.00 
b.  Replacement tags ..... 2.00 
(18)  The annual fee for kennel licenses shall be as follows: 
a.  Four to six animals ..... 25.00 
b.  Seven to nine animals ..... 40.00 
c.  Ten or more animals ..... 50.00 
d.  Animal medical clinics which commercially board animals ..... 50.00 
(19)  Weapons: Application for pistol license: "Applicable state fees" 
(Code 1974, §§ 5-132, 13-17, 18-199; Ord. No. 654, § 1, 5-20-2002; Ord. No. 732, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 773, § 1, 3-18-2013) 
Sec. A-42. - Administrative fees. 
    Annual fee. All building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical contractors and sign contractors shall pay an annual administrative fee of $50.00 
(Code 1974, §§ 13-18, 13-19; Ord. No. 691, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Cross reference- Building contractors, § 18-61 et seq. 
Secs. A-43-A-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 726, § 1, adopted April 12, 2010, in effect, repealed the former article III, §§ A-71-A-87, and enacted a new article III as set out herein. The former article III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code of 1974, §§ 13-29-13-36, 13-38, 13-45, 13-46, 13-48-13-50, 13-52, 13-53, 13-87; Ord. No. 679, adopted December 6, 2004; Ord. No. 680, adopted December 6, 2004 and Ord. No. 691, adopted August 1, 2005. 

Sec. A-71. - Permit fees generally. 
    The following fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit required by this code: 
(1)  Automobile service station ..... $200.00 
(2)  Boat ramp use: 
a.  Resident fee ..... 30.00 
b.  Nonresident fee ..... 60.00 
(3)  Explosives, storage and distribution ..... 100.00 
(4)  Residential fence permit ..... 50.00 
(5)  Commercial and industrial fences: for erection, alteration, relocation or repair, permit fees shall be based upon the cost of the work and shall be calculated as specified in section A-76(2)b. permit fee. 
(6)  Mobile home parking ..... 15.00 
(7)  Tree or shrub permit ..... 100.00 
(8)  Loading or unloading backed vehicle: 
a.  Premises (all vehicles) permit ..... 50.00 
b.  Vehicle permit ..... 25.00 
(9)  Residential concrete flatwork ..... 75.00 
(10)  Sheds (less then 200 square feet) ..... 60.00 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-72. - Site plan review fees. 
    The following fees shall be charged for the purpose of reviewing site plans in accordance with the requirements of chapter 110 of the Code of Ordinances, pertaining to zoning: 
(1)  Sites 0-20 acres ..... $1,000.00 
(2)  Each additional or portion thereof ..... 100.00 
(3)  Sites 20 acres or more ..... 300.00 
(4)  Major redesign of plan under subsection (1), (2), or (3) above: Same as above. 
(5)  Each additional review of site: One-half of original fee. 
(6)  Soil erosion and sedimentation fees: See section A-74. 
(7)  Those site plans not requiring review by the planning commission or the city planning consultant will require a base review fee of $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-73. - Subdivision plan review fees. 
    The following fees shall be charged for the purposes of reviewing subdivision plans by the city (including public hearing): 
(1)  Subdivision/condominium plat, plus $50.00/lot ..... $  600.00 
Examples: 
Single parcel platted into 100 lots ..... 5,650.00 
Two parcels platted into 100 lots ..... 5,700.00 
Parcel split into three and one of the parcels platted into 100 lots ..... 5,750.00 
Parcel platted into 50 lots and amended/replatted into an existing 100 lot condominium plat ..... 3,150.00 
(2)  Existing plat reconfigured into additional or lessor lots, plus $50.00/lot ..... 600.00 
Examples: 
Existing 100 lot condo reconfigured to 110 lots ..... 6,100.00 
Existing 100 lot condo reconfigured into 90 lots ..... 5,100.00 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 86. 
Sec. A-74. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
    The fee schedule for erosion and sedimentation control plan review and field inspection is as follows: 
Permit Class Size of Earth Change Plan Review Fee Permit and 
Inspection Fee Single-family residence construction -- $60.00 $200.00 per 1 year All other construction Less than one acre $60.00 $290.00 One acre to 9 acres $60.00 per acre $290.00 per acre 10 acres to 39 acres $600.00+$40.00/acre over 10 acres $2900.00+$150.00/acre over 10 40 acres and above $1800.00+$30/acre over 40 acres $7400.00+$100.00/acre over 40 acres Annual -- $60.00/acre $50.00/acre/year  
Notes: 
1.  Annual permits are issued for sanitary landfills, sand and gravel operations, large earth fill projects and similar operations that will continue for more than thirty (30) months. 
2.  Fees apply to total project site unless applicant clearly demonstrates on the plans that only a specific portion of the site will involve an earth change. For projects in easements or rights-of-way, determine the earth change area by multiplying project length by total construction easement width. Minimum easement width - 20 feet. 
3.  Round fractional acreage up to nearest whole acre. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-75. - Site development permits. 
    The following fees will be charged for a site development permit to cover the site development and inspection charges incurred by city personnel furnished for development construction inspection to ensure compliance with the appropriate city codes and specifications: 
(1)  Seven percent of the total development costs of a parcel of property. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-76. - Building permits. 
(a)  Plan review fee. For all structures, including new residential, commercial and industrial building additions, alterations, pools and accessory structures, the plan review fee will include a base review fee and a plan review fee based upon the type of construction. This fee shall be paid at the time of submission of all plans for review and shall be paid in addition to any permit fees as follows: 
(1)  Review, base fee: Residential, commercial and industrial ..... $75.00 
(2)  Plan review fee: Residential ..... 200.00 
(3)  Plan review fee commercial and industrial shall be paid per the following fee schedule: 
Building Valuation (commercial and industrial)* 
$0-$500,000.00 0.0013 of building valuation but not less than $300.00 Over $ 500,000.00 0.0003 of building valuation over $500,000.00 plus $650.00  
*Based on the current State of Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes and Fire Safety square foot construction cost table. 
Mechanical, plumbing, electrical codes, each: 25 percent of building plan review fee 
Barrier free design, energy (if separate review): 25 percent of building plan review fee 
(4)  If proposed plan review cannot be completed by the city, a third party will be used to review the plans and the developer will be responsible for all associated charges. 
(b)  Building permit fee. The fee for building permits shall be based upon a base permit fee and the permit fee which is the estimated cost of the building or altering the building as follows: 
(1)  Base permit fee: 
Residential, commercial and industrial ..... $75.00 
(2)  Permit fee: Residential $10.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of estimated construction cost. 
Commercial and industrial shall be paid per the following fee schedule: 
Building Permit(commercial and industrial)* Fee 
$0.00 to $1,000.00 (includes one inspection only) $75.00 $1,000.00 to $10,000.00 $75.00 plus $10.00 per $1,000.00 over $1,000.00 $10,001.00 to $100,000.00 $165.00 plus $3.00 per $1,000.00 over $10,000.00 $100,000.00 to $500,000.00 $435.00 plus $2.00 per $1,000.00 over $100,000.00 $500,000.00 plus $1,235.00.00 plus $3.00 per $1,000.00 over $500,000.00  
*Based on the current State of Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes & Fire Safety square foot construction cost table. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 793, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. A-77. - Refunds. 
    Request for refunds must be made within three months of the date of issuance of a permit unless specifically otherwise approved by the city engineer and shall be subject to deductions as follows: 
(1)  A minimum of the base permit fee shall be deducted to cover the cost of the overhead. 
(2)  If any inspections have been made prior to cancellation of the permit, an amount equal to the rate for such inspection, as specified in Section A-78 shall also be deducted 
(3)  Permits are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-78. - Additional inspections. 
    The permit fee for each building permit shall normally include only those called for inspections specifically enumerated in the governing ordinance. The permit fee for all other permits shall normally include no more than one rough and/or one final inspection. All additional inspections necessitated by the work not being ready or not being properly completed at the time inspection was called for, all reinspection of violation corrections, all inspections of repairs and/or alterations not covered in the various permit fee schedules, all overtime inspection, all special inspections not otherwise provided for and all extra inspections made at the request of the owner or the contractor shall be charged for as follows: 
(1)  Additional inspections (during normal working hours): per hour or fraction thereof ..... $50.00 
(2)  Unable to gain entry at time of inspection, each unit ..... 50.00 
(3)  Work not complete at time of inspection, each unit ..... 50.00 
(4)  Certificate of occupancy ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-79. - Permit for demolition of buildings. 
    The permit fee for demolition of buildings and structures in the city shall be as follows: 
Base permit fee: 
Residential, commercial and industrial ..... $75.00 
(1)  One-family residential: $50.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, (minimum of $30.00) of estimate demolition cost (including abatement costs), plus $75.00 base. 
(2)  All other building: $10.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, (minimum of $50.00) of estimated demolition costs (including abatement costs) plus $75.00 base. 
(3)  Performance bond: A minimum performance bond will be required in the amount of the estimated demolition costs (including abatement), section 18-34 permits and bond. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 793, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
Sec. A-80. - Permit for moving buildings. 
    For the moving of a building or structure from its foundation on a parcel of land to some other location without going upon a public street or way, the permit fee shall be $75.00. For the moving of a building or structure into, across or through a public street, alley or other public place in the city for a distance one-fourth mile or less, the permit fee shall be $150.00 and for each additional one-fourth mile or less, the permit fee shall be $150.00, and for each additional one-fourth mile or fraction thereof, such building or structure is moved along a public street, alley or other public place in the city, the permit fee shall be an additional $75.00 per each one-fourth mile. A demolition permit under A-79 may be required. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 793, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Sec. A-81. - Electrical permits and inspections. 
    The fees for electrical permits and inspections shall be as follows: 
(1)  Base Permit fees: 
Residential, commercial and industrial ..... $75.00 
(2)  New one-family residence (flat rate covers all services) ..... 250.00 
Up to 2,000 square feet, $7.00 per additional 100 square feet. 
(3)  Starter permits: 
Residential ..... $75.00 
Commercial or industrial ..... 100.00 
Represents base permit fee plus a minimum fee for beginning electrical installation where the amount of work being performed has not been determined. 
(4)  Minor electrical repairs ..... 50.00 
(5)  Installation permits: 
a.  Circuits: 
Residential: 
First circuit (new or extended) ..... 10.00 
Each additional circuit ..... 7.00 
Commercial/industrial (new or extended): 
First 25 circuits (each circuit) ..... 15.00 
Each additional circuit over 25 ..... 10.00 
b.  Data/telecommunications outlets: 
Up to 10 devices ..... 50.00 
11-20 devices ..... 100.00 
Over 20 devices (each) ..... 5.00 
c.  Power outlets (cook top, dishwasher, disposal, dryer, oven, range, sump pump, washer, water heater, water pump and other units not included in this section or contained elsewhere in this appendix) ..... 10.00 
d.  Feeders (bus ducts, raceways, etc.): 
First 50 feet or fraction thereof ..... 15.00 
Each additional 100 feet or fraction thereof ..... 7.00 
e.  Fire alarms: 
Up to 10 devices ..... 50.00 
11-20 devices ..... 100.00 
Over 20 devices (each) ..... 5.00 
f.  Fixtures: 
10 fixtures or fraction thereof ..... 10.00 
Each additional 10 fixtures or fraction thereof ..... 3.00 
Floodlights of 1,000 watts capacity each or over shall be considered as power units. 
Each cluster of floodlights consisting of lamps, each 1,000 watts or over shall be considered as one power unit or sum of lamp wattages. 
Each neon-type gas-tube lamp shall be counted as one unit. 
Lighting pole and base inspection ..... 8.00 
g.  Heating and air conditioning: 
Furnace ..... 15.00 
Air conditioning ..... 15.00 
Air conditioning and furnace (if combination units) ..... 25.00 
Air cleaner ..... 5.00 
Humidifier ..... 5.00 
Space heaters (includes circuits in each room): 
First room ..... 15.00 
Each additional room ..... 8.00 
h.  Standby generators: 
0 to 30 kw or kva ..... 100.00 
Over 30 total kw or kva ..... 150.00 
i.  Standby generator (any occupancy other than above): 
0 to 30 kw or kva ..... 60.00 
Over 30 total kw or kva ..... 100.00 
j.  Motion picture apparatus (per unit, includes wiring to each unit) ..... 25.00 
k.  Services: 
Temporary service ..... 40.00 
Temporary secondary service ..... 15.00 
New service (permanent) or change of service: 
Through 100 amp ..... 25.00 
Over 100 to 200 amp ..... 30.00 
Over 200 to 400 amp ..... 60.00 
Over 400 amp ..... 100.00 
Additional interruptible equipment to take advantage of special utility rates (no units over 15 kw), each unit ..... 20.00 
l.  Self-service fuel pumps or dispensing units: 
Each nozzle ..... 10.00 
Permit for installation of system: Not less than ..... 60.00 
m.  Sign circuits only (see circuit fee, commercial/industrial). 
n.  Sign connection only: 
Each sign, first circuit (provided inspection is made at the same time and same location) ..... 15.00 
Each additional circuit ..... 5.00 
Neon (each 25 feet) ..... 20.00 
o.  Smoke and/or heat detectors (residential and permanent): 
First 10 detectors ..... 20.00 
Next 50 detectors (each) ..... 5.00 
Over 50 detectors (each) ..... 3.00 
p.  Swimming pools: 
Above ground ..... 30.00 
Below ground ..... 50.00 
Hot tubs and equipment ..... 50.00 
q.  Temporary wiring (connections, displays, exhibits, shows, etc., including lighting, motors and other electrical equipment) ..... 50.00 
(6)  Inspections (no base fee required): The permit fee for each electrical permit shall normally include only those called for inspections specifically enumerated in the governing ordinance. The permit fee for all other permits shall normally include no more than one rough and/or one final inspection. All additional inspections necessitated by the work not being ready or not being properly completed at the time inspection was called for, all reinspection of violation corrections, all inspections of repairs and/or alterations not covered in the various permit fee schedules, all overtime inspections, all special inspections not otherwise provided for and all extra inspections made at the request of the owner or the contractor shall be charged for as follows: 
a.  Additional inspections and safety inspections, each unit (during normal working hours) ..... $50.00 
b.  Unable to gain entry at time of inspection, each unit ..... 50.00 
c.  Work not complete at time of inspection, each unit ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 793, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 98. 
Sec. A-82. - Mechanical permits and inspections. 
    The fees for mechanical permits and inspections shall be as follows: 
(1)  Base permit fee: 
Residential, commercial and industrial ..... $75.00 
(2)  Minor mechanical repairs ..... 50.00 
(3)  Heating: 
Residential heating system (includes duct and gas pipe) ..... 75.00 
Gas/oil burning equipment; new, replacement and conversion units: 
Burners with input less than 500,000 Btu ..... 40.00 
Burners over 500,000 Btu ..... 60.00 
Heat pumps; complete residential and commercial ..... 30.00 
Residential boiler ..... 30.00 
Hot water or steam piping, each system ..... 30.00 
Solid fuel burning equipment (includes chimney) ..... 45.00 
Chimney, factory-built, installed separately ..... 25.00 
Gas piping, each opening, new installation ..... 25.00 
Flue/vent damper ..... 15.00 
Flue liner ..... 25.00 
Water heater/pool heater ..... 25.00 
Solar, set of 3 panels (includes piping) ..... 20.00 
Electric heating equipment ..... 30.00 
(4)  Air conditioning and refrigeration: 
Evaporator coils ..... 30.00 
Refrigeration system under 5 hp, split system ..... 30.00 
Refrigeration system 5 hp to 15 hp, split system ..... 40.00 
Refrigeration system 15 hp to 50 hp, split system ..... 50.00 
Refrigeration system over 50 hp, split system ..... 80.00 
Chiller ..... 35.00 
Cooling towers ..... 35.00 
Compressor ..... 35.00 
(5)  Air handlers/heat wheels: 
Bath and kitchen exhaust (residential, includes duct) ..... 20.00 
Under 10,000 cfm (ventilation or exhaust) ..... 35.00 
Over 10,000 cfm (ventilation or exhaust) ..... 60.00 
Commercial hoods ..... 25.00 
(6)  Heat recovery units or through-the-wall fan coils ..... 25.00 
(7)  Humidifiers ..... 10.00 
(8)  Duct, each system ..... 35.00 
(9)  VAV boxes ..... 25.00 
(10)  Unit ventilators ..... 25.00 
(11)  Unit heaters (terminal units) ..... 25.00 
(12)  Tanks: 
Above ground ..... 40.00 
Below ground ..... 60.00 
(13)  Fire suppression/protection: 
$0.75 per sprinkler head, minimum ..... 20.00 
Piping $0.05 per foot, minimum ..... 25.00 
Duct $0.10 per foot, minimum ..... 25.00 
(14)  Inspections (base fee not required): The permit fee for each mechanical permit shall normally include only those called for inspections specifically enumerated in the governing ordinance. The permit fee for all other permits shall normally include no more than one rough and/or one final inspection. All additional inspections necessitated by the work not being ready or not being properly completed at the time inspection was called for, all reinspection of violation corrections, all inspections of repairs and/or alterations not covered in the various permit fee schedules, all overtime inspections, all special inspections not otherwise provided for and all extra inspections made at the request of the owner or the contractor shall be charged for as follows: 
a.  Additional inspection and safety inspections, each unit (during normal working hours) ..... 50.00 
b.  Unable to gain entry at time of inspection, each unit ..... 50.00 
c.  Work not competed at time of inspection, each unit ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 793, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. A-83. - Plumbing permits and inspections. 
    The fees for plumbing permits and inspections shall be as follows: 
(1)  Base permit fee, residential, commercial and industrial ..... $75.00 
(2)  Minor plumbing repairs ..... 50.00 
(3)  Fixtures ..... 10.00 
Water closet. 
Bathtub. 
Shower. 
Lavatory. 
Sink (of any description). 
Urinal. 
Bidet. 
Laundry tray. 
Drinking fountain. 
Laboratory, hospital, clinic fixtures, equipment and devices. 
Other fixtures not specifically listed. 
(4)  New stacks or stack alterations: 
Soil, waste vent and inside conductor ..... 10.00 
(5)  Water-connected appliances, equipment and devices ..... 10.00 
Water heater. 
Garbage disposal. 
Dishwasher. 
Humidifiers. 
Ice-making machine. 
Refrigerator. 
Washing machine. 
Beverage vending machine. 
Water softener. 
Connection to sprinkler system (irrigation). 
Other water supplied appliances, equipment and devices not specifically listed. 
(6)  Floor drains, special drains, traps and connections ..... 10.00 
Floor drain. 
Roof drain. 
Grease trap. 
Sump or interceptor (any description). 
Pump or water lift. 
Other traps not specifically listed. 
New connection and extension of existing drains ..... 15.00 
(7)  Main building to sewer extension ..... 40.00 
(8)  Reduced pressure zone backflow preventer: 
1 inch and smaller ..... 10.00 
2 inches and smaller ..... 25.00 
4 inches and smaller ..... 60.00 
Over 4 inches ..... 100.00 
(9)  Inspections (no base fee required): The permit fee for each plumbing permit shall normally include only those called for inspections specifically enumerated in the governing ordinance. The permit fee for all other permits shall normally include no more than one rough and/or one final inspection. All additional inspections necessitated by the work not being ready or not being properly completed at the time inspection was called for, all reinspection of violation corrections, all inspections of repairs and/or alterations not covered in the various permit fee schedules, all overtime inspections, all special inspections not otherwise provided for and all extra inspections made at the request of the owner or the contractor shall be charged for as follows: 
a.  Additional inspection and safety inspections, each unit (during normal working hours) ..... 50.00 
b.  Unable to gain entry at time of inspection, each unit ..... 50.00 
c.  Work not completed at time of inspection, each unit ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 793, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. A-84. - Residential and commercial occupancy. 
    The following fees shall be charged pertaining to the sale of buildings, change in use or tenancy, certificate of occupancy, or code compliance). 
(1)  Residential (one- and two-family residential, multiple dwellings, condominiums, townhouses, co-op apartments, hotels, motels, etc.), for inspections (building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical). This fee includes an initial inspection and one reinspection: 
One unit ..... $210.00 
Each additional unit ..... 60.00 
(2)  Correction of violation affidavit: 
Each inspection report ..... 100.00 
Extensions ..... 50.00 
(3)  Commercial: For inspections (building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical. This fee includes an initial inspection and one reinspection: 
Not exceeding 5,000 square feet ..... 240.00 
Over 5,001 square feet ..... 290.00 
(4)  Rental registration fee (per rental building) ..... 50.00 
(5)  Vacant property annual registration (per property) ..... 80.00 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-85. - Inspection of mobile home units. 
    The following fees shall be charged for inspection of mobile home units: 
(1)  General inspection for state-certified mobile home units ..... $50.00 
(2)  General inspection for non-certified mobile home units ..... 150.00 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Cross reference- Manufactured homes, ch. 62. 
Sec. A-86. - Lot division or lot combination. 
    The following fees shall be charged by the city for purposes of reviewing proposed divisions and combinations of land: 
(1)  One or two lot divisions/combinations ..... $400.00 
(2)  Three or four lot divisions/combinations ..... 600.00 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-87. - Wastewater contribution permit, sampling and testing. 
(a)  The fees for wastewater contribution permits and wastewater discharge permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge annual permits ..... $300.00 
(2)  Wastewater contribution annual permits ..... 300.00 
(b)  All costs for wastewater sampling and pollutant testing performed by the city as required to monitor and enforce compliance with any wastewater contribution permit or wastewater discharge permit issued by the city shall be reimbursed to the city by each permit holder at a rate determined by the city engineer to cover all costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
Sec. A-88. - Failure to obtain permits and pay fees. 
    Any contractor failing to obtain the permits and pay the fees required by sections A-71 through A-87, inclusive, prior to beginning the project for which the permit and/or fees were required, shall pay an additional fee equal to the fee required by these sections, except the additional fee hall not exceed $250.00. For each failure to obtain a permit or pay fees, in any 18-month period, any contractor, electrician or plumber licensed and/or registered under section A-42 shall be assessed an additional fee according to the following schedule: 
(1)  First failure ..... Warning 
(2)  Second failure ..... $100.00 
(3)  Third failure ..... 500.00 
(4)  Additional failures ..... 1,000.00 
    All failures after the first will be reported to the State Licensing Board. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 4-12-2010) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1974 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1974 Code, as updated through October 15, 2001, which are included herein. Sections of the 1974 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1974 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-4 1-1-1-4 1-5 1-9 1-6 1-5 1-7 1-7 1-8-1-10 1-8 2-1 2-1 2-2-2-5 2-61-2-64 2-15 2-111 2-17, 2-18 2-112, 2-113 2-28 2-131 2-64, 2-65 2-421, 2-422 2-67-2-69 2-423-2-425 2-71-2-74 2-426-2-429 2-80-2-88 2-471-2-479 2-94-2-101 2-501-2-508 2-120-2-127 2-531-2-538 2-128-2-131 2-451-2-454 2-132-2-137 2-591-2-596 2-137.1, 
2-137.2 2-597, 2-598 2-138 2-241 2-145-2-155 2-242-2-252 2-189-2-201 2-281-2-293 2-207-2-210 2-311-2-314 2-220-2-224 2-211-2-215 2-236 26-31 2-271-2-281 26-61-26-71 2-300-2-305 2-371-2-376 2-306 1-8 2-306(a)(1) 94-51 2-306(a)(2) 6-6 2-306(a)(3), 
2-306(a)(4) 14-114, 14-115 2-306(a)(5) 14-143 2-306(a)(6) 106-2 2-306(a)(13) 18-112 2-306(a)(15) 74-36 74-39, 74-40 74-72-74-78 2-306(a)(16) 74-45-74-47 2-306(a)(17) 74-107-74-112 74-142 2-306(a)(22) 94-6 2-306(a)(23)- 
2-306(a)(25) 70-102-70-104 2-306(a)(27) 70-112 2-306(a)(28) 82-3-82-7 2-306(a)(30) 102-42-102-44 2-306(a)(31) 102-51 2-306(a)(32) 98-35-98-37 98-41 2-306(a)(33) 110-687 2-306(a)(35) 14-85 2-306(a)(36) 66-84 2-306(a)(39) 98-242 2-306(a)(40) 98-245 2-306(a)(41), 
2-306(a)(42) 98-248, 98-249 2-306(a)(43), 
2-306(a)(44) 98-274, 98-275 2-307, 2-308 2-377, 2-378 2-321-2-331 26-101-26-111 3-16 66-442 3-17 66-441 3-18-3-23 66-443-66-448 3-27 66-449 4-1 6-1 6-4 4-2 6-2 4-4, 4-5 6-3, 6-4 4-8 66-234 4-9, 4-10 6-5, 6-6 5-16-5-19 10-151 5-20-5-22 10-152-10-154 5-33-5-36 10-31 5-47, 5-48 10-222 5-49 10-224 5-52 10-223 5-53 10-221 5-64, 5-65 10-61, 10-62 5-68-5-70 10-66 5-71 10-67 5-72 10-65 5-76, 5-77 10-68, 10-69 5-79-5-81 10-70-10-72 5-82 10-64 5-83, 5-84 10-73, 10-74 5-85 10-63 5-86, 5-87 10-66 5-98, 5-99 10-181, 10-182 5-100, 5-101 10-182, 10-183 5-102-5-114 10-185-10-197 5-115 10-184 5-116 110-353 5-127 10-101 5-128 10-105 5-129-5-132 10-121-10-124 5-132 A-41 5-133-5-135 10-125-10-127 5-136 10-104 5-137 10-103 5-138 10-105 5-139 10-102 6-1, 6-2 14-1, 14-2 6-3 14-82 6-4 14-3 6-5-6-7 14-83-14-85 6-8 14-81 6-9, 6-10 14-51, 14-52 6-10 A-11 6-11 14-53 6-22 14-112 6-23-6-26 14-111 6-27(a)-(c) 14-111 6-28, 6-29 14-31, 14-32 6-30-6-36 14-113-14-119 6-38, 6-39 14-54, 14-55 6-50-6-53 14-141 6-54 14-143 6-55 14-142 6-56 14-54 6-57 14-56 6-58, 6-59 14-144 6-71 14-221 6-72-6-78 14-241-14-247 6-79 14-223 6-80 14-248 6-81-6-83 14-224-14-226 6-84 14-222 6-85 14-249 6-100 14-171 6-101 14-191 6-102 14-193 6-103 14-173 6-104 14-192 6-105 14-174 6-106 14-194 6-107 14-172 7-1-7-6 22-81-22-86 7-17-7-23 22-111-22-117 8-1, 8-2 106-1, 106-2 8-3 106-113 8-4-8-9 106-81-106-86 8-10 106-114 8-21-8-29 106-31-106-39 8-31, 8-32 106-111, 
106-112 8-33-8-35 106-115 9-16(a) 18-31 9-16(b) 18-33 9-20(a) 18-31 9-20(d) 18-33 9-22(a) 18-31 9-22(d) 18-33 9-23(a) 18-31 9-23(d) 18-33 9-23.1 18-2 9-24(a) 18-31 9-24(d) 18-33 9-63, 9-64 18-61, 18-62 9-65-9-73 18-81-18-89 9-74 18-63 9-75 18-90 9-86 18-111 9-87, 9-88 18-113 9-89-9-92 18-115-18-118 9-93 18-121 9-94, 9-95 18-119, 18-120 9-96 18-114 9-97 18-116 9-99 18-122 9-100 18-33 9-110 18-1 91/2-2 50-62 91/2-3 50-61 91/2-4, 
91/2-5 50-63, 50-64 91/2-6(a), 
91/2-6(b) 50-91, 50-92 91/2-6(c) 50-65 91/2-6(d) 50-93 91/2-7, 
91/2-8 50-66, 50-67 91/2-9, 
91/2-10 50-111, 50-112 91/2-10(b) A-8 91/2-10(e)(1) A-8 91/2-11- 
91/2-22 50-113-50-124 91/2-24- 
91/2-30 50-68 91/2-31- 
91/2-34 50-151-50-154 10-1 34-31 10-2 34-36 10-4, 10-5 34-33, 34-34 10-5 34-35 10-6-10-8 34-37-34-39 11-1-11-6 30-2-30-7 11-7 30-1 12-54-12-56 38-31-38-33 12-57 38-35 12-58 38-34 12-59-12-64 38-36-38-41 12-65, 12-66 38-1, 38-2 12-84-12-86 38-101-38-103 12-87(a) 38-131 12-87(b), (c) 38-132 12-87(d) 38-133 A-87 12-88 38-134 12-89 38-136 12-90 38-138 12-91 38-135 12-92 38-137 12-93 38-139 12-94-12-96 38-107-38-109 12-97-12-99 38-104-38-106 12-111(a), 
12-111(b) 38-162, 38-163 12-112 38-161 12-113, 
12-114 38-165, 38-166 12-115(a) 38-167 12-116 38-168 12-117 38-191-38-195 12-118(b)-(e) 38-164 12-119, 
12-120 38-71, 38-72 121/2-1- 
121/2-8 82-131-82-138 13-1 2-2 A-1 13-2 2-3 13-2-13-6 A-3-A-7 13-8, 13-9 A-9, A-10 13-17, 13-18 A-41, A-42 13-19 A-42 13-29-13-36 A-71-A-78 13-38 A-79 13-45, 13-46 A-80, A-81 13-47 A-72 13-48-13-50 A-82-A-84 13-52, 13-53 A-85, A-86 13-61, 13-62 2-161, 2-162 13-62 A-2 13-63, 13-64 2-162, 2-163 14-1 42-1 14-2-14-5 42-3-42-6 14-6 42-2 14-7 42-7 14-17-14-20 42-31-42-34 14-26-14-31 42-121-42-126 14-37-14-42 42-151-42-156 14-44, 14-45 42-157, 42-158 14-56-14-58 42-181-42-183 14-59-14-61 42-185-42-187 14-62 42-184 14-62-14-67 42-188-42-193 14-78-14-89 42-221-42-232 14-90-14-108 42-251-42-269 14-109 42-233 14-115-14-132 42-291-42-308 14-134-14-137 42-309-42-312 14-143-14-146 42-331-42-334 14-157-14-161 42-361-42-365 141/2-1 46-32 141/2-2 46-31 141/2-3- 
141/2-7 46-33-46-37 141/2-16- 
141/2-19 46-61-46-64 141/2-25- 
141/2-29 46-81-46-85 15-1-15-9 54-31-54-39 15-72-15-74 22-141-22-143 15-75 22-142 15-76-15-82 22-144-22-150 15-111 54-61 15-112-15-116 54-81-54-85 15-122-15-134 54-101-54-113 16-1 74-31 16-2 74-33 16-3 74-36 16-4 74-80 16-5 74-79 16-7 74-34 16-8 74-32 16-19 74-35 16-20-16-25 74-37-74-42 16-26, 16-27 74-71, 74-72 16-28-16-32 74-74-74-78 16-33 74-73 16-34-16-39 74-43-74-48 16-39(a) A-12 16-40 74-49 A-13 16-44-16-47 74-102-74-105 16-47(a) A-12 16-48-16-54 74-106-74-112 16-55 74-101 16-56 74-113 16-58 74-114 16-69 74-141 16-70-16-76 74-143-74-149 16-77 74-142 17-1 18-151 17-4-17-7 18-171-18-174 17-8 90-1 17-200-17-207 18-191-18-198 18-1-18-10 22-31-22-40 18-11-18-20 22-42-22-51 18-64-18-68 22-301-22-305 18-69 22-331 18-70 22-333 18-71-18-73 22-335-22-337 18-74 22-332 18-75-18-77 22-338-22-340 18-78 22-334 18-79 22-306 18-173 22-241 18-174-18-177 22-271-22-274 18-178 22-243 18-179 22-242 18-180, 18-181 22-244, 22-245 18-191-18-196 22-171-22-176 18-197, 18-198 22-201, 22-202 18-199 22-205 A-41 18-200, 18-201 22-203, 22-204 18-202 22-206 18-203 22-209 18-204, 18-205 22-207, 22-208 18-206, 18-207 22-210, 22-211 19-1(a) 66-33 19-1(b), (c) 66-1 19-1(d) 66-231 19-1(e), 19-1(f) 66-2, 66-3 19-1(g) 66-233 19-1(h) 66-132 19-1(i) 66-204 19-1(j) 66-205 19-1(k) 66-83 19-1(l) 66-207 19-1(m) 66-206 19-1(n) 66-302 19-1(o)-(q) 66-201 19-2 66-84 19-3 66-31 19-4, 19-5 66-202, 66-203 19-6 66-201 19-7 66-208 19-8 66-62 19-9 66-4 19-10 66-209 19-11 66-232 19-12 66-106 19-14 66-131 19-15 66-102 66-104 19-16 66-101 19-17 66-103 19-18 66-105 19-19 66-64 19-20 66-82 19-21 1-8 19-22 66-32 19-23 66-81 19-32 66-152 19-33 66-151 19-34(a) 66-154 19-34(b) 66-153 19-35-19-37 66-155-66-157 19-38-19-40 66-171-66-173 19-47 66-271 19-53-19-58 66-272 19-69 66-332 19-70 66-334 19-71-19-73 66-351-66-353 19-75-19-79 66-333 19-85-19-88 66-331 19-89-19-93 66-63 19-99 38-221 19-101-19-103 38-222-38-224 19-109, 19-110 38-241 19-111 38-242 19-122-19-124 2-341-2-343 19-135-19-138 66-251-66-254 19-140-19-145 66-273 19-151-19-154 66-5 20-1 62-1 20-2 62-3 20-3 34-32 20-3-20-6 62-4-62-7 20-38-28-41 62-8 21-4 94-5 21-15-21-17 94-4 21-41 94-82 21-42 94-81 21-63-21-72 94-51-94-60 21-73 94-32 21-74 94-31 21-83 94-6 21-85 94-6 21-90 94-6 21-116, 21-117 94-111, 94-112 21-123-21-127 94-131-94-135 21-128 94-113 21-161 94-161 21-162 94-164-94-166 21-164 94-163 21-165 94-162 22-1 66-382 22-2 66-381 22-3 66-383 22-19-22-29 66-401-66-411 23-1 70-102 23-16-23-30 70-31-70-45 23-41-23-48 70-71-70-78 23-49 70-1 23-59-23-67 70-103-70-111 23-69-23-73 70-112-70-116 23-74(b), (c) 70-117 23-75-23-80 70-118-70-123 23-91 70-151 23-92-23-94 70-153-70-155 23-95 70-152 23-96 70-156 24-16, 24-17 42-61, 42-62 24-18-24-20 42-81-42-83 24-21 42-101 24-22, 24-23 58-61, 58-62 24-24-24-27 58-81-58-84 24-33 58-101 25-16-25-19 2-561-2-564 25-20 2-567 25-21, 25-22 2-565, 2-566 25-23, 25-24 2-568, 2-569 26-1 58-31 26-2, 26-3 66-301 26-4 66-61 26-25-26-30 58-131- 
58-136 26-41-26-48 58-161- 
58-168 26-59-26-67 58-191- 
58-199 26-68, 26-69 66-303 27-1-27-6 2-181-2-186 27-17-27-49 78-1-78-33 271/2-1- 
271/2-8 50-31-50-38 271/2-21- 
271/2-26 50-251- 
50-256 271/2-31, 
271/2-32 50-281, 
50-282 271/2-51(a)- 
271/2-56 50-221- 
50-224 271/2-58 50-226 271/2-58(a) 50-225 271/2-63- 
271/2-66 50-227- 
50-230 271/2-68- 
271/2-70 50-201- 
50-203 271/2-71, 
271/2-72 50-199, 
50-200 28-1-28-5 82-2-82-6 28-6 82-1 28-17-28-23 82-51-82-57 28-29, 28-30 82-81 28-31, 28-32 82-82, 82-83 28-33 82-7 28-39 82-102 28-40 82-101 28-41-28-43 82-103-82-105 29-1 86-31 29-2-29-6 86-61-86-65 29-7 86-32 29-18-29-24 86-81-86-87 29-25-29-30 86-101- 
86-106 29-31 86-136 29-42 86-135 29-43 86-142 29-44-29-54 86-161- 
86-171 29-55, 29-56 86-143, 
86-144 29-57 86-147 29-58, 29-59 86-172, 
86-173 29-60, 29-61 86-191, 
86-192 29-62 86-137 29-63-29-68 86-211- 
86-216 29-69 86-146 29-70-29-72 86-217- 
86-219 29-73 86-145 29-74-29-77 86-138- 
86-141 29-88-29-91 86-131- 
86-134 29-102-29-105 86-251- 
86-254 30-1 18-222 30-2 18-221 30-3-30-5 18-223- 
18-225 30-16-30-22 18-241- 
18-247 30-33-30-43 18-271- 
18-281 30-49-30-54 18-301- 
18-306 30-60-30-76 18-321- 
18-337 30-87-30-92 18-361- 
18-366 30-94 18-367 31-16 102-31 31-17-31-35 102-33- 
102-51 31-36 102-32 31-42-31-47 102-71- 
102-76 31-53-31-56 102-101- 
102-104 31-57-31-60 102-104- 
102-107 31-71-31-80 102-141- 
102-150 32-16 22-361 32-17 22-394 32-18 22-363 32-19 22-362 32-20-32-23 22-451-22-454 32-24-32-31 22-364-22-371 32-37-32-49 22-391-22-403 32-55, 32-56 22-421, 22-422 32-57 22-426 32-58-32-62 22-423-22-427 32-63 22-429 32-64 22-428 32-65-32-67 22-430-22-432 33-1 98-171 33-16 98-31 33-17 98-33 33-18-33-21 98-35-98-38 33-22 98-34 A-14 33-23-33-25 98-39-98-41 33-26 98-32 33-32, 33-33 98-61 33-34-33-38 98-62-98-66 33-44, 33-45 98-91, 98-92 33-45 A-15 33-46, 33-47 98-93, 98-94 33-48-33-50 98-94-98-96 33-56-33-65 98-121-98-130 33-76(a), (b) 98-174 33-76(c) 98-175 33-77(a), 33-77(b) 98-171, 98-172 33-78 98-176 33-79-33-84 98-180-98-185 33-85-33-87 98-177-98-179 33-101-33-107 98-211-98-217 33-120-33-128 98-241-98-249 33-141-33-152 98-271-98-282 33-161-33-170 98-301-98-310 33-181 98-173 33-182 98-186  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1974 Code, as updated through October 15, 2001, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1974 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede October 15, 2001, but which were never included in the 1974 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since October 15, 2001, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 368  8-20-1973 100 110-1 200, 201 110-2, 110-3 300-304 110-161- 
110-165 305 110-191 400-403 110-212- 
110-215 500-502 110-232- 
110-234 600-604 110-252- 
110-256 700-703 110-272- 
110-275 800-803 110-292- 
110-295 900-902 110-312- 
110-314 1000-1004 110-332- 
110-336 1100-1104 110-352- 
110-356 1200-1204 110-372- 
110-376 1300-1303 110-392- 
110-395 1400-1403 110-412- 
110-415 1500-1503 110-432- 
110-435 1600-1602 110-452- 
110-454 1650-1652 110-472- 
110-474 1700-1704 110-492- 
110-496 1800-1804 110-512- 
110-516 2000, 2001 110-641, 
110-642 2100 110-6 2101 110-5 2102(1)-2102(8) 110-121- 
110-128 2103-2113 110-672- 
110-682 2114 110-33 2115-2119 110-683- 
110-687 2201-2211 110-671 2203 110-688 2300 110-31 2301-2306 110-61-110-66 2307 110-34 2400-2406 110-91-110-97 art. XXV 110-32 art. XXVII 110-10 art. XXIX, 110-7, 110-8 art. XXX 3100-3103 110-4 art. XXXII 110-9 368-1  9-17-1973 1 110-273 370 12- 3-1973 1 90-1 371-8  7-15-1974 1 110-161 3 110-432- 
110-435 4 110-452- 
110-454 5 110-472- 
110-474 6, 7 110-641 368-3  6-16-1975 1 110-214 368-11  2-20-1979 1 110-414 2 110-253 
110-641 3 110-641 368-18  9-20-1982 1(1) 110-3 1(2) 110-214 1(3), 1(4) 110-253, 
110-254 1(5) 110-333 1(6) 110-532- 
110-535 110-538- 
110-541 1(7)-(11) 110-641 1(12), 1(13) 110-673, 110-674 1(14) 110-682 1(15)-(17) 110-33 1(18) 110-34 1(19) 110-611- 
110-617 368-19 11-15-1982 1 110-3 368-25 12- 5-1983 1 110-394 368-32  2- 3-1986 1 110-3 368-35  3-17-1986 1, 2 110-538, 
110-539 3 110-532- 
110-537 110-540, 110-541 368-39  1- 5-1987 1 110-641 368-41  9- 8-1987 1 110-688 368-43  2-16-1988 1, 2 110-673, 
110-674 498  9-16-1991 1 110-91 368-59  1- 6-1992 1 110-94 2 110-542 368-61 11-16-1992 1 110-688 368-65  2- 1-1993 1 110-542 368-62  6-21-1993 1 110-672 110-687 368-66  9- 7-1993 1 110-686 2 110-671 368-69 10-20-1997 1 110-3 2, 3 110-673, 110-674 4 110-538 368-74  1- 5-1998 1 110-641 368-78  3-15-1999 1, 2 110-641, 
110-642 368-79  4-19-1999 1 110-641 368-80  6- 7-1999 1 110-212- 
110-215 368-81  6- 7-1999 1 110-641 368-82  6- 7-1999 1 110-641 368-87  5-22-2000 1 110-641 368-88  7-10-2000 1 110-562- 
110-567 368-100  6- 4-2001 1 110-672 368-104  9-17-2001 1 110-63 368-105 10-15-2001 1 110-33 654  5-20-2002 1 App. A, § A-41 656  7-15-2002 1, 2 74-48, 74-49 657 10-21-2002 1(2-120) 2-531 1(2-122) 2-533 1(2-125), 
1(2-126) 2-536, 2-537 658 10-21-2002 1(271/2-50)- 
1(271/2-67) 50-181-50-198 659 11- 4-2002 1 94-4 2 94-7 368-110  1- 6-2003 1 110-643 660  1- 6-2003 1 2-592 368-111  4-28-2003 1 110-641 661  6- 2-2003 1 2-61 662  6- 2-2003 1 2-62 663  6- 2-2003 1 2-63 664  9- 2-2003 1 94-4 2 94-7 665 10-20-2003 1 2-164 667  1- 5-2004 1 74-49 669  3-15-2004 1 74-105 670  4-19-2004 1 6-4 671  4-19-2004 1, 2 18-151 672  6- 7-2004 1 42-155 App. A, § A-9 674 8-16-2004 1       Dltd 26-101-26-111       Added 26-101-26-112 675 12-20-2004 1       Added 42-181 2, 3       Added 42-184, 42-185 10       Rpld 42-181, 42-184-42-188 676 10-18-2004 1       Added 6-4(b)(4)-(6) 677 11-15-2004 1 94-3, 94-4 678 11-15-2004 1 App. A, § A-10 679 12-6-2004 1 App. A, § A-86 680 12-6-2004 1 App. A, § A-82 681 12-20-2004 Adopting Ord., p. ix 682 1-3-2005 1       Added 98-67 683 3-21-2005 1       Added 2-220-2-223 684 3-21-2005       Added 38-251-38-256 685 3-21-2005 1       Added 98-320 686 4-18-2005 1 66-156 687 5-23-2005 1 2-61 689 7-5-2005 1 App. A, § A-12 690 7-5-2005 1 App. A, § A-7 691 8-1-2005 1 App. A, §§ A-3, 
A-5-A-7, A-14, 
A-42, A-71, A-72, 
A-74-A-83, 
A-85-A-87 692 8-1-2005 1 App. A, § A-9 693 12-5-2005 1       Added 42-161-42-163 694 12-5-2005 1       Dltd 38-101-38-109, 
38-131-38-139 2       Added 38-101-38-105, 
38-131-38-145 695 11-21-2005 1       Added 82-8 696 1-3-2006 1 6-4(b)(1)-(3), (f)       Added 6-4(n) 697 1-3-2006 1 94-4(a), (b) 698 1-17-2006 1       Added 42-171, 42-172 699 2-6-2006 1       Added 6-7 700 2-21-2006 1 86-166 701 2-21-2006 1 86-136 702 3-6-2006 1 86-84 2       Rpld 86-104 703 5-1-2006 2       Added 98-131-98-134 704 10-16-2006> 1       Added 94-8 705 2-20-2007 1       Rpld Ch. 110       Added Ch. 110 705-1  9-21-2009 1 110-630(a)(5) 705-2  3-21-2011 1 110-252 705-3 10- 1-2012 1 110-28 2 110-253 3       Added 110-293(10) 4 110-333 705-4  1-22-2013 1 110-28 2 110-372 705-5  1-22-2013 1 110-293 705-7  6-17-2013 1       Added 110-538 705-8 12-16-2013 1 110-28 2 110-622       Rpld 110-623-110-626       Added 110-623-110-625 705-9 12-16-2013 1 110-602 706 3-5-2007 1-3 74-71-74-73 4       Rpld 74-74       Added 74-74 5 2-377(b) 708 5-21-2007 1 App. A, § A-9 709 5-21-2007 2       Added 2-65 3 2-61(b) 4 2-62(b) 5 2-63(b) 710  1-22-2008 1 42-181 2, 3 42-184, 42-185 711  1-22-2008 1 18-151 712  3- 3-2008 1       Added Ch. 2, Art. IX, Div. 9, §§ 2-601-2-605 714  5-27-2008 1 App. A, § A-9 715  6-16-2008 1       Added Ch. 22, Art. IX, §§ 22-471-22-475 716  2- 2-2009 1 App. A, § A-9 717  2- 2-2009 1 42-4 718  4-20-2009 1 22-271 719  5- 4-2009 1       Added Ch. 6, Art. II, 
§§ 6-8-6-11 720  6- 1-2009 1       Added Ch. 18, Art. V, 
§§ 18-200-18-211 721  6-15-2009 1       Added 18-34 722  7-20-2009 1 App. A, § A-9 723  3- 1-2010 1 98-171, 98-175, 98-243, 98-245, 98-248, 98-275, 98-276, 98-279, 98-282 724  2-16-2010 1 6-4(f) 725  3-15-2010 1       Added 22-481-22-491 726  4-12-2010 1 App. A, §§ A-1-A-6, A-12-A-14       Added App. A, § A-16 App. A, § A-42       Rpld App. A, §§ 
A-71-A-87       Added App. A, §§ A-71-A-88 727  4-12-2010 1 App. A, § A-11 728  4-12-2010 1       Added App. A, § A-16.5 729  4-12-2010 1       Added App. A, § A-17 730  4-12-2010 1       Added App. A, § A-18 731  4-12-2010 1       Added App. A, § A-19 732  4-12-2010 1 App. A, § A-41 733  4-19-2010 1       Added 98-401-98-408, 98-411, 98-421, 98-431-98-433 98-441, 98-442 98-451, 98-461, 98-462 98-471, 98-472 98-481-98-490 98-494, 98-495 734  6- 7-2010 1       Added 94-10, 94-11 735  6- 7-2010 1 42-4 736  6- 7-2010 1 98-171, 98-172, 
98-245 737  7- 6-2010 1 74-103 738  7- 6-2010 1 App. A, § A-12 739  8- 2-2010 1       Added 74-51 App. A, §§ A-12, A-19 740  8-15-2011 1       Rpld 22-506       Added 22-501-22-505 741  8-16-2010 2       Added 22-506 742 11- 1-2010 1 94-3, 94-7 743 11-15-2010 1       Added 98-501-98-521 744  1-10-2011 1 App. A, § A-9 745  2-22-2011 1       Rpld 2-63       Added 2-63 746  3- 7-2011 1       Rpld 2-62       Added 2-62 747  3- 7-2011 1 98-34 748  3- 7-2011 1 18-151 749  3- 7-2011 1 App. A, § A-14 750  3-21-2011 1 42-181 2 42-184 751  3- 7-2011 1 30-2 752  3-21-2011 1 18-171 754  7- 5-2011 1 66-208 755  9- 6-2011 1 App. A, § A-7 756  11- 7-2011 1 App. A, § A-9 757 12-19-2011 1 2-131 2       Added 2-114 758  1-23-2012 1 46-82 759  1- 9-2012 1 58-62 760  2- 6-2012 1 42-62 761  2- 6-2012 1 46-82 762  5- 7-2012 1 94-3, 94-7 763  5-21-2012 1 6-1 764  6- 4-2012 1 App. A, §§ A-12, A-13 765  6-18-2012 1       Added 22-52 766  1- 7-2013 1       Added 2-66 767  1- 7-2013 1 App. A, § A-9 768  2-19-2013 1       Added 14-120 769  2-19-2013 1 22-304 770  2-19-2013 1 App. A, § A-41 771  3-18-2013 1 14-111 772  3-18-2013 1 14-141 773  3-18-2013 1 App. A, § A-41 774  5- 6-2013 1 82-5 775  5- 6-2013 1 2-61 776  6-17-2013 1 42-362 777 11-12-2013 3       Added 2-701-2-712 778 10-28-2013 1       Added 2-70 779 12- 2-2013 1       Added 94-9 780  2- 3-2014 1       Added 66-274 781  3-17-2014 1       Added 2-71 782  4- 7-2014 1 66-272(c) 705-10  4-20-2015 1 110-28       Added 110-641 783  5-21-2015 1 2-61 784  5-21-2015 1 2-62 785  5-21-2015 1 2-63 705-11  8- 3-2015 1       Rpld 110-314(6) 786 12-14-2015 1 42-172 705-12 1-4-2016 1       Added 110-53(b) 787 4-18-2016 1 66-157 705-13 5-16-2016 1 110-53 705-14 7-11-2016 1       Added 110-85 705-15  9- 6-2016 1 110-53(b), (c) 788 10-17-2016 1 66-172 705-16 11-21-2016 1 110-28 2       Added 110-539 705-17  2- 6-2017 1       Added 110-642 789 6-19-2017 1 42-181 2 42-182 3 42-183 790 7-17-2017 1 66-274 705-18  8-21-2017 1 110-313 705-19  8-21-2017 1       Added 110-643 705-20 10- 2-2017 1 110-53 791 11- 6-2017 1 66-447(a) 2 22-304 705-21  1- 8-2018 1       Rpld 22-361-22-371 22-391-22-403 22-421-22-432 22-451-22-454 792  1- 8-2018 1 6-4(b) 705-22  9- 4-2018 1       Added 110-53(d) 793  9-17-2018 1 App. A, § A-6(1) App. A, § A-76(b)(1) App. A, § A-79(1), (2) App. A, § A-80 App. A, § A-81(1), (2), (4) App. A, § A-82(1), (2) App. A, § A-83(1), (2) 794 11-19-2018 1 98-34 795  2- 4-2019 1       Added 22-512  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws (MCL). 
MCL Section  
this Code 4.1241 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VII, 
Div. 2 8.3 et seq. 1-2 8.3u 1-10 8.4 1-4 8.4a 1-4 8.4b 1-3 8.5 1-9 10.31 et seq. Char. § 4.10 15.231 et seq. Char. § 17.3 15.231-15.246 50-183 50-195 15.261 Char. § 6.4 15.261 et seq. Char. § 6.4 26-65 15.321 et seq. Char. § 5.10 
2-242 15.328 Char. § 5.10 15.601 et seq. Char. § 5.7 24.201-24.328 38-101 28.421 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 66-171 28.425a 66-173 28.425f 66-172 28.425k 66-171 28.601 et seq. Ch. 58, Art. II, 
Div. 2 58-82 58-195 28.609 58-83 29.1 et seq. 42-1 29.3a 42-365 29.41 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. IV 29.361 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II, 
Div. 2 30.401 34-31 30.401 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 30.404(3) 34-34 30.409 34-35, 34-36 30.410 34-33, 34-34 30.414 34-32 45.515 et seq. 98-401 46.401 et seq. Char. § 5.9 Char. Ch. XV 61.1 et seq. Char. § 2.1 114.3(b), (c) Char. Ch. III 117.1 Char. § 1.1 117.1 et seq. Char. §§ 1.1-18.8 Char. § 2.2 Char. § 16.6 117.3(a) Char. § 4.1 Char. § 9.7 117.3(a), (c) Char. § 3.6 117.3(a), (d) Char. Ch. IV 117.3(e) Char. § 3.3 117.3(f) Char. § 9.2 117.3(g) Char. Ch. IX 
Char. § 9.1 117.3(h) Char. Ch. VIII Char. § 8.5 117.3(i) Char. Ch. IX 117.3(j) Char. § 6.9 117.3(k) Char. §§ 7.3- 
7.5 Char. § 7.7 18-151 18-171 42-181 94-3 117.3(l) Char. § 6.4 Char. § 17.3 117.3(m) Char. § 4.15 117.3(n) Char. Ch. VIII 117.4 22-81 117.4a Char. Chs. X, XI 117.4b Char. Ch. XI 117.4c Char. § 13.1 117.4d Char. Ch. XI 117.4e(3) Char. § 13.5 117.4i(g) Char. § 7.10 117.4i(h) Char. § 5.16 117.4i(k) Char. § 7.5 117.4(k) 1-8 117.4l 1-8 Char. § 7.5 117.4m Char. § 7.5 117.5 Char. § 2.2 Char. Ch. XI 117.5b 1-1 117.5e Char. § 13.3 117.5(e), (g) Char. Ch. X 117.21 Char. § 17.14 123.161 et seq. Char. § 13.4 98-94 123.501 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 123.1101 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 124.1 et seq. 94-161 124.251 et seq. Char. § 13.1 124.351 et seq. 94-161 124.401 et seq. 94-161 124.451 et seq. 94-161 124.501 et seq. Char. § 2.4 66-303 94-161 124.531 et seq. 94-161 125.286b 110-124 125.286d 110-124 125.31 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IX, 
Div. 7 2-568 86-211 125.32 2-561 125.33 2-563 125.33(1) 2-562 2-564 2-566 125.33(6) 2-567 125.51 et seq. Ch. 70 125.581 et seq. 2-568 Ch. 110 125.583a 110-622 110-623 110-624 110-625 125.584 110-25 125.584a Ch. 110, Art. XXX 125.584b Ch. 110, Art. XXII 125.584c Ch. 110, Art. XXII Ch. 110, Art. XXX 125.584d Ch. 110, Art. XXVIII 125.584e 110-621 125.584f 110-513 125.585 Ch. 110, Art. XXX 125.585a Ch. 110, Art. XXXI 125.586 110-27 125.1351 70-103 125.1415a(1) 90-1 125.1415a(5) 90-1 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 26-66 125.1508b 18-31 125.1523(1), (2) 18-33 125.1564 26-65 125.1601 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 26-31 125.1605 26-31 125.1651 26-62 125.1651 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. III 26-61-26-64 26-70 26-108 125.1652 26-63 125.1657 26-66 125.1661- 
125.1663 26-67 125.1663a 26-67 125.1664 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. IV 125.1664- 
125.1667 26-67 125.1667 26-68 125.1671 26-69 125.1680 26-71 125.2301 et seq. Ch. 62 62-2 98-401 98-421 110-124 125.2317 110-124 125.2336 110-124 125.286b 110-124 125.286d 110-124 125.2307 Ch. 62 129.11 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V Char. Ch. VIII Char. § 8.6 133.1 et seq. Char. Ch. X 141.101 et seq. 94-161 141.121 98-94 141.129 98-91 141.141 98-91 141.261 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 2-181 141.262 2-182 141.421 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V Char. Ch. VIII 141.2101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V Char. Ch. VIII 168.1 et seq. Char. Ch. III Ch. 30 168.30a et seq. Char. § 3.14 168.144l Char. § 3.4 Char. § 3.7 168.321 Char. § 5.6 168.491 et seq. Char. § 3.1 168.492 Char. § 3.1 168.499 30-3 168.544a Char. § 3.8, 
Char. § 3.9 168.552 Char. § 3.10 168.552a Char. § 3.10 168.559 et seq. Char. § 3.13 168.631 et seq. Char. § 3.5 168.644a et seq. 30-4 168.644a- 
168.646b 30-1 168.644b 30-5 168.644e Char. § 3.8 30-6 168.644f 30-6 168.654 et seq. Char. § 3.3 30-2 168.721 Char. § 3.2 168.851 et seq. Char. § 3.15 168.861 et seq. Char. § 3.16 168.951 et seq. Char. § 3.17 201.37 Char. § 3.6 Char. § 5.6 211.1 et seq. Ch. 90 211.2(2) Char. § 9.4 211.16 Char. § 9.17 211.24a Char. § 9.6 211.29 et seq. Char. § 9.8 Char. § 9.10 211.29(6) Char. § 9.9 211.30a Char. § 9.11 211.31 Char. § 9.11 211.40 Char. § 9.15 211.42 Char. § 9.13 211.44 et seq. Char. § 9.14 211.55 et seq. Char. § 9.19 211.87 Char. § 9.17 211.89- 
211.91 Char. § 9.18 211.161 Char. §§ 9.8- 
9.10 Char. §§ 9.18, 9.19 211.501 et seq. 78-24 211.691 et seq. Char. § 9.5 211.741 et seq. 78-8 78-10 78-15 213.321 et seq. 26-68 247.183-247.186 38-101 247.61 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. III 247.62 102-141 247.651- 
247.675 50-191 257.1 et seq. 22-424 38-161 38-192 Ch. 94 94-1, 94-2 94-6 257.1- 
257.923 94-3, 94-4 257.252a et seq. 94-6 257.319 6-4 257.605, 
257.606 Ch. 94 257.606(1)(i) Ch. 94, Art. II 257.610 Ch. 94 257.625(1)(c) 94-3, 94-7 257.656 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. II 257.707a 38-191 257.707a et seq. Ch. 38, Art. V, 
Div. 2 257.707b 38-192 257.707c 38-193 257.707d 38-194 257.707e 38-195 257.707e(2) Ch. 38, Art. V, 
Div. 2 257.907 94-7 257.951 94-4 280.1 et seq. 38-101 98-401 98-411 287.261 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. IV 287.270 Ch. 14, Art. VI 287.270b Ch. 14, Art. VI 287.290 Ch. 14 289.1101 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. II 324.20101 et seq. 98-131 324.21301 et seq 98-131 324.2411 et seq. Char. § 6.9 324.3101 et seq. 46-64 46-85 324.3108 46-81 324.32501 et seq. 38-141 324.5514 66-209 324.8901 et seq. 70-118 Ch. 74 Ch. 74, Art. III 324.9101 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. IV 38-107 324.11501 et seq. Ch. 74 324.80101 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. IV 106-112 106-114 324.80101- 
324.80104 106-111 324.80113 Ch. 106, Art. IV 324.80122- 
324.80124 106-111 324.80126 106-111 324.80140, 
324.80141 106-111 324.80144- 
324.80153 106-111 324.80146 106-112 324.80148 106-112 324.80155 106-111 324.80164- 
324.80173 106-111 324.82101 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. III 324.82124 Ch. 94, Art. III 324.9101-324.9123a 38-101, 38-102 333.6103 6-4 333.6107 6-4 333.6523 66-204 333.7101 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. VI, 
Div. 3 66-205 66-271 66-383 333.7104 66-234 333.7106 22-501 333.7201 et seq. 66-271 333.7401 et seq. 66-271 333.7451 et seq. 66-273 333.13102 66-334 333.26421 22-503 333.26423 66-274 338.41 et seq. 22-41 338.881 et seq. 18-1 380.1 et seq. 66-5 393.351 70-103 399.172 2-501 408.651 et seq. Ch. 10 418.101 et seq. 58-168 58-194 433.351 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. VII 433.352 Ch. 14, Art. VII, 
Div. 2 436.701(1) 6-4 436.1101 et seq. Ch. 6 6-4 66-173 66-353 436.1105 66-234 436.1701 6-3 436.1703 6-4, 6-4(b)(3) 436.1707 6-2 436.1801(3) 6-4 436.1915 6-1 445.371 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VII 445.483(3) 22-471 
22-472 450.99- 
450.104 18-191 450.2101 et seq. 94-161 474.101 et seq. 94-161 480.11 et seq. Ch. 94 94-162-94-166 480.12a 94-164 480.12b 94-165 480.12c 94-166 484.2101 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. IV 484.2102 50-182 484.2251 50-183 484.2251 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 484.3101- 
484.3120 50-181 484.3103 50-182 484.3104(2) 50-194 484.3104(3) 50-186 484.3105(1) 50-183 484.3105(3) 50-183 484.3106(1) 50-183 484.3106(1), (2) 50-184 484.3106(2) 50-183 484.3106(5), 
484.3106(6) 50-183, 50-184 484.3106(7), 
484.3106(8) 50-187 484.3108 50-189, 50-190 484.3110(4), 
484.3110(5) 50-191, 50-192 484.3113(1) 50-190 484.3113(4) 50-190 484.3113(6) 50-193 484.3115 50-184 484.3115(2) 50-196 484.3115(3), 
484.3115(4) 50-184 484.3115(5) 50-188 500.3102- 
500.3103 94-9 559.101 et seq. 110-513 560.101 et seq. Ch. 86 86-31 86-62 86-103 86-137 86-253 98-401 98-421 110-602 560.102(f) 86-31 560.111 86-82 560.111 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. II, 
Div. 2, Subdiv. II 560.112 86-84 560.125 86-137 560.131 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. II, 
Div. 2, Subdiv. III 560.132 et seq. 86-103 560.182 Ch. 86, Art. II, 
Div. 3 560.186 86-253 560.246 86-83 560.263 Ch. 86, Art. III 560.267 86-65 600.101 et seq. 38-144 600.2801 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. VI 600.2940 Ch. 38, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 600.2952 2-162 600.8396 2-371 2-375 600.8701 et seq. 1-8 2-378 600.8703 2-372 600.8705 2-373 2-375 600.8707 2-372, 2-373 2-375 600.8707(6) 2-371 600.8709 2-374, 2-375 600.8727(9) 2-378 600.9921 Char. § 3.6 Char. § 4.5 Char. § 4.6 Char. § 5.6 Char. § 5.9 Char. Ch. XVI 600.9930 Char. § 3.6 Char. § 4.5 Char. § 4.6 Char. § 5.6 Char. § 5.9 Char. Ch. XVI 691.1401 et seq. Char. § 17.1 701.1 et seq. 66-331 722.1 et seq. 6-4 722.151 et seq. 66-333 722.641 66-352 722.641 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. VIII, 
Div. 2 722.642 66-351 722.671 et seq. 66-252 740.141a 66-234 750.49 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 750.81 et seq. 66-31 750.107(1)(h) 66-207 750.115 66-81 750.116 66-105 750.131 et seq. 66-106 750.145 66-332 750.167 66-201 750.167(1)(c) 66-33 750.167(1)(e) 66-204 750.167(1)(i), 
(1)(j) 66-1 750.167(1)(k) 66-3 750.167(1)(l) 66-132 750.169 66-201 66-203 750.170 66-201 750.218 et seq. 66-103 750.219a 50-68 750.222 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 750.226a 66-154 750.227c 66-152 750.233 et seq. 66-151 750.240 42-3 66-302 750.241 42-7 750.243a et seq. Ch. 42, Art. V 750.243a(1)- 
750.243a(3) 42-361-42-363 750.243b 42-364 750.243d 42-365 750.245 et seq. 66-209 750.301 et seq. 66-232 70-120 750.335a 66-206 66-233 750.356 Ch. 66, Art. III, 
Div. 3 750.356 et seq. 66-101 750.377a et seq. 66-62, 66-63 70-122 82-2 750.377b 42-33 750.382 102-44 750.383 98-180 750.383a 98-36 750.411a 66-302 750.411h 66-32 750.416 66-64 750.437 14-83 750.448 66-231 750.464a 10-69 750.467 14-84 750.470 66-353 750.473 66-5 750.493d 66-131 750.502c 70-103 750.535 22-472 750.536a 66-104 750.536d 66-102 750.540(c) 66-208 750.540e 66-208 750.541 et seq. 66-201 750.546 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. III, 
Div. 2 70-102 750.552 66-82 752.61 70-103 752.91 14-82 752.271 et seq. 66-272 752.361 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 752.361-752.374 22-485 752.525 66-201 66-203 752.543 66-201  
