CODIFIED ORDINANCES of TRAVERSE CITY, MICHIGAN 
  
____________ 
Published in 2016 
____________ 

> 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Amendment 
Number Included/ 
Omitted Supplement 
Number 1031 Included 1 1032 Included 1 1033 Included 1 1034 Included 1 1035 Included 1 1036 Included 1 1037 Included 1 Amend. of 11-8-16 Included 2 1038 Included 2 1039 Included 2 1040 Included 2 1041 Included 2 1042 Included 2 1045 Included 3 1046 Included 3 1047 Included 3 1048 Included 3 1049 Omitted 3 1050 Included 4 1051 Included 4 1052 Included 4 1053 Included 4 1054 Included 4 1055 Included 4 1056 Included 4 1057 Included 4 1058 Included 4 1059 Included 4 1044 Included 5 1060 Included 5 1061 Included 6 1062 Included 6 1063 Included 6 1064 Included 6 1065 Included 6 1066 Included 6 1067 Included 7 1068 Included 7 1069 Included 7 1070 Included 7 1071 Included 7 1072 Included 7 1073 Included 7 1074 Included 7 1075 Included 8 1076 Included 8 1077 Included 9 1078 Included 9 1079 Included 9 1080 Included 9 1081 Included 9 1082 Included 9 Amend. of 11-6-18 Included 10 1083 Included 10 1084 Included 10 1085 Included 10 1086 Included 10 1087 Included 11 1088 Included 11 1089 Included 11 1090 Included 11 1091 Included 11 1092 Included 11  
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF TRAVERSE CITY, MICHIGAN[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter of the City of Traverse City was approved by the voters on November 5, 1940, and was amended on the following dates: 
November 2, 1942 April 7, 1953 April 4, 1955 November 5, 1968 August 5, 1969 November 3, 1970 April 4, 1977 November 7, 1978 April 2, 1979 April 6, 1981 July 28, 1987 November 3, 1987 November 7, 1989 November 5, 1991 November 2, 1993 November 3, 1998 November 2, 1999 November 7, 2000 November 5, 2002 November 2, 2004 November 8, 2005 November 7, 2006 November 2, 2010 November 4, 2014  

PREAMBLE 
    The electors of the City of Traverse City, in the County of Grand Traverse and State of Michigan, pursuant to the authority granted them by the Constitution and general laws of said State, hereby revise the Charter of the City of Traverse City, to read as follows: 
CHAPTER I - INCORPORATION, BOUNDARIES AND POWERS 

Section 1. - Incorporation. 
    The municipal corporation known as the City of Traverse City, Michigan, shall be and continue to be a municipal corporation and body politic under the same name. 
Section 2. - Boundaries. 
    The territory in the County of Grand Traverse and State of Michigan, hereinafter described, is hereby continued as, and constituted and declared to be, a city by the name of Traverse City and subject to the municipal government of said corporation, said territory being described as follows, to-wit: 
All of fractional sections one, two and three; the east fractional one-half of section four; the southeast fractional quarter of the northwest fractional quarter of section four; the east one-half of fractional section nine; all of fractional sections ten, eleven and twelve; all in township twenty-seven north, range eleven west; also lots one and two in section six, in township twenty-seven north, range ten west. And the said City shall have and enjoy the full jurisdiction over the waters of Grand Traverse Bay the entire length of the water frontage of said corporate limits for one statute mile from the shore line of said waters, far enough to embrace all docks, wharves, boat houses and other structures, and boats, floats and vessels at rest and at anchor, for all proper sanitary, quarantine, police and municipal purposes within such limits. 
Section 3. - Powers. 
    All of the powers, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, possessed by the City of Traverse City by virtue of the Charter adopted by the electors of the City on April 10, 1913, and all amendments thereto, which Charter is hereby revised; and by Act 424 of the Michigan Local Acts of 1895, and amendments thereto, are hereby expressly reserved to the City of Traverse City. Further, unless otherwise provided in this Charter, said City and its officers shall be vested with any and all powers, expressed and implied, which cities and their officers are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters, including all powers granted to cities and officers of cities of the fourth class by Act 215 of the Public Acts of 1895, as amended, and permitted to cities by Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, as fully and completely as though those powers were specifically incorporated into and provided for in this Charter, and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers in this Charter be held to be exclusive. 
CHAPTER II - ELECTIONS 

Section 4. - Wards and Precincts. 
    The City of Traverse City shall constitute one (1) ward, which shall be divided into such number of election precincts as may be required by State law. Until the City Commission shall otherwise provide by resolution, the election precincts of the City shall remain as now established. 
Section 5. - Nonpartisan Elections. 
    All elections for City officers are to be nonpartisan. 
Section 6. - State Law to Apply. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, the general election laws of the State shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedure relating to City elections and to the registration of electors within the City except as such laws relate to political parties or require more than one (1) publication of notice. In any circumstances where the application of said laws may be uncertain, the Election Commission shall construe the same and prescribe the procedure. 
Section 7. - Election Commission. 
    The Election Commission shall consist of the City Clerk, and three (3) registered qualified voters who are not in default to the City. The Chairman shall be one of the Election Commissioners. The Election Commission shall appoint the Inspectors of Election and fix their compensation and shall perform all of the duties required of City Election Commissioners by this Charter and the laws of the State. (Amended 11-3-98.) 
Section 8. - Date of Regular City Election. 
Editor's note- This section was superseded by Ordinance 121, passed April 6, 1981. See Section 206.01 of the Codified Ordinances. 
Section 9. - No Primary Election. 
    There shall not be a primary election for city elective offices. (Amended 11-7-06) 
Section 10. - Special Elections. 
    Special elections shall be held upon adoption of a resolution by the City Commission or when required by this Charter or the general laws of the State. Resolutions for special elections shall clearly set forth the purpose of the election, and no special election called by the City Commission shall be held within thirty (30) days of the date of the adoption of the resolution. All provisions contained herein for holding regular elections shall apply to special elections. 
Section 11. - Election Notices. 
    The City Clerk shall give public notice of the time and places at which elections are to be held and of the offices to which candidates are to be elected pursuant to state law. (Amended 11-2-99.) 
Section 12. - Voting Hours. 
    On the day of any election, the polls shall be open at such times as required by state law. (Amended 11-2-99). 
Section 13. - Nomination Petitions. 
    Persons desiring to qualify as candidates for any elective office under this Charter shall file with the City Clerk nomination petitions signed by not less than 70 registered electors of the City. The City Clerk shall prepare and make available official blank nominating petitions in substantially the same form as required by state law for state and county officers, except that references to political parties shall be omitted. Whenever it shall be necessary at any city election to elect an officer to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term, such fact shall be stated in the petitions filed for the purpose of nominating candidates to fill such vacancy. (Amended 11-7-06) 
Section 14. - Qualifications of Elective City Offices. 
    No person shall be qualified to hold, nor be eligible for election to, any elective City office unless he shall be a registered and qualified elector and shall have resided within the corporate limits of Traverse City continuously for thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of election. No defaulter to the City shall be eligible for election to any City office. Any votes cast for any person not possessing the qualifications provided herein shall be void. 
Section 15. - Affidavit of Eligibility. 
    No nomination petition shall be received for filing by the City Clerk unless the candidate named therein also files with the City Clerk, within the time limited for filing such petitions, a sworn affidavit containing such information as may be required by the City Clerk, to determine his eligibility as required by this Charter. Any person who shall willfully swear to any false statement in making such affidavit shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment in the City or County jail not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
Section 16. - Time for Filing Nomination Petitions. 
Editor's note- This section was superseded by Public Act 276 of 2012, effective January 1, 2014. 
Section 17. - Certification of Names of Candidates. 
Editor's note- This section was superseded by Ordinance 121, passed April 6, 1981. See Section 206.03 of the Codified Ordinances. 
Section 17A. - Election of Officers. 
    The candidate or candidates receiving the highest number of votes cast for that office or offices shall be deemed elected to that office or offices for the term designated on the ballot. (Amended 11-7-06) 
Section 18. - Board of Canvassers. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed by State law. 
Section 19. - Filling of Vacancies. 
    Whenever a vacancy shall occur in any elective City office, it shall be filled by appointment by the City Commission, and the person so appointed shall hold the office until the next regular election, or special election called by resolution for that purpose, when the vacancy shall be filled by election for the residue of the official term. 
CHAPTER III - THE GOVERNING BODY 

Section 20. - City Commission. 
    The City Commission shall consist of six (6) members and the Mayor nominated and elected at large. Six (6) members of the City Commission shall each have four-year terms of office. The Mayor shall have a two-year term of office, the Mayor shall be a member of the City Commission. At the annual organizational meeting, the City Commission shall meet and choose one of its members as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall hold such office for one year until the following organizational meeting. Effective November 11, 2019, at the odd-year organizational meeting, the City Commission shall meet and choose one of its members as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall hold such office until the organizational meeting two years later. In the event the Mayor Pro Tem vacates such office before their term as Mayor Pro Tem expires, the City Commission shall select one of its members to fill the remainder of the Mayor Pro Tem's term. (Amended 11-7-00 and 11-6-18 .) 
Section 20A. - Seeking Other City Office. 
    Any Commissioner who becomes a candidate for another City elective office shall so declare and resign from the City Commission not later than twenty-one (21) days prior to the deadline for filing nominating petitions, unless the Commissioner's term expires in the same year as the election. Such resignation shall be effective at the City Commission's Organizational Meeting following the election unless an earlier date is stated. The resignation shall be submitted to the City Clerk in writing and shall be irrevocable as of the date it is submitted. Any Commissioner who does not so resign shall not be eligible to be placed on the ballot. (Amended 11-2-04 and 11-6-18 .) 
Section 21. - Terms of Office. 
Editor's note- This section was superseded by Ordinance 121, passed April 6, 1981. See Section 220.02 of the Codified Ordinances. 
Section 22. - Mayor. 
Editor's note- This section was superseded by Ordinance 121, passed April 6, 1981. See Section 220.03 of the Codified Ordinances. 
Section 23. - Compensation. 
Editor's note- This section was superseded by Ordinance 93, passed April 16, 1979. See Section 276.02 of the Codified Ordinances. 
CHAPTER IV - LEGISLATION, POWERS AND PROCEDURE 

Section 24. - Regular Meetings. 
Editor's note- This section was superseded by Ordinance 121, passed April 6, 1981. See Section 220.04 of the Codified Ordinances. 
Section 25. - Special Meetings. 
    Special meetings shall be called by the City Clerk on the written request of the Mayor or Manager or any three (3) Commissioners to at least six (6) hours written notice to each Commissioner served personally or left at his usual place of residence; but any special meeting shall be a legal meeting for all purposes without such notice if all Commissioners are present thereat or have waived notice thereof in writing. 
Section 26. - Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem. 
    The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Commission and may speak and vote as any other member of the City Commission. The Mayor Pro Tem shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor, and, if a vacancy occurs, shall act as Mayor until the next annual organizational meeting or until an elected Mayor takes office, whichever first occurs. At such an organizational meeting, a City Commissioner shall be appointed interim Mayor until the next organizational meeting or until an elected Mayor takes office, whichever first occurs. The City Commission seat vacated by the Mayor shall be filled pursuant to Section 19 of the Charter. In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the City Commission shall appoint one of its members to preside. (Amended 11-2-04.) 
Section 27. - Quorum; Voting. 
    A majority of the Commissioners shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. The City Commission may, by a majority vote of those present, compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the City at its meetings and enforce orderly conduct therein. On all votes which are not unanimous, the yea or nay vote of each member shall be recorded by roll call, but where the vote is unanimous, it shall be necessary to so state; provided, however, that all members of the City Commission who are absent shall be so listed in either case. 
Section 28. - Limitations on the Power of the City Commission. 
    No office shall be created or abolished, no taxes or assessment imposed, nor any contract approved, nor franchise granted, nor any street, alley or public grounds vacated, nor any real estate or interest therein acquired, sold or disposed of, nor private property taken for public use, unless five (5) members of the City Commission shall vote in favor of the same; nor shall any vote of the City Commission be rescinded or reconsidered at a special meeting, unless there be present as many members as were present when such vote was taken. 
    Provided that no plan for urban renewal, rehabilitation or redevelopment pursuant to Act 344 of the Public Acts of 1945, as amended, of any blighted area (as defined in the Act) of the City, or pursuant to the National Housing Act of 1949, as amended, or any other plan utilizing public funds and/or controls for the same purpose, shall be adopted until submitted to and passed by a majority of the electors of the City at a regular municipal or at a special election to be held for that purpose. 
    It is hereby declared that buildings over 60 feet in height are generally inconsistent with the residential and historical character of Traverse City. Therefore, any proposal for construction of a building with a height above 60 feet, shall not be approved by the City or City Commission, until after the proposal is submitted to and approved by a majority of the City electors at a regular election, or at a special election. (Amended 11-8-2016 .) 
Section 29. - Actions of the City Commission. 
    No money shall be appropriated, nor the expenditure thereof authorized, except by ordinance, resolution or vote of the City Commission, and no such vote, resolution or ordinance shall be passed or become of any effect except by an affirmative vote of five (5) members of the City Commission. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no resolution or motion shall be passed except by affirmative vote of four (4) members of the City Commission. 
Section 30. - Rules of the City Commission. 
    The City Commission shall determine its own rules, and shall keep a journal of its proceedings in the English language which shall be signed by the City Clerk. All regular and special meetings of the City Commission shall be open to the public. The rules of the Commission shall provide for an opportunity for the public to be heard on any question under consideration of the Commission. 
    A summary of the Commission proceedings at each meeting shall be prepared by the City Clerk and published in the official newspaper. There shall not be standing committees of the City Commission, except as provided by law and this Charter. The City Commission upon request of the City Manager may establish citizen advisory committees. Not more than one City Commissioner may sit on any such advisory committee. The City Manager, or the designee of the City Manager, shall be a member of such an advisory committee with full authority of vote. The advisory committee may be advisory to the City Commission, the City Manager, or any other City official or body, as designated by the City Commission. The function of such an advisory committee is advisory only, and the committee shall not have authority other than to study and recommend. The City Commission shall determine the number and terms of the members of the advisory committee and may set a date on which the committee will be dissolved unless expressly renewed by the City Commission. 
Section 31. - Ordinances. 
    Legislation shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and short title. The style of all ordinances shall be "The City of Traverse City Ordains." The effective date of an ordinance shall be prescribed therein. At least two (2) weeks shall elapse between the introduction and enactment of an ordinance. Enactment shall require the affirmative vote of not less than four (4) Commissioners and the effective date shall be not earlier than ten (10) days after enactment; except that ordinances immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health or safety may be enacted on the date of introduction and given immediate effect by the affirmative vote of not less than six (6) Commissioners. No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, but the section or sections amended shall be enacted in full. An ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number and title only. Provided that no ordinance respecting standards, for the construction, repair, maintenance, improvement, occupancy, lease or sale of housing, (other than hotels, motels or that designed, built or leased to be occupied by three or more families) shall be adopted until submitted to and passed by a majority of the electors of the City at a regular municipal election or at a special election which may be called for that purpose. 
Section 32. - Ordinance Record. 
    All ordinances, and the dates of introduction and enactment and the vote thereon, shall be recorded by the City Clerk in a book to be called the "Ordinance Book," and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and the City Clerk to authenticate such record by their official signatures. 
Section 33. - Publication; Adoption of Technical Codes. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all ordinances, when enacted, shall be published forthwith by the City Clerk in the manner provided by this Charter for the publication of notices, and the City Clerk shall enter his certificate as to the manner and date of publication under each ordinance in the ordinance book; provided that, if the City Commission shall direct the Clerk to make a digest of any ordinance or amendment which, in its opinion, is not of general public application and is more than one thousand (1,000) words in length, and when the City Commission shall approve such digest and shall order its publication, such publication shall be deemed to be sufficient publication of such ordinance; provided, further, that the City Clerk shall also make available for public distribution at his office not less than twenty-five (25) mimeographed copies of the full draft of such ordinance. The City Commission may adopt any detailed technical regulation (e.g., building code, electric wiring code, food inspection ordinance, etc.) as a City ordinance by reference to any recognized standard code, official or unofficial, or if such code be written in detail for the City and adopted as an ordinance, the publication of not less than fifty (50) copies in booklet form, available for distribution at cost, shall be sufficient publication of such ordinance, and any amendment to, or revision of, such adopted code or detailed technical ordinance, may be published in the same manner. 
Section 34. - Compilation and Revision. 
    The City Commission shall, by resolution, order a general revision and compilation of ordinances within two (2) years from the date this Charter is adopted by the electors and every ten (10) years thereafter. Such revision and compilation, when completed, shall be adopted by appropriate ordinance which shall also designate when such revised and compiled ordinances shall become effective. Such revised and compiled ordinances need not be recorded in "The Ordinance Book" or the proceedings of the City Commission. The printing and binding of not less than one hundred (100) copies in book form, available for public distribution at cost, shall be deemed sufficient publication. 
CHAPTER V - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 

Section 35. - City Manager; Qualifications. 
    The City Commission shall appoint, by four or more affirmative votes, a City Manager for an indefinite term. Such City Manager shall be the administrative officer of the City and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Commission. He shall be selected on the basis of fitness and ability alone, without regard to his political or religious preferences, and shall have had training and actual experience in municipal administration. He need not be a resident of the City or of the State at the time of his appointment, but he must be a citizen of the United States, and shall reside in the City of Traverse City during his term of office; provided, however, that any City Manager so appointed during the first three (3) years after the date upon which this Charter becomes effective, shall have had at least four (4) consecutive years of actual experience as a City Manager. During the absence or disability of the City Manager, or in the event of a vacancy in that office, the City Commission shall designate some properly qualified person to execute the functions of that office during the period of such absence or disability, or until the vacancy has been filled. The first City Manager under this Charter shall be appointed by the City Commission within ninety (90) days after this Charter becomes effective. Upon the resignation or removal of the City Manager, the vacancy in such office shall be filled by the City Commission within ninety (90) days after the effective date of said resignation or removal. 
Section 36. - General Functions and Duties of City Manager. 
    The City Manager shall have the following functions and duties: 
(a)  To enforce all City laws and ordinances; 
(b)  To enforce all City contracts and franchises; 
(c)  To supervise all public utilities, improvements, works and undertakings, and the finances of the City; 
(d)  To appoint and remove all administrative officers and employees in the administrative service of the City, except the City Attorney, provided however, the Manager may remove the City Clerk and City Treasurer only with the consent of five (5) members of the City Commission. But the Manager may authorize the head of a department or office responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office. Provided however, that no official holding office by virtue of appointment by the Commission at the time of this Charter becomes effective, shall be removed by the Manager without preferring charges to the City Commission, until such official shall have served the full term for which he was appointed. 
(e)  To attend all meetings of the City Commission, and to take part therein, but without vote; 
(f)  To prepare the annual itemized budget, and to keep the Commission fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City; 
(g)  To purchase all supplies, including insurance, for the City, and approve all vouchers for the payment of same; 
(h)  To conduct all sales of personal property which the City Commission may authorize to be sold as having become unnecessary, or unfit for City use; 
(i)  To recommend to the City Commission, for adoption, such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; 
(j)  He shall be a member ex officio of all committees of the Commission; 
(k)  He shall be responsible to the City Commission for the efficient administration of all City departments and utilities; 
(l)  He shall be responsible to the City Commission for the proper discharge of all just obligations of the City; 
(m)  To perform such other duties as the City Commission may direct that naturally pertain to the general management of City affairs, and he shall execute and perform all administrative functions of the City that are not imposed by the Charter or any City ordinance upon some other official. 
Section 37. - Removal of City Manager. 
    The City Manager may be removed by four or more affirmative votes of the City Commission. No Manager who has been in the service of the City for one (1) year or more shall be removed without a hearing. At least thirty (30) days before the removal of any City Manager, the City Commission shall adopt a resolution stating its intention to remove him, and the reasons therefor, a copy of which shall be served forthwith on the City Manager, who may within ten (10) days, demand a public hearing at which he may appear in person and may be represented by counsel. In such event the final resolution removing the City Manager shall not be adopted until such public hearing has been held. Upon passage of a resolution stating the intention of the City Commission to remove the Manager, the City Commission may suspend him from duty, but his pay shall continue until his removal. There shall be no appeal from the action of the City Commission in removing the Manager. No City Manager shall be removed within ninety (90) days after any regular City election, unless proceedings for his removal were commenced not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election. 
    Neither the City Commission nor any of its committees or members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office or employment by the City Manager or any of his subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Commission and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager, and neither the City Commission nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager either publicly or privately. Any violation of the provisions of this section by a member of the City Commission shall be deemed a misdemeanor, conviction of which shall operate immediately to vacate his office. 
Section 38. - Appointment of Administrative Officers. 
    The City Manager shall appoint and remove, with the approval of five (5) members of the City Commission, a City Clerk and a City Treasurer. The City Manager shall appoint an Assessor, Police Chief, Fire Chief, City Engineer, and may appoint a Health Officer, and such other officers and heads of departments as may be deemed necessary, or may be created by the City Commission. The City Commission may create such additional offices as it may deem necessary for the operation of the City government upon recommendation by the City Manager, provided such offices do not invade the functions of the foregoing offices. The powers and duties of these officers and heads of the departments shall be those prescribed by State law, by this Charter and by ordinance, and such additional duties as may be required by the City Manager. The compensation of officers and employees, except that of City Manager, shall be fixed by the City Manager with the approval of the City Commission, in accordance with budget appropriations. The compensation of the City Manager shall be fixed by the Commission. 
Section 39. - Administrative Departments. 
    The City Manager shall establish regulations setting forth the duties of and the procedures to be followed in each department and office of the City government, which regulations shall be compiled and shall be known as "The Administrative Code." Pending the creation of such code the City Manager may establish temporary regulations. Each officer or director of a department of the City government shall, subject to approval by the City Manager, have supervision and control of his department and shall have power to prescribe rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter and the Administrative Code. 
Section 40. - Purchasing Procedure. 
    Competitive bids for all purchases and public improvements shall be obtained where practicable and contracts awarded to the lowest responsible bidders. The City Commission shall have the power to reject any or all bids if deemed by it to be to the advantage of the City. Sealed bids shall be asked for in all transactions involving expenditures of more than nine thousand dollars ($9,000) and the transaction evidenced by written contract submitted to and approved by the City Commission; provided that, in cases where it is clearly to the City's advantage to contract without competitive bidding, the City Commission, by affirmative vote of five (5) members and upon recommendation of the City Manager, may so authorize. The City Commission may delegate to the City Manager authority to contract, solicit, award or reject bids and to expend money in conformity with the approved budget, which amount for any one transaction shall not be more than nine thousand dollars ($9,000). Detailed purchasing and contracting procedures shall be established by the City Manager. The City Commission may authorize the making of public improvements by day labor. (Amended 11-8-05). 
Section 41. - Investigations. 
    The City Commission, the City Manager, or any person or committee authorized by either of them, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer of the City and to make investigation as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
Section 42. - Supervisors. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed by State law. 
Section 43. - Board of Review. 
    The City Commission shall appoint a Board of Review of five (5) citizens who are owners of property assessed for taxes in the City, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Commission. The City Commission shall fix the compensation of the members of the Board of Review. The Board of Review shall elect its own clerk who may, at the pleasure of the Board, be the City Assessor. 
Section 44. - City Clerk. 
    The City Clerk shall perform all such duties as are, or may be, imposed upon him by the general laws of the State or by the provisions of this Charter, and such other duties as the City Commission may prescribe. 
Section 45. - City Treasurer. 
    The City Treasurer shall have the custody of all money, bonds, notes, mortgages, leases and conveyances of value belonging to the City. He shall receive all money belonging to and receivable by the corporation and shall keep account of all receipts and expenditures thereof. He shall be collector of all taxes levied by the City; he shall collect and receive all rents, rates and dues from all public utilities owned or operated by the City. He shall keep account of and be charged with all taxes and money appropriated, raised or received for each fund of the corporation, and shall keep a separate account of each fund and shall credit thereto all money raised, paid in or appropriated therefor, and shall pay every warrant or check out of the particular fund established or raised for the purpose for which the warrant was issued as indicated thereon and endorsed thereon by the City Clerk. The City Treasurer shall render to the City Manager daily reports of money received and paid out by him, and whenever required by the City Manager, shall render a full itemized statement of all money received and credited by him to each fund, and on what account received, and the amounts of money remaining in each fund on the day of such report. The City Treasurer shall keep all money in his custody belonging to the City and to the public separate and distinct from his own money. He shall turn over to the proper receiving officer of the School District of Traverse City all funds in his hands as City Treasurer belonging to such School District, on proper warrant of such District. He is hereby prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the corporation money, warrants or evidences of debt or any School or Library funds in his custody or keeping for his own use or benefit or for the use and benefit of any other person. Any violation of this section shall subject him to immediate removal from office by the City Commission, which is hereby authorized to declare the office vacant for such offense and to appoint his successor. The City Treasurer shall be the collector of City and County taxes within the City. He shall also collect all other taxes and assessments levied within the City, whether the same be for general City purposes, for special improvements, or for School purposes, and he shall, in addition thereto, perform all such duties in relation to the collection of taxes as may be required by the general laws of the State. The City Treasurer shall, on the first day of each month, and at any time when so required by the City Commission or the City Manager, furnish a detailed statement of the City's finances in all of its departments. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, the City Treasurer shall, in addition to all other bonds required by law, give corporate surety bonds in such sum or sums, with such surety or sureties, and to be conditioned and approved as the City Commission shall provide. 
Section 46. - City Assessor. 
    The Assessor shall annually estimate and assess the value of all taxable property, real and personal, in the City and make an assessment roll in the same manner as supervisors of Townships. There shall be spread upon said roll any and all taxes duly certified by the Board of Supervisors of the County or by other proper authority. He shall make all special assessments authorized by the Charter of the City and for the purpose of such special assessment that portion of the annual assessment roll applicable thereto shall be taken as the value of the property to be assessed. The Assessor shall attend all meetings of the Board of Review and shall furnish said Board information concerning the assessment roll made by him of property assessed thereon, but he shall have no vote on such Board. 
Section 47. - City Attorney. 
    The City Commission shall appoint a City Attorney for an indefinite term who shall hold office at the pleasure of the Commission. The City Attorney shall act as the legal advisor to, and attorney and counsel for, the municipality and all its officers in matters relating to their official duties. Upon recommendation of the City Attorney, the City Commission may retain additional legal counsel. The City Attorney shall receive such salary or compensation as may be fixed by the City Commission. 
Section 48. - City Engineer. 
    The City Engineer shall be the official surveyor of the City and shall perform such duties as are imposed upon him by the provisions of this Charter or the ordinances of the City, and such other duties as may be required of him by the City Manager. 
    The City Engineer shall keep in his office, in addition to such other records as the City Manager may require: 
(a)  A plat book of the City, showing the location, width, grade and boundaries of all streets, alleys, sidewalks and public grounds, and whenever any change is made in any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground, he shall indicate on such plat book the changes so made. 
(b)  A plat book showing the location, grade, size, kind and connection of every sewer, his reference points and a statement of the cost of each sewer. He shall also, in said plat book, or in one especially provided for that purpose, keep a record and plat of all water pipes, hydrants, cut-off valves and the plans of the water system in use in the City, and all artesian wells and supply pipes, which occupy any part of a street or alley. He shall make or cause to be made, all necessary plats or maps of all cemetery grounds and burial grounds within or without the City limits, owned and controlled by the City, for use in his office or in the City Clerk's office, and such other plats and records as may be required by the City Manager. 
    The City Engineer shall secure and preserve in his office the original notes of the surveys of the land of the City, together with his own notes and also all surveys of the burial grounds and the recorded plats thereof, and be custodian of the same in order that ready reference may be had to all such information. The City Engineer shall make or cause to be made all necessary surveys, maps, plats, diagrams, estimates, plans and specifications for all public improvements, buildings, and grounds, as directed by the City Manager and as an employee of the City he shall serve in any capacity as the City Manager may direct. The City Commission may in their discretion assign the duties of City Engineer to the City Manager. 
Section 49. - City Health Officer. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed on November 3, 1987. 
Section 50. - Property to be Delivered to Successor. 
    Whenever any officer shall resign or be removed from office, or the term for which he shall have been elected or appointed shall expire, he shall, upon demand therefor by his successor or the Mayor, or City Clerk, deliver over to his successor in office, or to the City Clerk, all the books, papers, money and effects in his custody as such officer, which in any way appertain to his office; and every person willfully violating this provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be proceeded against in the same manner as are public officers generally for like offenses under the general laws of this State, now or hereafter enforced and applicable thereto; and every officer, whether elected or appointed, shall be deemed to be an officer, within the meaning of the provisions of said general laws of the State. 
Section 51. - Police Department. 
    The City shall have a Police Department. 
Section 52. - Fire Department. 
    The City shall have a Fire Department. 
CHAPTER VI - MUNICIPAL COURT 
Editor's note- Former sections 51 through 68 regarding a municipal court were repealed by State law. 

Section 69. - Traffic Violations Bureau. 
    The City Commission shall have power and authority to establish a Traffic Violations Bureau within the Police Department by ordinance for the handling of vehicular traffic cases other than failure to stop in event of an accident, reckless driving or speeding. In such Bureau, any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under the ordinance of the City may, within the time specified in the notice, answer at the Traffic Violations Bureau to the charges set forth in such notice by paying a prescribed fine which cannot be waived by the Bureau and, in writing, pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to the person in charge of the Bureau to make such a plea and pay such fine in court. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and the power of attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed to be complete satisfaction for the violation and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states. The creation of such a Bureau by the City Commission shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in court should such person so choose. 
Section 70. - Constable. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed on November 3, 1987. 
Section 71. - Bond. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed on November 3, 1987. 
Section 72. - Duties of Constable. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed on November 3, 1987. 
Section 73. - Compensation of Constable. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed on November 3, 1987. 
Section 74. - Vacancy in Office of Constable. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed on November 3, 1987. 
CHAPTER VII - GENERAL FINANCE; BUDGET PROCEDURE 

Section 75. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of July. Such year shall constitute the budget year of the City Government. 
Section 76. - Budget Procedure. 
    The City Manager shall prepare a complete itemized budget proposal for the next fiscal year as provided for in this Charter, and shall submit it to the City Commission on or before the first regular meeting of the City Commission in the month of May. (Amended 11-2-99). 
Section 77. - Budget Document. 
    The proposed budget document shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall include at least the following information: 
(a)  Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each department and office of the City, showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the current and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increases and decreases recommended, as compared with appropriations for the current year. 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the City, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any. 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated income of the City from sources other than taxes and borrowing, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the City from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year. 
(d)  A statement of the estimated balance or deficit, as the case may be, for the end of the current fiscal year. 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
(f)  Such other supporting schedules as the City Manager may deem necessary or the City Commission may require. 
Section 78. - Budget Hearing. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption, at such time and place as the City Commission shall direct, and notice of such public hearing shall be published at least one week in advance by the City Clerk. A copy of the proposed budget shall be on file and available to the public during office hours at the City Clerk's office for a period of not less than one week prior to such public hearing. 
Section 79. - Review of Budget. 
    The City Commission shall review the proposed budget document submitted by the City Manager and may make such changes therein as it shall deem necessary. 
Section 80. - Adoption of Budget; Tax Limit. 
    Not earlier than the third Monday in May and not later than the first Monday in June of each year the City Commission shall, by resolution, adopt the budget for the next fiscal year and shall provide in such resolution for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxation for municipal purpose, which shall not exceed one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the City. (Amended 11-2-99). 
Section 81. - Disbursement of Funds. 
    No funds of the City other than petty cash shall be disbursed except by check. The City Commission shall, within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this Charter, by ordinance or resolution, establish a procedure for making all disbursements. 
Section 82. - Transfer of Appropriations. 
    After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City during the fiscal year to which such budget applies, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred during such year except pursuant to the budget appropriation. The City Commission may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or any portion thereof from one department, fund or agency to another. The balance in any appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the general fund and be reappropriated during the next fiscal year. 
Section 83. - Budget Control. 
    At the beginning of each quarter period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the City Commission, the City Manager shall submit to the City Commission data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and expenses to date; and if it shall appear that the income is less than anticipated, the City Commission may reduce appropriations except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the cash income. If the revenues exceed the amounts estimated in the budget, the City Commission may make supplemental appropriations, after a public hearing as hereinbefore provided. 
Section 84. - Depository. 
    The City Commission shall designate the depository or depositories for City funds and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City moneys. The City Commission shall provide for such security for City deposits as is authorized and permitted by the general laws of the State, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
Section 85. - Independent Audit. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the City government at least annually and more frequently if deemed necessary by the City Commission. Such audit shall be made by qualified accountants experienced in municipal accounting. The results of such audit shall be made public in such manner as the City Commission may determine. An annual report of the City business shall be made available to the public by publication in the official newspaper, in such form as will disclose pertinent facts concerning the activities and finance of the City government. 
CHAPTER VIII - GENERAL FINANCE; BORROWING POWER 

Section 86. - General Borrowing. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of State law and the Constitution of the State of Michigan, the City Commission, by resolution, may authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the City and the issuance of bonds of the City or other evidences of indebtedness therefor, and may pledge the full faith, credit and resources of the City for the payment of the obligation created thereby. 
Section 87. - Special Assessment Bonds. 
    The City Commission shall, subject to the applicable provisions of the general laws of the State, have authority to borrow money in anticipation of the payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such special assessments, and to issue bonds or other legal obligations therefor. Such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and a general obligation of the City. All collections on each special assessment roll or combination of rolls shall be set apart in a separate fund and in a separate bank account for the payment of the principal and interest of the bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments, and shall be used for no other purpose. 
Section 88. - Mortgage Bonds. 
    When the City is authorized to acquire, own or operate any public utility in accordance with the provisions of Section 23, 24 and 25 of Article VIII of the Michigan Constitution of 1908, it may issue mortgage bonds therefor beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Constitution of 1908 pertaining thereto. 
Section 89. - Other Bonds. 
    The City shall have power to issue revenue or other types of bonds in the manner and for the purposes permitted by the Constitution of the State of Michigan or by State law. 
Section 90. - Preparation and Records. 
    Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and it shall be unlawful for any officer of the City to use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose, and any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk, under the seal of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept by the City Clerk. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "Cancelled." 
CHAPTER IX - GENERAL FINANCE; TAXATION 

Section 91. - Subjects of Taxation. 
    An assessment of all property in the City which is subject to taxation shall be made annually by the Assessor, and shall be completed before the second Monday in March, and, except as otherwise provided by State law, the subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for State, County and School purposes under the general law and the City shall have all the rights, liens, powers and remedies accorded by State law to all political subdivisions of the State in connection with the collection of taxes. (Amended 11-8-05) 
Section 92. - Taxation Procedure. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, City taxes shall be levied, collected and returned in the manner provided by State law. All personal property shall be assessed to the owner thereof on the first Monday of February of the year in which the assessment is made. 
Section 93. - Meeting of Board of Review. 
    The Board of Review shall convene in the City office building at nine (9) o'clock in the forenoon on the second Monday in March to review and correct the assessment roll and shall remain in session not less than six (6) hours in each day for at least two (2) and not more than six (6) successive business days. The Board of Review shall choose one of its members to act as chairman and one of its members or the Assessor to act as Clerk and a majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are, by general law, conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships. A copy of the proceedings of the Board of Review shall be filed with the City Clerk on or before the 15th day of July following each meeting thereof. (Amended 11-8-05) 
Section 94. - Notice of Meetings. 
    Notice of the time and place of the sessions of the Board of Review shall be published by the City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the second Monday in March and also by posting the same in one (1) public place in the City. (Amended 11-8-05) 
Section 95. - Endorsement of Assessment Roll. 
    On or before the second Tuesday in March the Board of Review shall endorse the assessment roll as provided by general law. Such roll shall be the assessment roll for all tax purposes within the City. (Amended 11-8-05) 
Section 96. - Certification of Tax Levy to Assessor. 
    Within three (3) days after the adoption by the City Commission of the budget for the next fiscal year, the City Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the amount of the tax levied fixed by the City Commission which the Assessor shall proceed to rateably assess to each person and piece of property on the assessment roll, together with all special assessments as well as any other amounts which the City Commission may require under authority of State law or this Charter to determine to be assessed or reassessed against any property or person. 
Section 97. - Collection by Treasurer. 
    After extending the taxes on the assessment roll and certifying to such roll in the manner required of assessing officers by State law, the Assessor shall, on or before the 10th day of June, deliver such assessment roll to the City Clerk, together with a copy or duplicate thereof, and the City Clerk shall forthwith annex his warrant to the original roll, directing and requiring the City Treasurer to collect from the several persons named in such roll the several sums, or the total thereof, opposite their respective names. The taxes thus assessed shall become at once a debt to the City from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amount assessed, together with all charges thereon, shall, on the 1st day of July, become a lien until paid, on the property of the taxpayer of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for State and County taxes. The City Treasurer shall have like power and duty to collect City taxes as is granted to or required of township treasurers in the collection of State and County taxes. 
Section 98. - Taxes; When Due. 
    City taxes shall be due and payable on the 1st day of July of each year. All taxes paid on or before the 31st day of July of the same year shall be collected without additional charge. From and after said 31st day of July, there shall be added one-half of one percent (1/2%) per month or fraction thereof, to taxes remaining unpaid, together with a penalty of two percent (2%). 
Section 99. - Partial Payment of Taxes. 
    The City Commission may, by resolution, authorize the City Treasurer, for a period not extending beyond the next March 1st, to accept partial payment on taxes and special assessments together with interest and penalties in such manner as the City Commission may determine. 
Section 100. - Return to County Treasurer. 
    If the City Treasurer has been unable to collect any of the City taxes on said roll on real property before the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by him, then it shall be his duty to return all such unpaid taxes on real property to the County Treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as similar returns made by township treasurers. Such returns shall include all the additional charges hereinbefore provided, which charges shall in such return be added to the amount assessed in said roll against each description. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to such County Treasurer are collected under the provisions of the general tax laws of the State, and the same rate of interest and all charges shall be collected thereon, and all taxes upon lands so returned as delinquent shall be and remain a lien thereon until paid. At the time of making said return, the City Treasurer shall make and file in his office a copy thereof upon which he shall record subsequent collections or reassessments as returned to him by the County Treasurer. The City shall have power to purchase any premises within the City of Traverse City at any tax or other public sale that may hereafter be held when such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of the City for taxes on said premises. 
Section 101. - State, County, School and Library Taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and levying taxes in the City for State, County, Library and School purposes, the City shall be considered the same as a township, and, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all provisions of State law relative to the collection of such taxes, the accounting therefor to the appropriate taxing units and the returning of property to the County Treasurer for nonpayment thereof shall apply to the performance thereof by the City Treasurer who shall perform the same duties and have the same powers in connection therewith as township treasurers. 
CHAPTER X - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Section 102. - General. 
    The City Commission shall have power to determine that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited. 
Section 103. - Resolution of City Commission. 
    Whenever the City Commission shall determine that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessments upon the property especially benefited, it shall so declare by resolution, and such resolution shall state the estimated cost of the improvement, what proportion of the cost thereof shall be paid by special assessments, and what part, if any, shall be paid from the general funds of the City, the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, and shall designate the districts or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied. 
Section 104. - Special Assessment Roll. 
    Within twenty-one (21) days after the City Commission shall have determined by resolution that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessments upon the property specifically benefited, the Assessor shall make an assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefited by the proposed improvement. 
Section 105. - Review. 
    The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of seven (7) days before the City Commission meets as a Board of Review to review the roll and to hear complaints. 
Section 106. - Notice. 
    Notice of the opening of the roll for public inspection and of the time and place of the meeting of the City Commission, acting as the Board of Review, to hear complaints shall be published by the City Clerk at least one (1) week before the opening of the roll for public inspection. 
Section 107. - Objections to Improvement. 
    If, at or prior to the meeting of the Board of Review, the owners of more than one-half (1/2) of the property to be assessed shall object in writing to the improvement, the assessment shall not be made without an affirmative vote of six members of the City Commission. Every special assessment roll ratified and confirmed by the City Commission, acting as the Board of Review, shall be final and conclusive. 
Section 108. - Additional Assessment; Refunds. 
    When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the costs of the improvement for which it was made, the City Commission may make an additional pro rata assessment, which additional assessment shall not, in any case, exceed thirty percent (30%) of the original assessment. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by five percent (5%) or less, the City Commission may place the excess in the City treasury. If more than five percent (5%), the excess shall be refunded pro rata according to assessments. 
Section 109. - Collection of Special Assessments. 
    Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon from the date of confirmation of the roll shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for State and County taxes, until paid. Interest at a rate not to exceed six percent (6%) per annum shall be collected on deferred installments; and from such date after confirmation as shall be fixed by the City Commission the same penalties and collection fee shall be paid on delinquent installments of such special assessments as are provided by this Charter to be paid on delinquent general City taxes. Such delinquent special assessments shall be returned to the County Treasurer for collection and shall be handled in the same manner as are delinquent general City taxes; provided, that no such delinquent special assessments, nor any delinquent installment thereof, shall be returned to the County Treasurer for collection unless and until such delinquency has continued for a period of six (6) months, nor until the first day of March next following such six (6) months delinquency. 
Section 110. - Procedure. 
    To make effective the provisions of this Charter, the assessment procedure concerning plans and specifications, estimate of costs, the making of the assessment roll and correction of errors, the collection of special assessments and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment method outlined in Chapter XXIV of Act 215 of the Public Acts of 1895, same being Sections 2032 to 2059 inclusive of the Compiled Laws of 1929, which, insofar as not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, and except that no more than one (1) publication shall be required in any case, is hereby adopted into and made a part of this Charter. All acts required therein to be performed by a "Board of Special Assessors" shall be performed by the City Assessor. 
CHAPTER XI - UTILITIES; FRANCHISES; PERMITS 

Section 111. - Franchises. 
    All franchises heretofore granted by the City of Traverse City and now in operation shall continue until the expiration of such franchises. All irrevocable public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions and amendments thereof shall be granted only by ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted before thirty (30) days after application therefor has been filed with the City Commission, nor until a full public hearing has been held thereon. No such ordinance shall become effective until it has been submitted to the electors and has been approved by three-fifths (3/5) of the electors voting thereon. No such ordinance shall be submitted to the electors at an election to be held less than sixty (60) days after the grantee named therein has filed its unconditional acceptance of such franchise, and it shall not be submitted to a special election unless the expense of holding the election as determined by the City Commission shall have been paid to the City Treasurer by the grantee. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted and no franchise shall be granted for a longer term than thirty (30) years. No franchise shall be transferable, directly or indirectly, except with the approval of the City Commission expressed by ordinance. 
Section 112. - Right of Regulation. 
    All public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the City: (a) to repeal the same for misuse or nonuse, or for failure to comply therewith; (b) to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; (c) to establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; (d) to make independent audit and examination of accounts at any time, and to require reports annually; (e) to require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; (f) to impose such other regulations as may be determined by the City Commission to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
Section 113. - Regulation of Rates. 
    All public utility franchises shall make provision for fixing rates, fares and charges, and for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals of not more than five (5) years, either by arbitration upon terms to be specifically set forth in the franchise, or by any State agency, at the election of the City. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits. 
Section 114. - Purchase; Condemnation. 
    The City shall have the right to acquire by condemnation or otherwise the property of any public utility in accordance with the general laws of the State, provided that the price to be paid shall in no event include any value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits. 
Section 115. - Revocable Permits. 
    Temporary permits for public utilities, revocable at any time at the will of the City Commission, may be granted by the City Commission by resolution on such terms and conditions as it shall determine, provided that such permits shall in no event be construed to be franchises or amendments to franchises. Any such resolution shall be subject to the referendum provided for by this Charter. 
Section 116. - Joint Use. 
    Every public utility may be required by the City to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and public places of the City by the City of Traverse City or by other public utilities, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable, upon payment of reasonable rental therefor; provided that in the absence of agreement upon application of any public utility, the City Commission shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, which award shall be final. 
Section 117. - Use of Streets and Public Places. 
    The right to use, control and regulate use of its streets, alleys, bridges and public places, and the space above and beneath them, is hereby reserved to the City, and every public utility franchise shall be subject thereto. Every public utility shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the City harmless from all damages arising from said use. 
CHAPTER XII - MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES 

Section 118. - Operation for Benefit of City. 
    The several municipally owned utilities: i.e. The Sewage Treatment Plant (including the entire sewer system), The Traverse City Light and Power Department, The City Water Works Department, together with any utilities hereafter acquired, shall be operated for the benefit of the City of Traverse City. 
Section 119. - Administration by City Manager. 
    The City Manager of the City of Traverse City shall be the chief administrative officer of each of these utilities or utility departments and shall have power to appoint and remove a superintendent for each or any of them and all officers and employees thereof; but the City Manager may authorize the head of a utility or utility department or office responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates, such appointments or removals shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and of any ordinances enacted in conformity therewith. The appointments made by or under authority of the City Manager shall be on the basis of the fitness, training and experience of such appointees for the work they are to perform. All such appointments shall be without definite term unless for provisional, temporary or emergency service not to exceed the maximum periods which may be prescribed by personnel regulations. 
Section 120. - Separate Utility Funds. 
    The funds of each of the utilities or utility departments shall be kept separate from the general fund of the City of Traverse City. 
Section 121. - Municipal Utility Emergency Reserve. 
    An emergency reserve account shall be created for each utility or utility department to meet any emergencies which may occur in connection with such utility or utility department. Municipal utilities shall be deemed to include the water supply and distribution system, the sewage collection and disposal system, the light and power system, and any other public improvement in the nature of a utility which is hereafter established or acquired. The emergency reserve fund shall be established annually in the budget. The purpose of such fund is to meet any emergencies which occur in connection with such utility or utility department. Funding of the emergency reserve shall come from retained earnings of the utility or utility department, or, if such is insufficient in the estimation of the City Commission, shall come from the general fund. Withdrawals from the emergency reserve fund shall be replaced. 
Section 122. - Use of Utility Revenues. 
    All further net profits shall revert to the general fund of the City of Traverse City and shall be used for the purpose of: (a) reducing the indebtedness as such indebtedness matures, of the particular utility or utility department from which such profits are derived; (b) making normal plant improvements and expansions; (c) reducing the current indebtedness of the City; and (d) supplementing the tax revenues of the City by using this money to defray the usual expenses of City government. 
Section 123. - Mortgage Bonds. 
    The City Commission may borrow money to acquire or operate any public utility. It may issue mortgage bonds therefor beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness herein prescribed; provided, that the indebtedness created by such mortgage bonds shall not impose any liability upon the City, but shall be secured only upon the property and revenues of such public utility, including a franchise, stating the terms upon which in case of foreclosure the purchaser may operate the same, which franchise shall in no case extend for a longer period than twenty (20) years from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise on foreclosure. 
Section 124. - Rules and Regulations. 
    Insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of this Charter, the present regulations of the various utilities and utility departments relative to rates, charges, operation, etc., shall continue in full force and effect under this Charter until changed by proper ordinance or resolution of the City Commission. In addition to the powers, privileges and rights possessed by the several utilities and utility departments of the City under the State Constitution, the general laws of the State, this Charter and the City ordinances, such utilities and utility departments of the City shall have the power to render all such services to their customers as are rendered by public utilities of similar type operating in the City. 
Section 125. - Accounts and Reports. 
    Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City, distinct from other City accounts, and in such a manner as to show the true and complete financial result of such City ownership, or ownership and operation, including all assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These accounts shall show the actual cost to the City of each public utility owned, the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements, all expenses of maintenance, the amounts set aside for sinking fund purposes, and all operating expenses of every description. They shall show, as nearly as possible, the value of any service furnished to or rendered by any such public utility by or to any other City department. It shall be the duty of the superintendent of each utility or utility department to make an annual report to the City Manager on or before the tenth day of March of each year of all the works under his supervision. The report shall also provide a proper allowance for City taxes, for which due allowance shall be made for services rendered to the City, insurance, and for depreciation and obsolescence. The report shall show the condition of all reserve accounts. The City Manager shall annually cause to be made and published for public distribution, a report showing the financial results of such ownership, or ownership and operation, which report shall give the information specified in this section, and such further information as the City Manager shall deem expedient or the City Commission shall require. 
Section 126. - Disposal of Plants. 
    The City shall not sell, exchange, lease or in any way alien or dispose of the property, easements, income or other equipment, privilege or asset belonging to and appertaining to any utility which it may acquire, or its parks, unless and except the proposition for such purpose shall first have been submitted, at a regular or special election held for the purpose in the manner provided in this Charter, to the qualified voters of the City and approved by them by a three-fifths (3/5) majority vote of the electors voting thereon. All contracts, negotiations, grants, leases or other forms of transfer in violation of this provision shall be void and of no effect as against the City. The provisions of this section shall not, however, apply to the sale or exchange of any real estate which is not necessary to the operation of any utility or utility department or any articles or equipment of any City owned utility as are worn out or useless, or which could, with advantage to the service, be replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment. 
CHAPTER XIII - STREETS, PUBLIC GROUNDS AND PROPERTY, CEMETERIES, PARKS, TRUSTS 

Section 127. - General. 
    The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself the right to use and to control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and public places, and the space above and beneath them, and shall have the power to acquire, own, establish, maintain, operate and administer, either within or without its corporate limits, parks, boulevards, cemeteries, hospitals, almshouses, buildings and all works which involve the public health or safety. 
Section 128. - Perpetual Dedication. 
    All grants or dedications heretofore made shall continue without change. All cemeteries and parks now owned or hereafter acquired by the City of Traverse City either within or without its corporate limits shall be dedicated solely to cemetery or park purposes respectively, provided, however, that the electors by a three-fifths (3/5) majority vote may approve subsequently disposal of such cemeteries and parks or portions thereof. 
Section 129. - Trusts. 
    All trusts heretofore established for cemetery, park or other purposes shall be used and continued in accordance with the terms of the trusts. The City of Traverse City may, in its discretion, receive and hold any property in trust for cemetery, park or other public purposes and shall apply the same to the execution of such trusts and for no other purposes whatsoever. 
    All money to be derived from the rights to explore for oil, gas and/or minerals on the Brown Bridge or other property of the City of Traverse City, together with production money (royalties), shall be placed in a perpetual trust fund in one or more banking institutions designated by the City Commission. This fund shall be known as the Brown Bridge Trust Fund, all portions of which shall be invested in obligations of the United States of America. The income from said Trust shall be used to supplement City taxes as a credit against the General Fund levy as established yearly by the City Commission. Said funds shall remain in a perpetual trust, the principal of which shall not be used except by a three fifths (3/5) majority vote of the qualified electors voting thereon. However, any amount of the principal in the Brown Bridge Trust Fund that is over twelve million dollars ($12,000,000) may be placed in a separate trust fund for a period of five years beginning November 4, 2014, and ending November 5, 2019, and used for City parks capital improvements when matching funds can be secured from outside sources. (Amended 11-4-14) 
Section 130. - Cemetery Care Funds. 
    The amount now standing to the credit of the Perpetual Care Fund, together with all additions thereto, shall be kept in a separate fund known as the Perpetual Care Fund, which shall constitute a trust fund, the income of which shall be used as occasion may require for the general care and maintenance of those lots for the benefit of which said funds shall have been deposited. Said fund shall never, under any pretext or evasion, be diverted from its declared purpose. All moneys received by the City for the perpetual care of lots or graves may be invested only in bonds of either the City of Traverse City, School District of Traverse City, County of Grand Traverse, or bonds or other full faith obligations of the United States of America, as the City Commission may direct. All portions of said Perpetual Care Fund not so invested in bonds shall be kept in a separate checking account in some banking institution to be designated by the City Commission. There shall also be created a fund known as the Cemetery Care Fund, and fifty percent (50%) of all moneys which shall from time to time be received from the sale of lots and graves and crypts shall be placed in said Fund, the income of which shall be used as occasion may require for the general care and maintenance of the entire City cemetery property. Said Cemetery Care Fund shall also constitute a trust fund, the moneys of which shall never under any pretext be diverted. This Fund or portions of this Fund may be invested only in bonds of the City of Traverse City, School District of the City of Traverse City, County of Grand Traverse, or bonds or other full faith obligations of the United States of America. Any moneys in said funds not so invested shall be placed in a separate checking account in such banking institution as the City Commission may designate. 
Section 131. - Platting and Sale. 
    The City Commission shall cause cemeteries to be laid out into lots, avenues and walks, the plats thereof to be recorded in the office of the City Clerk. The City Commission shall fix the price of such lots and manner of conveyance and recording. 
Section 132. - Protection; Establishment; Maintenance. 
    The City Commission shall have power to enact all ordinances deemed necessary for the establishment, maintenance and protection of all cemeteries and parks (together with the improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto) now owned or hereafter acquired by the City of Traverse City either within or without its corporate limits and like power with reference to all cemeteries within the City belonging to, or under the control of, any church, religious society, corporation, company or association; and the City shall have power to condemn property for cemetery purposes in accord with the general statutes of the State. 
CHAPTER XIV - PUBLIC LIBRARIES 

Section 133. - Board of Library Trustees. 
    The City Commission may appoint a Board of Library Trustees consisting of three members whose terms of office shall be three years and whose terms shall be staggered so that the term of not more than one trustee expires in any year. The City may participate with any other municipality in the establishment and operation of a District Library in the manner provided by law. 
Section 134. - Control of Grounds and Buildings. 
    The Board of Library Trustees shall have control and management of the grounds and buildings and the care and government of the public library and reading rooms, subject to the ordinances of the Commission and the provisions of this Charter. 
Section 135. - Power to Maintain. 
    The Commission shall have power to establish and maintain a public library and reading room for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of said City and levy a tax of not to exceed one mill on the dollar annually on all the taxable property in the City, such tax to be levied and collected in like manner as other general City taxes, and to be known as the Library Fund; provided, that whenever the City Commission shall determine by resolution that it is expedient to acquire by purchase grounds and buildings for the construction of a suitable building in which to establish free library reading rooms they shall have the power to and may raise by tax not to exceed three mills on the dollar annually on all the taxable property in the City, to be levied and collected the same as other general City taxes, and to be known as the Library Fund. 
Section 136. - Organization. 
    Said Board of Library Trustees shall, immediately after appointment, and annually thereafter, meet and organize by the election of one of their number president. The City Clerk shall be Clerk of said Board. 
Section 137. - Government of Library. 
    Said Board shall make and adopt such rules, by-laws and regulations for their own guidance and for the government of the library and reading rooms as may be expedient. They shall have exclusive control of the expenditures of all moneys collected to the credit of the Library Fund, and supervision, care and custody of the grounds, rooms or buildings constructed, leased or set apart for that purpose; provided, that the construction of any building for that purpose shall be under the supervision of the City Commission; and, provided further, that all moneys received for such Library Fund shall be deposited in the City treasury to the credit of the Library Fund, and shall be kept separate and apart from all other moneys of the City, and be drawn upon by the City Clerk, countersigned by the Mayor, upon the properly authenticated vouchers of the Board of Library Trustees. 
Section 138. - Employees and Compensation. 
    Said Board may appoint a suitable librarian and necessary assistants and recommend to the Commission their compensation, and the Commission shall fix the same and provide for the payment thereof. 
Section 139. - Injury to Library or Books. 
    The Commission shall have power to pass ordinances imposing suitable penalties for the punishment of persons committing injury to said library or the grounds or other property thereof, or for willful injury to or failure to return any book belonging to such library, or for violation of any of the rules or regulations governing the same. 
Section 140. - Reports. 
    The Board shall make and report to the City Commission on or before the 10th day of March in each year, and oftener when required so to do by the City Commission, a statement of the conditions of their trust at the date of their report, including the various sums of money received from the Library Fund and from other sources, and what sums of money have been expended and for what purpose; the number of books and periodicals on hand; the number lost or missing; the number procured by purchase, gifts or otherwise during the year; the number of visitors attending; the number of books loaned out and the general character and kind of such books, with such other statistics, information and suggestions as they may deem of general interest. All such portions of such report as relates to the receipt and expenditure of moneys, as well as the number of books on hand, books lost or missing and books purchased, shall be verified by affidavit. 
Section 141. - Donations. 
    Any persons desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real estate for the benefit of such library and reading room shall have the right to vest the title to the money or other personal property or real estate so donated in said Board of Library Trustees, to be held and controlled by such Board, when accepted according to the terms of the deed, gift, devise or bequest of such property, and as to such property said Board shall be held and considered to be special trustees. 
CHAPTER XV - RECALL; INITIATIVE; REFERENDUM 

Section 142. - Recall. 
    Any elective officer may be removed from office by the electors in the manner provided by the general laws of the State of Michigan. A vacancy created by the recall of any elective officer shall be filled by election in the manner prescribed by law. No person who has been removed from office by recall, or who has resigned from such office while recall proceedings are pending against him, shall be appointed to any office within one (1) year after such recall or resignation. 
Section 143. - Initiative and Referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition or a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the City Commission or on any decision to build or acquire a power generation facility may be had by a petition as hereinafter provided. An ordinance sought to be initiated by petition shall be fully set forth on the petition or as an attachment thereto. If the ordinance is more than three pages, it may be incorporated by reference and filed with the City Clerk at all times while the petition is being circulated. (Amended 11-2-1999 and 11-2-2010.) 
Section 144. - Petitions. 
    An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by registered qualified electors of the City in number equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the highest vote for any Commissioner at the last regular City Election prior to the filing of the petition. Before being circulated for signatures, all such petitions shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney. No such petition need be on one paper, but may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition paper shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil, and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and his place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. At the time of filing the petition papers, the City Clerk shall provide a receipt on a form supplied by the City Clerk, indicating the total number of petition papers filed with the City Clerk and the total number of signatures submitted on the petitions; such form shall indicate that it shall not be construed as certification by the City Clerk as to the sufficiency of any signature on the petitions nor the sufficiency of the petition papers themselves and it shall be countersigned by the filer of the petition papers. Any such petition shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall, within ten (10) days, determine the sufficiency thereof and so certify. If found to contain an insufficient number of names of qualified electors of the City, or to be improper as to form or compliance with the provisions of this section, ten (10) days shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper, the City Clerk shall present the petition to the City Commission at its next regular meeting. A referendum petition on any decision to build or acquire a power generation facility shall be filed within 45 days from the decision. (Amended 11-2-1999, 11-2-2010 and 11-8-2016 ). 
Section 145. - Commission Procedure. 
    Upon receiving a certified initiatory or referendary petition from the City Clerk, the City Commission shall, within thirty (30) days, either (a) if it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance; (b) if it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance; or (c) in either case, determine to submit the proposal to the electors. 
Section 146. - Submission to Electors. 
    Should the City Commission decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the City for any other purpose or, in the discretion of the City Commission, at a special election. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by law. 
Section 147. - General Provisions. 
    The certification by the City Clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition within twenty (20) days after the passage of the ordinance to which such petition refers shall automatically suspend the ordinance in question pending repeal by the City Commission or final determination of the electors, as the case may be. No referendum shall be had on any ordinance based on a franchise or a contract unless referendary petitions are filed within twenty (20) days after the passage of such ordinance, unless a provision therefor is specifically provided for therein. An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the City Commission for a period of two (2) years, and then only by the affirmative vote of not less than five (5) Commissioners. Should two or more ordinances adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions the one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
CHAPTER XVI - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 148. - Peace, Health and Safety. 
    The City Commission shall provide, by ordinance, for the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property. 
Section 149. - House Trailers. 
    The City Commission may, by ordinance, provide for the regulation of the use, occupancy, sanitation and parking of house trailers and temporary structures within the City, and the licensing or taxation thereof, provided, that the right of the City Commission to regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to, the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any other manner whatsoever. 
Section 150. - Water and Watercourses. 
    For the benefit of the public morals, peace, health and welfare, the City shall have and possess the power to use and control and regulate the use of all streams, waters and watercourses within its limits; which power shall include, but not be limited to, the licensing of motor driven watercraft, including outboard motor boats, and the prohibition of any type of motor driven craft which constitutes a public nuisance; the regulation of the mooring of boats for hire; the regulation of the speed of, and of the lights to be used on, all watercraft operating within the City; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not be construed so as to conflict with the general laws of the State or nation nor to interfere with any riparian or littoral rights without the corporate limits of the City. 
Section 151. - Wharves and Dockage. 
    The City Commission shall have the power to establish, construct, maintain and control public wharves, docks, piers, landing places and basins upon any lands or property belonging to or under the control of the City. 
Section 152. - Restrictions as to Contracts and Official Positions. 
    Neither the City Commission nor any City official shall have the power to make any contract with, or to give any official position to one who is in default to the City, and any contract made with, or any appointment to any official position, in violation of the provisions of this section shall be void and of no effect. 
Section 153. - Vacancy Defined. 
    In addition to other provisions in this Charter a vacancy shall be deemed to exist in any office when an officer dies, resigns, is removed from office, moves from the City, is convicted of a felony or judicially declared to be mentally incompetent. 
Section 154. - Official Interest in Contracts. 
(a)  Contractual Conflicts of Interest. The conduct of City officials and employees in relation to conflicts of interest involving contracts shall be as established by State law. 
(b)  Dual Fiduciary Duties. A City Commissioner having a dual fiduciary duty, which is not a financial conflict of interest as defined by law or this Charter, shall vote unless, upon request of that Commissioner, a majority of the remaining eligible Commissioners allows abstention. 
(c)  Financial Conflict of Interest. An official or employee who has a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any matter to be decided by the City, other than with respect to a contract, shall make that interest known and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in the making of the decision. Violation of this subsection with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation dealing with the City shall render the decision voidable by the City Manager or the City Commission. Any official or employee violating the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall forfeit office. A financial conflict of interest may be waived by the City Commission after full disclosure of such conflict to the Commission. Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the remaining members of the Commission in a unanimous vote may rule that the best interests of the City are to be served by removing the prohibition on voting and participating in the matter. 
Section 155. - Civil Service. 
    The City Commission may provide, by ordinance, for a merit system of personnel management and may establish by ordinance a pension and retirement system for any or all groups of employees in the service of the City. The cost of any such pension and retirement system shall be determined on actuarially sound mortality and service tables. 
    Effective July 1, 1971, pensions and retirement for all policemen and firemen shall be subject to the provisions of Act 345 of the Public Acts of 1937, as amended. 
Section 156. - Private Use of Public Property. 
    No officer or employee shall devote any City property or labor to his own personal use. 
Section 157. - Misdemeanors Under Charter and Violations of Ordinances. 
    All offenses in this Charter declared to be misdemeanors and all violations of City ordinances shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
Section 158. - Notice of Publication. 
    Notices or proceedings requiring publication, and all ordinances passed by the City Commission, shall, unless otherwise provided by this Charter, be published once in the official newspaper. The City Commission shall annually in May designate the official newspaper for the next fiscal year which shall be a newspaper printed and published in the City of Traverse City. Provided, however that the City Commission may, at any time, prescribe by ordinance for such publication by posting or otherwise. 
Section 159. - Damage Claims. 
    The City shall not be liable for unliquidated damages for injuries to persons or property unless the person claiming such damages, or someone in his, her or their behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the City Clerk within sixty (60) days after such claim for damages shall have accrued. Such claim shall be verified by the claimant, or some person having knowledge of the facts, and shall specify the time and place, the nature and extent of the injury sustained, the manner in which it occurred, the specific grounds upon which the claim of liability on the part of the City shall be asserted, the names and addresses of all known witnesses, the name of the attending physician, if any, and an itemized statement of the amounts claimed. Upon filing such claim, the City shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate the same and may require the claimant to produce all witnesses for examination under oath. Failure to file a claim or produce witnesses in the manner required in this section shall forever bar any action or proceeding in any court for the collection of such claim. No action shall be maintained in any case unless the same be brought within the statutory period after such injury or damages shall have been received. On trial or action on such claim, no witness shall be competent to testify for the claimant, who was known and not named in the claim filed with the City, or not produced upon demand. If such claim shall arise from or is claimed to have been received by reason of any defect in any sidewalk, crosswalk, pavement, alley or street, the claimant who alleges such injury shall, in said written notice, specify the location of said defect and the character and a detailed description of the alleged defect claimed to have existed. 
Section 160. - City Planning Commission. 
    The City Commission shall by ordinance establish and maintain a City Planning Commission having the powers and duties prescribed by State law. 
Section 161. - Uniform Accounting. 
    The City Commission shall provide for an accounting system which shall conform to State law. 
Section 162. - Public Records. 
    All records in the City shall be public. 
Section 163. - Amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided in Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended. Should two (2) or more amendments, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 164. - Headings. 
    Chapter and section headings are for convenience only and shall not be considered to be part of the Charter. 
Section 165. - Severability. 
    The sections of this Charter and the parts thereof are severable, and in the event of any provisions being declared unconstitutional or contrary to State law, it is hereby declared the intent of the Charter Commission and the electors voting thereon that such unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the validity of any other provision of this Charter. 
Section 166. - Submission of Charter. 
    This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the electorate of the City of Traverse City, for adoption or rejection, at the general City election to be held November 5, 1940. 
Section 167. - First Election. 
    If this Charter shall be adopted at said election, the first City Commission to serve under this Charter shall be composed of the two (2) hold-over City Commissioners elected for a term of four (4) years at the general City election held November 8, 1938, under the prior Charter of the City of Traverse City who shall continue in office until their successors are elected at the regular City election held under this Charter in April, 1943, and assume the duties of their office on the second Monday following their election; the person elected to the office of Mayor at the general City election to be held November 5, 1940, who shall serve as Mayor under this Charter for the full term of two (2) years to which he was elected and until the second Monday following the regular City election to be held in April, 1943, at which time his successor shall be selected in the manner provided in this Charter; the two (2) persons elected as City Commissioners at said election to be held November 5, 1940; and two (2) other persons to be elected to the office of City Commission on a ballot which shall constitute a part of the sheet at the top of which shall be located the ballot by which the question of the adoption or rejection of this Charter shall be submitted to the electorate of the City of Traverse City, the two (2) persons receiving the highest number of votes on such ballot shall be deemed to be elected and the ballot on which such City Commissioners shall be elected shall specify that persons voted for thereon shall be deemed to be elected only if this Charter shall be adopted. The name of no person shall appear on said ballot whose name appears on the ballot to elect persons to the office of City Commissioner at the general election to be held November 5, 1940, in accordance with the provisions of the prior Charter of the City of Traverse City. The last two (2) members of the City Commission to be elected to the office of City Commissioner as herein prescribed shall be nominated as prescribed in this Charter, except that the primary election shall be omitted in so far as candidates for such office are concerned and the last day and time for filing nomination petitions for such office shall be twelve (12) o'clock, noon, October 25, 1940. 
CHAPTER XVII - SCHEDULE 

Section 168. - Submission of Charter; Terms of Office of First Commission. 
    The last four (4) persons elected to the office of City Commissioner as provided in the preceding section shall hold office under this Charter until the second Monday following the regular City election to be held in April, 1945. 
Section 169. - First Commission Meeting. 
    The first City Commission, as established hereunder, shall assemble in the official City Commission chambers at seven-thirty (7:30) p.m. on the second Monday following its election, and when it shall have been called to order by the City Clerk, the City Commission existing under the previous Charter of the City of Traverse City shall cease to be and the office and term of the Mayor and of each and every member of the City Commission holding office by virtue of such previous Charter of the City of Traverse City shall, except as otherwise provided herein, terminate, and this Charter shall become operative and the new City Commission as constituted herein shall assume its duties. 
Section 170. - Hold-Over Offices. 
    All officers holding office under the previous Charter, except the Mayor and members of the City Commission, holding office under and by virtue of such previous Charter, shall continue in office until their successors shall be chosen and shall qualify, or the office be abolished in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. All offices not named in this Charter shall be abolished and cease to be at midnight December 31, 1940. Where questions arise concerning the responsibility and authority of officers, pending the appointment of a City Manager, the City Commission shall temporarily fix such responsibility and grant such authority as is necessary to maintain the services of the City. 
Section 171. - Budget Adjustments. 
    The first City Commission elected under this Charter shall have authority, on recommendation of the City Manager, to make any necessary adjustments in the budget then in force. 
Section 172. - Ordinance and Resolutions; Contracts; Franchises. 
    All by-laws, ordinances, contracts, franchises, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City, not inconsistent with this Charter, in force at the time this Charter becomes effective shall continue in full force until repealed or amended by action of the proper authorities. 
Section 173. - Taxes and Assessments. 
    All taxes and assessments levied or assessed and all charges thereon and all fines and penalties imposed, which remain uncollected at the time this Charter becomes effective, shall be collected as if such change had not been made. If a different remedy is provided by this Charter, or any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto, which can be made applicable to any rights existing when this Charter becomes effective, such remedy shall be deemed to be accumulative to the remedies before provided. 
Section 174. - Vested Rights Continued. 
    After the adoption of this Charter, the City shall continue to be vested with all property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects, and the records, files, books, and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of the previous Charter, and with any additional property and rights as herein prescribed. No right or liability, either in favor of or against the City, existing at the time this Charter becomes effective, and no suit or prosecution of any character, shall in any manner be affected by any change, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the City shall continue to be its debts and liabilities, and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such change shall be collected, and all licenses issued by the City shall be and remain the same as if such change had not been made. 
CHAPTER XVIII - LIGHT AND POWER BOARD 

Section 175. - Light and Power Department. 
    There is hereby created the Light and Power Department of the City of Traverse City, which shall be responsible for the development, production, purchase and distribution of all electricity, heat, steam, light and power services by the City. 
Section 176. - Light and Power Board. 
    There is hereby created the Light and Power Board of the City, which shall have exclusive jurisdiction, control and management of the Light and Power Department and all its operations and facilities, except as herein provided. Unless specifically allocated to the City Commission or to a City official, the Board shall have all the powers and duties possessed by the City to construct, acquire, expand and operate the light and power system and to do any and all acts or things that are necessary, convenient or desirable in order to operate, maintain, enlarge, extend, preserve or promote an orderly, economic and business-like administration of the Light and Power Department. The Board shall operate as a separate unit of City government. The Board may sue or be sued in the name of the Light and Power Department of the City of Traverse City. All damage claims arising from the operations of the Board and the Department shall be the responsibility of and be liquidated by the Board from the appropriate funds of the Department. 
Section 177. - Organization of Board. 
(a)  Number of Board Members. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be nominated and appointed by the City Commission. Not less than one (1) and not more than two (2) of these members shall be City Commissioners selected by the City Commission and shall be ex officio members with full voting authority. In addition to these seven (7) members, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall be an ex officio member without voting authority and shall not be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum. 
(b)  Term of Office. The non-Commissioner Board members shall be appointed to serve terms of five (5) years from the first Monday of April. The Commission Board members shall be appointed for a two-year term bi-annually at the City Commission organizational meeting. Any Board member may continue beyond the appointed term of office until that Board member's successor is appointed and has qualified, unless the Board member has been removed from office as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Commission, for the unexpired term. 
(d)  Qualifications and Removal. No person shall be a Board member unless the person is a resident elector of the City, except that one (1) Board member may be a nonresident of the City if that Board member resides within the current actual service area of the Department. No person who holds any other City office or who is an employee of the City shall be a member of the Board. A Board member ceasing to possess any of these qualifications or a Board member who has engaged in official misconduct, the unfaithful performance of duties, or who has failed to diligently attend meetings, shall be suspended for not more than thirty (30) days by the Mayor and shall be removed from office upon approval of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the City Commission. 
(e)  Compensation. No Board member shall be compensated for serving on the Light and Power Board. Board members may be reimbursed for actual out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the carrying out of duties as a member of the Light and Power Board upon approval of the majority of the Board. 
(f)  Officers. The Board by majority vote shall elect from among its members a chairman who shall preside over the meetings of the Board and a vice-chairman who shall act for the chairman during the chairman's absence. The Board shall appoint a secretary to the Board who shall be responsible for maintenance of records. An election of officers of the Board shall be held annually at the first regular meeting following the appointment of a new Board member after the end of a regular term of office. No member shall serve as chairman for more than two (2) consecutive terms. 
(g)  Board Meetings. The Board shall establish a regular monthly schedule of meetings. Special meetings may be held as required following appropriate notice. The Board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings. No action shall be taken by the Board except by the concurring vote of at least four (4) members. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members of the Board. (Amended 11-2-99.) 
(h)  Subcommittees. The chairman with the approval of the Board shall have the authority to appoint ad hoc subcommittees, but there shall be no standing subcommittees of the Board. (Amended Nov. 5, 1991) 
Section 178. - Organization of Department. 
(a)  Executive Director. The Board shall appoint and employ an Executive Director who shall be qualified by training and experience for the overall management of the Department. Salary shall be fixed by the Board and the Executive Director shall have such authority as delegated by the Board. The Executive Director shall determine the number of employees necessary for the operation of the utility, and fix their duties and compensation subject to the approval of the Board. The Executive Director shall have control of all actual construction and repairs, the immediate management of operation of the Department and the enforcement and execution of all rules and regulations, programs, plans and decisions made or adopted by the Board. The Executive Director shall maintain suitable permanent records regarding his or her actions. The Executive Director shall prepare plans and specifications, take bids and let contracts, subject to the approval of the Board. 
(b)  Employees. There shall be such other officers and employees of the Department as may be provided by the Board. The officers and employees shall be appointed and removed by the Executive Director subject to the provisions of this article. The Executive Director may hire an assistant with the advice and consent of the Board. The Executive Director shall adopt an organizational structure for management of the Department subject to the approval of the Board. The Executive Director shall negotiate all labor contracts, but all such contracts shall be executed by the chairman and secretary of the Board upon approval by the Board. 
(c)  Attorney. The Board shall appoint legal counsel who shall hold office at the pleasure of the Board. Legal counsel shall act as advisor to and attorney and counsel for the Board and the Department and shall approve in writing all contracts, bonds and other instruments in which the Board or the Department is concerned. Legal counsel shall represent the Board and the Department in all courts in any litigation and shall perform such other duties as the Board may authorize. With the consent of the City Commission, the City Attorney may act as legal counsel for the Light and Power Department and Board. 
(d)  Surety Bonds. The Board may require surety bonds for any of the officers and employees of the Department in such amounts as the Board deems necessary. The premiums for the bonds shall be paid by the Department in the same manner as any other operating expense. 
Section 179. - Powers and Duties of Board. 
(a)  Purchase and Sale of Personal Property. The Board shall have the power to acquire and dispose of personal property by sale, purchase, exchange or lease under procedures established by the Board which may provide a monetary limit within which such transactions involving personal property may be made by the Executive Director without Board approval and without necessity of securing competitive bids. 
(b)  Purchase and Sale of Real Property. No later than the effective date of this article, the City Commission shall clearly designate all light and power real property which appertains to the Light and Power Department operations, except general utility easements. The Light and Power Department may use any utility or roadway easement for utility purposes. The Board shall have the power to acquire real property or any interest therein in the name of the City for Light and Power Department purposes. The Board may sell or lease any Light and Power Department real property or interest therein in the name of the City, but the Board shall not sell, exchange, lease or in any way alien or dispose of the real property belonging to and appertaining to the Light and Power utility which it now owns or may hereafter acquire unless the proposition for such disposal shall first have been submitted to the qualified voters of the City and approved by them by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon. The provision of this section regarding approval of the electors shall not, however, apply to the sale, lease or exchange of any real property which is not necessary for the operation of the Light and Power Department and which is certified as not necessary by the Light and Power Board and which is also certified as not necessary by the City Commission. The proceeds from the sale, lease or exchange of any real property certified as not necessary shall accrue to the Light and Power Department. 
(c)  Contracts. The Board shall have the following powers both inside and outside the City limits: 
i.  To sell its products and services to public and private corporations and to other consumers. 
ii.  To construct plants, transmission lines and other facilities; 
iii.  To purchase franchises; and 
iv.  To enter into all contracts and agreements in furtherance hereof. 
(d)  Extensions of Services. The Board may adopt regulations governing extensions of services of the Department both inside and outside the City limits. The regulations shall provide the conditions under which the extension shall be made to render them compensatory and shall provide that each extension project shall, when completed, become the property of the City whether on public or private property. 
(e)  Eminent Domain. The Board shall have no authority to exercise powers of eminent domain, but may recommend such actions be taken by the City. 
(f)  Use of Right of Way. The Board may use the grounds over, under or along any road, railroad, highway, street, sidewalk, thoroughfare, alley or water way in the operations of the Department, but shall in all cases be subject to the applicable general regulations of the City, and cause the surface of the public way to be restored to its usual condition. 
(g)  Joint Operations. The Board may enter into contracts and agreements with any public or private corporation or an individual, both inside and outside the boundaries of the City and State (1) for the joint use of property belonging either to the City in use for Light and Power Department purposes or to the other contracting party or jointly to both parties, and (2) subject to the approval of the City Commission, either for acquisition of real property or the issuance of bond obligations for the joint acquisition, financing, construction and operation of plants, buildings, transmission lines and other facilities. 
(h)  Rates. After a public hearing and public notice the Board shall fix rates to be charged for electricity, heat, steam and other utilities sold and services rendered by the Department. Rates shall be fair, reasonable and compensatory and shall be uniform for all consumers within the same class; but different rate schedules may be applied to different classes of consumers as determined by the Board. Rates within the City limits may be less but shall be no greater than for the same class of consumers outside the City limits. Rates shall be sufficient to pay all operating and maintenance expenses of the utility's operation and all bond interest and redemption costs of the utility operations. The Board may require reasonable deposits as security for the payment of charges for utility services and may provide for the return of deposits when satisfactory consumer credit has been established. The Board shall also provide for the collection of payments for charges of the utility. (Corrected to eliminate typographical error 4-19-04). 
(i)  Budget. The Board shall submit to the City Commission on or before the last regular meeting of the City Commission in the month of April of each year an itemized budget conforming to the system of accounts required by the State of Michigan. The City Commission shall approve or reject this budget, but shall not have authority to change any of its provisions. The Board may amend its budget following the same procedure for budget adoption. (Amended 11-2-99). 
(j)  Authority for Expenditures. No moneys shall be drawn from the funds of the Department nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred except in conformity with the approved budget and after authorization by the Board. No claim against the Department shall be paid unless evidenced by a voucher approved by the Executive Director or by some other employee to be designated by the Executive Director. 
(k)  Bonds. Subject to applicable laws, the Board may recommend to the City Commission and the Commission may authorize the issuance and sale of revenue bonds necessary to finance the acquisition, construction, improvement and extension of any utility facilities owned by the City for Light and Power purposes including facilities owned or operated jointly with others. 
(l)  Short Term Indebtedness. Notwithstanding subsection (k) hereof and subject to applicable laws, the Board may borrow money for periods not to exceed three (3) years and may issue negotiable notes payable from the revenues of the Department as evidence of the indebtedness. However, such notes must be fully paid within three (3) years from their date of issuance and may not be renewed or converted to other short term indebtedness. 
(m)  Fee. No later than June 30 of each year, the Board shall pay to the City five percent (5%) of its gross revenue for the fiscal year ending on that same June 30. Such payment shall be the annual fee of the Light and Power Department to the City. Other than the annual fee, no other payment shall be made to the City except upon concurrent resolution duly adopted by a majority of the Board and a majority of the City Commission. No free service of electricity or any other service or product of the Light and Power Department shall be furnished by the Light and Power Department to any person, public or private, or to any political subdivision or any public agency or instrumentality of the State or Federal government. 
(n)  Accounting Reports. The Board, in addition to the reports and accounting that it may otherwise be required by law to make shall furnish to the City Commission a monthly financial statement on an accrual basis comparative with the budget. The City Commission shall conduct not less than annually an audit by a certified public accountant in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards showing the funds and accounts of the Department, which audit shall be open to public inspection. 
(o)  Capital Planning and Expansion. The Board shall conduct necessary studies and planning for the electricity, heat, steam, light and generating transmission facilities and related improvements and shall have the authority to include in its budget for each fiscal year up to five percent (5%) of the gross revenues or five percent (5%) of the undepreciated costs of existing facilities to provide for the financing of such expansion and improvements. The Board shall submit to the City Commission annually with its budget a capital improvements plan for the next six (6) years. The City Commission, after submitting this plan to the Planning Commission for its review and after the Planning Commission has held a public hearing on the plan, may approve or reject this plan, and once approved it may not be rejected by the City Commission except to the extent of the annual revisions of the plan adopted by the Board. If not approved or rejected by the City Commission by its first meeting in June, immediately following, the capital improvements plan shall be deemed approved. The Board's annual revisions shall include, as a minimum, a plan for the sixth year of the capital improvements plan. (Amended 11-2-93; 11-2-99, 11-7-06.) 
(p)  Rules and Policies. The Board shall have the power to adopt such rules, regulations and policies governing its conduct in the operation of the Light and Power Department as it deems advisable. The Board may also from time to time recommend to the City Commission the adoption of ordinances regarding the operation of the Light and Power Department, and specifically for the collection of payments for services rendered by the Light and Power Department. 
Section 180. - General Provisions. 
(a)  Existing Obligations. Contracts and obligations relating to the Light and Power Department of the City incurred prior to the taking effect of this chapter shall not be impaired and shall be binding upon the Board insofar as they apply to the Department. 
(b)  Repeal of Existing Charter Provisions. All existing provisions of the Charter of the City of Traverse City and parts of said provisions inconsistent with any provision of this chapter are hereby repealed including reference to the Traverse City Light and Power Department in Section 118 of said Charter. 
(c)  Severability of Provisions. The sections and subsections of this chapter are declared to be severable and in the event any one or more sections, subsections or parts thereof be declared void or illegal, it shall not affect the validity of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Effective Date of Chapter. For the purpose of creation, appointment, qualification and organization of the Board, and for the purpose of designating light and power real property, this chapter shall take effect from and after its passage, and for all other purposes of this chapter, shall take effect sixty (60) days from its passage. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the City Charter and any amendments thereto made subsequent to November 4, 2014. 
Ordinance 
Number Referendum 
 Date  Section 
this Charter Amend. of 11- 8-2016 28, 144 Amend. of 11- 6-2018 20, 20A  
PART TWO - ADMINISTRATION CODE 
TITLE TWO - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapter 202 - Codified Ordinances[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Ordinances and resolutions generally,  31 et seq.; Codification required,  34; Publication of ordinances and resolutions,  158 
Cross reference- Ordinances and resolutions generally, Ch. 222 
State Law reference- Publication of codes of municipal ordinances, M.C.L.A.  117.5b 

202.01 - Designation; citation; headings. 
(a)  This volume consists of all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Municipality, revised, codified, arranged, numbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, and as such shall be known and designated as the Codified Ordinances of Traverse City, Michigan, 1990, for which designation "Codified Ordinances" may be substituted. Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the Codified Ordinances. 
(b)  All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such components of the Codified Ordinances unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "Traffic Code." Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "section" followed by the number, such as "Section 202.01." 
202.02 - Amendments and supplements; numbering. 
(a)  The Codified Ordinances of Traverse City may be amended or supplemented at any time and, when any amendment or supplement is adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a part thereof, such amendment or supplement shall be incorporated in, and deemed a part of, the Codified Ordinances, so that a reference to the Codified Ordinances shall be understood and construed as including the Codified Ordinances of Traverse City and any and all such amendments and supplements. 
(b)  All amendments and supplements enacted as a part of the Codified Ordinances shall be integrated therewith by following the form of arrangement and plan set forth in the original Codified Ordinances as follows: each Code shall be subdivided into titles and/or chapters, and each chapter shall be subdivided into sections, which shall be numbered in accordance with the decimal numbering system. The numbering of all sections, except penalty sections, shall be consecutive within each chapter commencing with the first section of Chapter 202, which shall be numbered 202.01, the first "2" signifying Code 2, and the two figures "02" before the decimal signifying the chapter within the Code, and the two figures "01" after the decimal signifying the first section in Chapter 202 of the Code. Penalty sections shall be designated "99" and shall be the last section of a chapter. 
202.03 - Definitions and interpretation. 
    Terms used in these Codified Ordinances, unless specifically defined herein, shall have the meanings prescribed by state law. In the construction of these Codified Ordinances, or any provision thereof, the following rules and definitions shall control, except those which are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Commission as disclosed in a particular provision, section or chapter: 
(1)  Adopting ordinance. "Adopting Ordinance" means the ordinance of the Municipality adopting the Codified Ordinances of Traverse City, pursuant to law. 
(2)  Authority. Whenever in the Codified Ordinances authority is given to an officer or an act is required to be performed, such authority may be exercised and such act may be performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy or subordinate, unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any such particular provision. 
(3)  Calendar-computation of time. The terms "month" and "year" mean the calendar month or year. The time expressed in days within which an act is to be done or a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, unless the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which case it shall be excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday shall be excluded. 
(4)  City commission. "City Commission" means the legislative authority of the City. 
(5)  Conjunctions. "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and," if the sense so requires. 
(6)  County. "County" means the County of Grand Traverse, Michigan, and/or the County of Leelanau, Michigan. 
(7)  Gender. Words importing the masculine shall extend and be applied to the feminine and neuter genders. 
(8)  General rule. Except as otherwise provided in this section, words and phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of the language, provided, however, that technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a special meaning in the law shall be construed according to such technical or special meaning. 
(9)  Joint authority. Words giving authority to a board, commission, authority or to three or more officers or employees or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority thereof, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(10)  Keeper and proprietor. "Keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
(11)  Land and real estate. "Land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
(12)  Law. "Law" means all applicable laws of the United States of America, the State of Michigan and the City of Traverse City. 
(13)  Municipality or city. "Municipality" or "City" means the City of Traverse City, Michigan. 
(14)  Notice. "Notice" means notice as described in section 202.04. 
(15)  Number. Words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural number. 
(16)  Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having conscientious scruples about taking an oath. An affirmation shall have the same force and effect as an oath. 
(17)  Ordinance. "Ordinance" means and includes any ordinance of the Municipality, including any provision of these Codified Ordinances. 
(18)  Owner. "Owner," when applied to property, includes a part owner, joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or any part of such property. 
(19)  Person. "Person" includes any individual, copartnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
(20)  Premises. "Premises," when used as applicable to property, extends to and includes land and buildings. 
(21)  Property. "Property" includes real and personal property and any mixed and lesser estates or interests therein. "Personal property" includes every kind of property except real property; "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
(22)  Public acts. "Public Acts" means Acts of the State legislature of the State of Michigan. 
(23)  Public place. "Public place" means any place to or upon which the public resorts or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the City or any agency of the state or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom or by invitation, express or implied. 
(24)  Publish. "Publish" means to print in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality the entire document or a brief summary thereof with a listing of places where copies have been filed and times when they are available for inspection. 
(25)  Reasonable time. In all cases where provision is made for an act to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice. 
(26)  Residence. "Residence" means an abode in which a person permanently resides. 
(27)  Shall and may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(28)  Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb lines or lateral lines and the right-of-way lines, which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(29)  State. "State" means the State of Michigan. 
(30)  Street, highway and alley. "Street," "highway" and "alley" mean the entire width subject to an easement for public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the City, County or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The word "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a property. 
(31)  Tenant and occupant. "Tenant" and "occupant," as applied to buildings or land, shall extend and be applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or any part of, a building or land, alone or with others. 
(32)  Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the future. 
(33)  Time. Whenever any time established in the Codified Ordinances for the taking of any action expires on a Sunday or a legal holiday, such time shall not expire on such day but shall expire on the next week day. 
(34)  Responsibility. Whenever any act is prohibited by a provision of these Codified Ordinances or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of another person to do such act. 
202.04 - Notices. 
(a)  Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which if performed by the City may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of these Codified Ordinances, shall be served: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his or her residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)  By mailing such notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his or her last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, by posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the premises for five days before the act or action concerning which the notice is given. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any City officer unless permission is given by such officer to remove such notice or placard. 
202.05 - Severability. 
    It is the legislative intent of the City Commission in adopting these Codified Ordinances that all provisions and sections of these Codified Ordinances be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City. Should any provision or section of these Codified Ordinances be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent that these Codified Ordinances shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of these Codified Ordinances, whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
202.06 - Sections and ordinances repealed. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the Municipality, and parts of the same, in conflict with any of the provisions of these Codified Ordinances, are hereby repealed. 
202.07 - Exemptions from repeal. 
    The repeal provided for in section 202.06 shall not affect: 
(a)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the adoption of these Codified Ordinances; 
(b)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the Municipality, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the Municipality, or any evidence of the Municipality's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the Municipality; 
(c)  The administrative ordinances and resolutions of the City Commission not in conflict or inconsistent with any provision of these Codified Ordinances; 
(d)  Any right, license or franchise conferred by any ordinance or resolution of the Commission on any person; 
(e)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing, naming, relocating or vacating any street or other public way; 
(f)  Any ordinance or resolution or part thereof providing for the establishment of positions, for salaries or compensation; 
(g)  Any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending, or any judgment rendered, on or prior to the adoption of these Codified Ordinances; 
(h)  Any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing taxes or assessments; 
(i)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or changing the boundaries of the Municipality; or 
(j)  Any ordinance or resolution adopted by the Commission after the adoption of these Codified Ordinances. 
202.08 - Violations of state laws. 
    No person shall violate any law of the state, or any rule or regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state. No enumeration of particular laws, rules or regulations in ordinances of the City shall be held to be exclusive. 
(1976 Code Sec. 1.07) 
202.09 - Publication of rules and regulations. 
    All rules and regulations made by an administrative officer, subject to approval by the City Commission under these Codified Ordinances, shall be published. 
202.10 - Enforcement of codified ordinances. 
    The City Manager shall enforce the provisions of these Codified Ordinances or he or she may delegate the enforcement thereof to any City official. Whenever a section of these Codified Ordinances is alleged to have been violated, the enforcement of which section by the Code Enforcement Officer has been authorized by the City Manager by Administrative Order, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue and serve an appearance ticket upon the violator if he has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an offense. Such appearance ticket shall be in the form subscribed by law. 
(Ord. 937 Passed 4-2-12). 
State Law reference- MCL 764.9c et seq. 
202.11 - Application of codified ordinances. 
    These Codified Ordinances shall apply to acts performed within the jurisdiction of the City. Acts performed outside the City shall be governed by these Codified Ordinances up to the limits prescribed by law, where the law confers power on the City to regulate such acts outside the City. 
202.12 - Copies of codified ordinances. 
    Each copy of the Codified Ordinances distributed to an officer or employee of the City shall remain the property of the City and shall be turned over by such officer or employee, upon expiration of his or her term of office or employment with the City, to the City Clerk for reassignment. 
202.99 - General code penalty; complicity; citations. 
(a)  Designation. Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the City is specifically designated as a municipal civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
(b)  General penalty. Except for designated municipal civil infractions, whenever, in these Codified Ordinances, or in any technical or other code adopted by reference in these Codified Ordinances, or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of any provision of these Codified Ordinances, or under authority of any technical or other code adopted by reference in these Codified Ordinances, or under authority of state law, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided, whoever violates or fails to comply with any such provision shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues, unless otherwise provided. 
(c)  Civil infraction sanction. The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under 1961 PA 236, as amended, and other applicable laws. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)  Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used in this section "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision (i) committed by a person within any 6 month period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance) and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not less than $250.00, plus costs. 
b.  The fine for any repeat offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. 
(3)  A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any ordinance. 
(d)  Separate offense. Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(e)  Action for injunction or other process. In addition to any remedies available at law, the City may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this Code or any City ordinance. 
(f)  Surcharges; equitable remedies. The imposition of any penalty provided for in this section shall be in addition to any surcharge levied for a violation of or noncompliance with a provision of these Codified Ordinances, or a provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in these Codified Ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of either or under authority of state law, and shall be in addition to any equitable remedy provided by a provision of these Codified Ordinances, or a provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in these Codified Ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of either, or under authority of state law, including the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(g)  Complicity. Every person concerned in the commission of a violation or an offense under these Codified Ordinances, whether he or she directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted, indicted, tried, or found responsible, and on conviction shall be fined and punished as if he or she had directly committed such offense. 
(h)  Citations. A police officer who witnesses a person violating this Code of Ordinances, which violation is either a misdemeanor or a civil infraction, may stop the person, detain the person temporarily for purpose of making a record of the violation and identifying the person, and preparing and subscribing as soon as possible the written citation, which shall be a notice to appear in court for the offense. If a police officer witnesses a person violating this Code of Ordinances within the City, that police officer may pursue, stop and detain the person outside the City for the purpose of exercising the authority and performing the duties described above. 
(Ord. No. 400. Passed 11-21-94. Ord. 506. Passed 8-7-00.) 
Chapter 204 - Wards and Boundaries[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 204. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- Boundaries of City,  2; Election precincts,  4 
State Law reference- Equal representation, M.C.L.A.  117.3; Incorporated city or village annexed to home rule city, M.C.L.A.  117.13; Apportionment, M.C.L.A.  117.27a 
Cross reference- Downtown District boundaries,  298.04; Zoning district boundaries,  1256.03, 1296.06 

Chapter 206 - Elections[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Elections generally, Ch. II; Election Commission,  7; Recall; initiative; referendum, Ch. XV; Adoption of Charter,  166 et seq. 
State Law reference- Boards of election commissioners generally, M.C.L.A.  168.21 et seq.; Compensation of boards of election commissioners, M.C.L.A.  168.28, 168.682; Canvass of votes generally, M.C.L.A.  168.801 et seq.; Canvass of votes in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.12, 117.15 
Cross reference- Election Commission, Ch. 280 

206.01 - Regular elections. 
    Pursuant to the Michigan Election Law, Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1954, as amended (M.C.L.A. 168.1 et seq.), all regular City elections shall be held at the odd-year general election on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in every odd-numbered year. Reference in the City Charter to the "general City election" shall be to the regular City election. All regular and special City elections shall be nonpartisan. 
(Ord. 121. Passed 4-6-81.) 
206.02 - Primary elections-Repealed. 
(Ord. 767. Passed 8-6-07.) 
206.03 - Certification of names of candidates. 
    The City Clerk shall forthwith, after the last day for receiving and filing nominating petitions, certify to the Election Commission the names and post office addresses of all candidates whose petitions meet the requirements of the City Charter and this chapter, together with the name of the office for which they are candidates. 
(Ord. 121. Passed 4-6-81.) 
206.04 - Conflicts with Charter. 
    Pursuant to M.C.L.A. 168.644l; M.S.A. 6.1644(12), this chapter shall take precedence over and supersede Sections 8, 9, 16 and 17 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. 121. Passed 4-6-81.) 
TITLE FOUR - LEGISLATION 
Chapter 220 - City Commission[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- City Commission generally, Chs. III, IV; Power to conduct investigations,  41; Procedure re initiative and referendum,  145; First City Commission,  168, 169 
State Law reference- Legislative body in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3 
Cross reference- Enforcement of Subdivision Regulations,  1242.01 

220.01 - Rules. 
(a)  Pursuant to the City Charter, the City Commission shall determine its rules by resolution, which resolution shall provide for a minimum vote required for suspension and amendment of the rules. Such minimum vote may not be reduced. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall, at all times, keep in his or her office an official copy of such rules, certified as to the date upon which such rules were adopted. The City Clerk shall also keep a current up-to-date copy of such rules available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.01; Ord. 106. Passed 12-17-79.) 
220.02 - Terms of office. 
(a)  The members of the City Commission, including the Mayor, shall hold office beginning at 7:00 p.m. on the first Monday immediately after the regular City election, except as outlined in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  The terms of office shall be so arranged that not more than four Commissioners, including the Mayor, shall retire at any one time. 
(c)  All terms elected in 2007 shall commence at 8:00 p.m. on the Monday immediately after the regular City election; additionally, the term of the Mayor elected in 2009 shall commence and expire at 8:00 p.m. on the Monday following the regular City election. However, the terms of those elected to the office of City Commissioner in 2009 and thereafter shall expire at 7:00 p.m. on the first Monday immediately after the regular City election. The term of the individual elected to the office of Mayor in 2011 and thereafter shall expire at 7:00 p.m. Beginning in 2013, all terms elected shall commence at 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. 121. Passed 4-6-81. Ord. 480. Passed 8-16-99. Ord. 530. Passed 4-16-01. Ord. 816. Passed 12-1-08) 
220.03 - Mayor. 
    Insofar as required by state law, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Commission and shall have a voice and a vote in its proceedings, but no veto power. The Mayor shall authenticate by signature such instruments as the City Commission, the City Charter or the laws of the state require. 
(Ord. 121. Passed 4-6-81. Ord. 480. Passed 8-16-99. Ord. 530. Passed 4-16-01.) 
220.04 - Meetings. 
    The City Commission shall have its organizational meeting at 8:00 p.m. on the second Monday in November of each year. Beginning in 2012, the organizational meeting shall be at 7:00 p.m. on the second Monday in November of each year. At the organizational meeting, any newly elected Commissioner shall assume the duties of their office. Regular meetings shall be held twice in each month, on the first and third Mondays, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. When any Charter or regular meeting date falls upon a legal holiday, such meeting shall be held upon the following business day. For purposes of this section, legal holidays shall be: New Year's Day; Martin Luther King, Jr., Day; President's Day; Fourth of July; and Labor Day. 
(Ord. 121. Passed 4-6-81. Ord. 480. Passed 8-16-99. Ord. 530. Passed 4-16-01. Ord. 816. Passed 12-1-08. Ord. 862. Passed 3-15-10.) 
220.05 - Conflicts with Charter. 
    Pursuant to M.C.L.A. 168.644l; M.S.A. 6.1644(12), Sections 220.02, 220.03 and 220.04 shall take precedence over and supersede Sections 21, 22 and 24 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. 121. Passed 4-6-81.) 
Chapter 222 - Ordinances and Resolutions[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Ordinances and resolutions generally,  31 et seq.; Codified Ordinances,  34; Ordinances for special assessments,  103; Ordinances and resolutions for cemeteries and parks,  132; Initiative and referendum,  143 et seq.; Publication of ordinances and resolutions,  158; Existing ordinances and resolutions,  172 
State Law reference- Ordinances in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3, 117.5b; Enforcement, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Enactment, M.C.L.A.  117.4j; Actions to recover fines and penalties, M.C.L.A.  117.29 
Cross reference- Codified Ordinances, Ch. 202 

222.01 - Publication. 
    Following the adoption of or an amendment to an ordinance by the City Commission, a notice of adoption shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city by the City Clerk within ten days after adoption. Unless the City Commission expressly requires full publication at the time of adoption, a summary of the ordinance may be published. If a summary of the ordinance amendment is published, the notice shall include the following information: (1) The effective date of the ordinance; and (2) The place where a true copy of the ordinance may be inspected or obtained. 
(Ord. 792. Passed 4-7-08.) 
TITLE SIX - FINANCE 
Chapter 230 - Finance Generally[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Constitution reference- Finance generally, Mich. Const. Art. 9,  1 et seq. 
Charter reference- Purchasing procedure,  40; Budget,  171; Borrowing power, Ch. VIII; Utility moneys,  120 et seq.; Uniform accounting system,  161 
State Law reference- Tax Assessors in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3; Deposit of public funds, M.C.L.A.  129.11 et seq.; Municipal bonds, M.C.L.A.  132.2, 133.6, 135.7; Municipal Finance Act, M.C.L.A.  133.5, 133.6; Collection of municipal income taxes, M.C.L.A.  141.671; Public money, M.C.L.A.  750.489 et seq. 

230.01 - Purchases and contracts. 
(a)  Purchasing agent. The City Manager shall act as Purchasing Agent of the City in accordance with Section 40 of the City Charter. The City Manager shall establish detailed purchasing and contracting procedures. The City Manager may delegate the authority to issue purchase orders. 
(b)  Competitive bids. Competitive bids for all purchases and public improvements shall be obtained where practicable and contracts awarded to the lowest responsible bidders. The City Commission shall have the power to reject any or all bids if deemed by it to be to the advantage of the City. "Competitive bidding" means the process of soliciting vendor participation in the purchasing process to ensure fair and open competition. 
(c)  Purchases or contracts of $9,000.00 or less. The City Manager shall have the authority to contract, solicit, award or reject bids, and to expend money in conformity with the approved budget, which amount for any one transaction shall not be more than $9,000.00. A purchase order or a service order may be issued by the City Manager if there are sufficient funds available in the appropriation to which the purchase is chargeable. The City Manager may secure competitive quotations where practicable for the purchase of all items which, in his or her opinion, could be advantageously purchased through competition. 
(d)  Purchases or contracts over certain dollar amount. If the amount of the transaction is more than $5,000.00, sealed competitive bidding shall be required, except in cases where it is determined by the City Manager that it is clearly to the City's advantage to contract without competitive bidding. If the amount of the transaction is more than $9,000.00, it shall be evidenced by written contract submitted to and approved by affirmative vote of five members of the City Commission. 
(e)  Exceptions to competitive bidding. It is clearly to the City's advantage to not have competitive bidding and such bidding is not required in the following cases: 
(1)  Pursuant to Section (d). 
(2)  When the Commission determines by an affirmative vote of five members that: 
a.  The public interest will be best served by purchase from or jointly with another unit of government. 
b.  An emergency exists such as where a purchase is made or service obtained under extraordinary circumstances to protect the immediate health, safety, or welfare of individuals, to protect public property against loss or damage, or to prevent or minimize serious disruption of services; or 
c.  The public interest will be best served without obtaining bids, such as in the employment of professional services. 
(Ord. 380, Passed 2-7-94; Ord. 694, Passed 2-6-06; Ord. 772, Passed 10-15-07; Ord. 1035 , Passed 7-5-16) 
230.02 - Accounting system. 
(a)  Method. The accounting system of the City shall be in accordance with accepted principles of governmental accounting. The system shall provide records showing, at all times, by funds, accounts and other pertinent classifications, the amounts appropriated, the estimated revenues, the actual revenues or receipts, the amounts available for expenditures, the total expenditures, the unliquidated obligations, the actual balances on hand and the unencumbered balances of appropriations. However, accounts for Municipal public utilities or other self-supporting enterprises shall be maintained in accordance with standard commercial accounting principles and practices to produce accurate information as to net gain or loss from operations. Budgetary accounts are not required. 
(b)  City treasurer's duties. The accounting system shall be centralized in the office of the City Treasurer where accounts shall be kept for all agencies and activities and where records of all financial transactions relating to all funds of the City shall be maintained. The City Treasurer shall exercise budgetary control over all appropriations to ensure that no obligation is incurred in excess of the available balance of the appropriation applicable thereto and to ensure that a proper pre-audit is made of all proposed expenditures. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.03) 
230.03 - Budget control. 
(a)  Authorization of appropriations. After receipt of the proposed annual budget from the City Manager, and after its review and adoption as outlined in Sections 75 to 80 of the City Charter, the City Commission shall authorize appropriations in separate amounts for personal services, for other operating expenses and for capital outlays for each department or major activity financed from revenue funds for which appropriations are made. 
(b)  Transfer of appropriations. The City Commission may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or any portion thereof from one appropriation account to another within the same fund. The balance of any appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to unappropriated surplus of the fund from which it was appropriated and shall be available for appropriation the following fiscal year. 
(c)  Certification of available funds. No contract, purchase order or other commitment document involving anexpenditure from appropriations shall be issued or entered into unless the City Treasurer first certifies that there is available to the credit of the appropriation concerned an unencumbered balance to meet the obligation. Before so certifying, the City Treasurer shall encumber the proper appropriation with the amount of the contract, purchase order or other commitment document. 
(d)  Budget stabilization fund. There is hereby established a budget stabilization fund pursuant to Act 30 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended (M.C.L.A. 141.441 et seq.; M.S.A. 5.3230(1) et seq.). Such Fund shall have the limitations and purposes as established by state law for each fiscal year beginning on July 1, 1981. Thereafter, the City Commission may appropriate to the Budget Stabilization Fund, by resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of the members elected and serving thereon, all or part of any surplus in the General Fund resulting from an excess of revenue in comparison to expenses. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.04; Ord. 123. Passed 6-15-81.) 
230.04 - Payment procedures. 
(a)  Pre-audit of expenditures. The City Treasurer shall receive and examine all payrolls, vouchers, bills and other claims and demands against the City, and shall not issue payment therefor unless it is found by a diligent pre-audit that the claim is in proper form, correctly computed and duly approved; that it is justly and legally due and payable; that it is charged to the proper account; and that it is accompanied by certification of a responsible official of the department concerned that the goods or services listed therein have been actually received. If the City Treasurer finds a claim to be erroneous or otherwise invalid, payment shall not be authorized and an immediate report of the circumstances shall be made to the City Manager. 
(b)  Preparation of vouchers. Verified invoices shall be assembled in the office of the City Treasurer. Vouchers shall be prepared and recorded as expenditures against the account to which the same are properly chargeable. 
(c)  Register of expenditures. After recording approved claims as expenditures and preparing checks, the City Treasurer shall transmit to the City Clerk a register showing the payee, the amount and the fund to which the amount is to be charged. 
(d)  Review of register. The City Clerk shall review the register, may examine any vouchers and invoices and, upon approval, shall sign the checks. 
(e)  Signing checks. All moneys, except petty cash, shall be disbursed by check, which check shall be signed by the City Clerk and countersigned by the City Treasurer. However, payroll checks may be signed by the Deputy City Clerk. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.05) 
230.05 - Assessment of taxes-Repealed. 
(Ord. 793. Passed 4-7-08) 
230.06 - Bonds. 
    In addition to special requirements for particular bonds, all bonds running to the City shall be corporate surety or cash bonds and shall be approved by the City Attorney and filed with the City Clerk. (1976 Code Sec. 2.08) 
Chapter 232 - Special Assessments[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Constitution reference- Special assessments, Mich. Const. Art. 9,  6 
Charter reference- Bonds for special assessments,  87; Endorsement of roll,  95; Continuation of assessments,  173; Special assessments, Ch. X; 
State Law reference- Special assessments, M.C.L.A.  104A.1 et seq., 211.741 et seq. 
Cross reference- Assessment of taxes,  230.05 

232.01 - City commission authority. 
    The City Commission shall have the power to determine by resolution, with or without petition, that the whole or any part of the cost of any public improvement or abatement necessary to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property in special districts especially benefited but such determination shall not be made until the preliminary proceedings provided for in this Chapter shall have been completed. In all cases, public improvements and hazard abatement shall be made at the discretion of the City Commission. Advisory petitions for improvements may be submitted to the City Commission but they shall be advisory only and shall not be jurisdictional. 
(Ord. 819. Passed 1-5-09.) 
232.02 - Initiation of public improvements. 
(a)  Filing of petitions. The initiation of a public improvement, any part of the expense of which is to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels of real estate in proportion to the probable benefit to be derived there from, may be made by petition to the City Commission, signed by the owners of 50 percent or more of the owners of the property to be benefited by the improvement. To permit proper planning, designing and financing, petitions for capital improvement should be filed by April 1. If a petition is filed after April 1 and the City Engineer determines the costs will appreciably change, a new petition with the revised cost information shall be circulated before the petition may be considered. The City Commission may not be able to consider any such request or petition which is filed later than April 1 of each year. 
(b)  Contents of petitions. Petitions shall be presented on forms provided by the City Clerk and shall set forth the location, extent and character of the desired improvement, the portion of the total cost which is proposed to be assessed against the property to be benefited, and the number of annual installments in which the assessment is to be divided. 
(c)  City Commission initiation. Public improvements may be initiated by City Commission resolution. 
(1)  If written objections to a proposed improvement where the cost is proposed to be defrayed in whole or in part by special assessment have been filed with the City Assessor by the owners of more than one-half of the parcels to be assessed at or before the public hearing provided for in Section 232.03, the City Commission shall not proceed with the improvement except by the affirmative vote of 6 members of the City Commission. 
(d)  Waiver of notice of hearing. The owner of record of any lot or premises may, at any time, execute, in writing, a "Waiver of Notice and Proceedings," and may file the same with the City Clerk, waiving any or all notice of hearing and other proceedings required in this chapter and in the City Charter and authorizing the City Commission to make such special assessment as the City Commission may determine against the owner and his or her property without further notice. The City Commission may thereupon, by resolution, authorize the City Manager to proceed with the improvement. Any special assessment so made shall, upon confirmation of the assessment by the City Commission, be considered the same as any other special assessment formally made under the City Charter, notwithstanding the omission of any notice or proceeding so waived. 
(Ord. 819. Passed 1-5-09. Ord. 847. Passed 10-19-09.) 
232.03 - Special assessment district procedures. 
(a)  Resolution on public improvement. The City Commission may, by resolution determine to make an improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. By such resolution, the City Commission shall approve the preliminary plans for the improvement, determine the estimated cost thereof, determine what proportion of the cost of the improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited and what proportion, if any, shall be a general obligation of the City, designate the special assessment district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied and direct the City Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the City Commission's determination and to report the same to the City Commission for conformation. The City Commission may also direct the City Engineer to proceed with the preparation of final plans and specification for the improvement and may authorize the City Engineer to proceed with the advertising and taking of bids in accordance with City purchase requirements. 
(b)  Assessment of engineering costs. In the event that an improvement for which a petition has been filed receive initiatory approval and hearing of necessity approval from the Commission but does not receive final construction approval, any cost incurred in the preparation of preliminary and final plans and specification may be assessed against the parcel of that would have benefited if the improvement had been made. Cost shall be assessed against the aforementioned parcels of land according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Setting the public hearing. Upon receipt of a special assessment roll, the Commission shall: 
(1)  Order it filed in the office of the City Clerk for public examination; 
(2)  Fix the time and place when it will meet and review the roll and hear all persons interested in the necessity of the improvement; and 
(3)  Direct the City Clerk to give notice of the hearing. 
(d)  Notice of public hearing. The notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing and shall be published in the official newspaper of the City not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. Fifteen days notice shall also be sent by mail by the City Clerk to each owner of property subject to assessment, as indicated by the records of the City Assessor's office, but failure to send the notice to any owner of property shall not invalidate the proceedings or assessments. All notices shall state clearly the costs of the improvement are described in the roll and that they are either "estimated costs" or "final costs." 
(e)  Objection to roll. An owner of property to be assessed may file an objection to the improvement in writing with the City Clerk. No original assessment roll shall be confirmed except by the affirmative vote of six members of the City Commission if prior to the confirmation written objections to the proposed improvement have been filed by the owner of more than one-half of the property to be assessed. 
(f)  Public hearing and approvals. 
(1)  The City Commission shall meet and review the project specifications and the special assessment roll at the time and place appointed and shall hear all persons interested in the necessity of the improvements and all oral or written objections to it. 
(2)  The City Commission may correct the roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or tax parcel, or other errors appearing in it. Any changes made in the roll shall be noted in the minutes. 
(3)  After the hearing and review, the Commission may confirm the special assessment roll with the corrections as it may have made, if any, or may refer it back to the City Manager for revision or may annul it and any proceedings in connection with it. 
(4)  Upon confirmation of any special assessment roll, the Commission shall determine the number of installments in which the assessments may be paid and shall determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments but not to exceed six percent per annum. 
(5)  The Clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll. The roll shall, upon confirmation, be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 819. Passed 1-5-09; Ord. 1038 . Passed 10-3-16.) 
232.04 - Procedure for assessing single parcels. 
    When any expense is incurred by the City upon or in respect to any single lot or tax parcel, which expense is chargeable against it and the owner of it under the provisions of the Charter, this Code, or law of the State of Michigan and is not of that class required to be pro-rated among several lots and tax parcels in a special assessment district the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  Preparation of account. An account of the labor, material or services for which the expense was incurred, verified by the City Manager, with a description of the lot or tax parcel and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the City Treasurer who shall immediately bill the owner, if known. 
(2)  Notification of assessment. The bill shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the lot or tax parcel to be assessed and the bill shall notify the owner of the time of the meeting of the Commission, not sooner than 30 days thereafter, when the Commission will meet for the purpose of adopting a resolution placing a special assessment upon the lot or tax parcel for the charges unless the charges are paid prior to the date of the meeting. The requirement in this subsection for notification of the assessment may be waived in writing to the City Clerk by the property owner. 
(3)  Resolution of special assessment. At the meeting the Commission shall adopt, a special assessment resolution covering each lot or tax parcel for which charges have not been paid in full. As many lots or tax parcels may be included in a single resolution as shall be convenient. Upon adoption of the resolution, the Commission may authorize installment payments, and if installment payments are authorized, shall determine the number of installments and the rate of interest to be charged, but not to exceed six percent per annum. 
(4)  Notice of resolution. Within seven calendar days after the adoption of the resolution, the Clerk shall give notice of the lot or tax parcel owners. The notice shall be sent by first class mail to the last known addresses of the persons as shown on the assessment records of the city, or by publication. The notice shall state the basis of the assessment, the amount, and shall give a reasonable time, not less than 30 days, within which payment shall be made to the Treasurer. 
(5)  Placement of lien on tax roll. In all cases where payment is not made within the time set, the fact shall be reported by the Treasurer to the Assessor, who shall charge the amounts, together with a penalty as allowed by Charter, against the persons or lots or tax parcels chargeable, on the next tax roll. The special assessment resolution shall be treated as a special assessment roll and the adoption of the resolution shall correspond to the confirmation of a special assessment roll. 
(6)  Other provisions not applicable. The provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter with reference to special assessments generally and the proceedings necessary before making the improvements, shall not apply to assessments contemplated under this section. 
(Ord. 819. Passed 1-5-09. Ord. 990. Passed 4-17-14; Ord. 1039 . Passed 12-19-16) 
232.05 - Financing and payment. 
(a)  Payment in full. A property owner may pay the full assessment on all special assessment projects in cash and save the interest charges. 
(b)  Payment in full upon transfer. Special assessment are payable in full upon transfer of title to the property and upon any land division or boundary adjustment. 
(c)  Installment payments. Installments, plus interest not to exceed 6 percent may be made on any unpaid balance, except as otherwise provided by law. The property owner may make full payment of the balance at any time during the assessment period, plus interest due on the date of such payment. 
(d)  Installment periods. The Installment period for improvements shall be as follows: 
(1)  Water mains. Not to exceed 10 years. 
(2)  Sanitary sewers. Not to exceed 10 years 
(3)  Storm sewers. Not to exceed 10 years. 
(4)  Curb and gutter. Not to exceed 20 years. 
(5)  Street. Not to exceed 20 years. 
(6)  Alley. Not to exceed 10 years. 
(7)  Sidewalks. Not to exceed 20 years. 
(Ord. 819. Passed 1-5-09.) 
232.06 - Attachment of lien. 
    All special assessments contained in any special roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and until paid shall be a charge against the respective owners of the lots and parcels of land. Such line shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created for City taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree, nor any act of the City Commission vacation a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the City upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. 
(Ord. 819. Passed 1-5-09.) 
232.07 - Collection of special assements. 
(a)  Installments. The special assessment roll shall be transmitted by the Clerk to the Treasurer for collection, immediately after its confirmation. The Treasurer shall divide the assessments into installments, when so ordered by the Commission; provided that, if such division operates to make any installment less than $10.00, then the Treasurer shall reduce the number of installments so that each installment shall be above and as near $10.00 as possible. 
(b)  Delinquent assessments. The Treasurer shall be charged with collecting all special assessments. After an assessment or any installment becomes delinquent, the Treasurer may add the entire assessment, with any interest, collection fee or penalty, to the annual tax bill of the City attributable to the lot or premises involved, or may collect it separately by the tax sale procedure. 
(c)  Additional remedies. In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefore, any delinquent special assessment in its entire amount, together with interest, collection fees and penalties, may be collected in an action at law in the name of the City against the person assessed or liable for the same, in any court having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. 819. Passed 1-5-09.) 
232.08 - Standards for improvements. 
    The standards and specifications for improvements made according to this chapter shall be established by written policy of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 819. Passed 1-5-09.) 
TITLE EIGHT - ADMINISTRATION 
Chapter 240 - City Manager[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- City Manager,  35 et seq.; Power to conduct investigations,  41; Administration of Municipally-owned utilities,  119 
State Law reference- Changing salary or emoluments during term of office, M.C.L.A.  117.5 
Cross reference- Authority re trees and shrubs,  1028.02 

240.01 - Supervising agency for urban redevelopment corporation. 
    The City Commission of the City of Traverse City hereby appoints, establishes and designates the City Manager as the person to exercise the powers and perform the duties held by or incumbent upon the supervising agency pursuant to the Urban Redevelopment Corporation Law, being Act 250 of the Public Acts of 1941, as amended (M.C.L.A. 125.901, et seq; M.S.A. 5.3058(1), et seq.). 
(Ord. 319. Passed 12-2-91.) 
Chapter 242 - City Attorney[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 242. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- City Attorney,  47; Attorney for Light and Power Board and Department,  178(c) 
State Law reference- Legal advisor, M.C.L.A.  87.20; Membership in Board of Election Commissioners, M.C.L.A.  168.25; Duties re animals running at large, M.C.L.A.  433.53, 433.62; Service of process, M.C.L.A.  600.1925 

Chapter 244 - City Clerk[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 244. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- City Clerk,  44 
State Law reference- Filing charters or amendments thereto, M.C.L.A.  117.24; Filing of initiative petitions, M.C.L.A.  117.25; Apportionment of wards; copy of apportionment plan, M.C.L.A.  117.27a 

Chapter 246 - City Treasurer[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 246. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
State Constitution reference- Finance generally, Mich. Const. Art. 9,  1 et seq.; Ch. 230 
Charter reference- City Treasurer,  45; Collection of taxes by City Treasurer,  97 et seq.; Collection of municipal income taxes,  97 et seq. 
State Law reference- Tax Assessors in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3; Distribution of fine moneys, M.C.L.A.  117.31; Deposit of public funds, M.C.L.A.  129.11 et seq.; Municipal Finance Act, M.C.L.A.  133.5, 133.6; Collection of municipal income taxes, M.C.L.A.  141.671; Public money, M.C.L.A.  750.489 et seq.; Duties re accounting system,  232.02(b) 
Cross reference- Finance generally, Ch. 230; Duties re Parking Violations Bureau,  488.01, 488.02 

Chapter 248 - City Assessor[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 248. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
State Constitution reference- Finance generally, Mich. Const., Art. 9,  1 et seq.; Ch. 230 
Charter reference- City Assessor,  46; Certification of tax levy to City Assessor,  96; Special assessments, Ch. X 
State Law reference- Tax Assessors in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3; Deposit of public funds, M.C.L.A.  129.11 et seq.; Municipal bonds, M.C.L.A.  132.2, 133.6, 135.7; Municipal Finance Act, M.C.L.A.  133.5, 133.6; Public money, M.C.L.A.  750.489 
Cross reference- Finance generally, Ch. 230; Special assessments, Ch. 232 

Chapter 250 - City Engineer[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 250. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- City Engineer,  48; Special assessments for public improvements, Ch. X 
State Law reference- Improvements in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4d et seq. 
Cross reference- Special assessments for public improvements, Ch. 232; Engineering Department, Ch. 264; Streets, Ch. 1020; Sidewalks, Ch. 1022; Sewers, Ch. 1042; Water, Ch. 1044; Improvement guarantees,  1252.02 

Chapter 252 - Police Department[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Enforcement of laws, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Arrests, M.C.L.A.  117.34; Jurisdiction outside City limits, M.C.L.A.  117.34 
Cross reference- Removal of abandoned vehicles by Police Department,  410.03(UTC 2.5d); Duties re emergency excavations,  1024.03; Police Chief as Harbor Master,  1062.03 

252.01 - Disposition of recovered property. 
(a)  Application of section. This section shall apply to money or other property recovered by or delivered to the Police Department, which money or property is not claimed within six months after such recovery or delivery. 
(b)  Deposit of money; public sales. At any time after the expiration of such six months, the Chief of Police may turn any such money over to the City Treasurer to be credited to the General Fund and may sell at a public sale any other property so recovered or delivered and held, according to the procedure set forth in this section, after giving the notice provided for in subsection (c) hereof. However, the procedure shall not be initiated and such notice shall not be given until such six months have elapsed. 
(c)  Notices. The Chief of Police shall publish notice one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, village or township in which the money or property was recovered by or delivered to the Police Department. Such notice shall describe the money or other property so recovered or delivered and held, together with the time and place of a public sale at which such property may be purchased by the highest bidder. Until the time of such sale, the money or other property may be claimed at the Department. If, prior to the sale, the Chief of Police comes to know or has reason to suspect the identity of the true owner of such money or other property, then he or she shall forthwith, and prior to the sale, contact, or direct an officer or employee of the Department to contact, such owner, and shall give such owner the opportunity to claim such money or other property. 
(d)  Receipts from sale. After the holding of any such sale, the money received from such sale, after deducting the cost of conducting such sale, and any other money recovered or delivered and held included in the notice provided for in subsection (c) hereof, shall be turned over to the City Treasurer to be credited to the General Fund of the City. 
(e)  Validity of claims after notice and sale. No claim, to obtain any money or other property recovered by or delivered to the Police Department, after notice and sale as provided in subsections (b) and (c) hereof, shall be valid. Such property and money shall be considered as abandoned and belonging to the City. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.15) 
Chapter 254 - Fire Department[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 254. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
State Law reference- Firemen's Retirement System, M.C.L.A.  38.551 et seq.; Borrowing money for fire protection, M.C.L.A.  117.4a; Fire stations, M.C.L.A.  117.4e 
Cross reference- Fire hydrants,  1044.12;  1610.05(d); Fires in parks,  1064.07; Approval of R-6 District plans,  1270.05; Fire safety in rental dwellings,  1482.14; Fire Prevention, Ch. 1610 

Chapter 256 - Department of Public Services[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 256. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- Administrative departments,  39; Investigation of departments,  41 
State Law reference- Improvements in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4d et seq.; Approval of public works projects by Planning Commission, M.C.L.A.  125.39, 125.40 
Cross reference- Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal, Ch. 1060 

Chapter 258 - Department of Public Utilities[17] 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 258. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- Administrative departments,  39; Investigation of departments,  41; Utilities generally, Ch. XI; Municipally owned utilities, Ch. XII 
Cross reference- Shutting off of utility service,  266.01(b); Utilities generally, Ch. 1040; Utilities in subdivisions,  1248.05, 1248.06, 1248.08, 1248.12; Utilities in R-6 High-Rise Apartment Districts,  1270.05; Zoning requirements,  1299.02; Utility equipment in floodways,  1458.08; Aerial wires,  1610.13 

Chapter 260 - Light and Power Department[18] 
Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 260. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- Light and Power Department,  175 et seq.; Light and Power Board,  176 et seq.; Utilities generally, Ch. XI; Municipally owned utilities, Ch. XII 
Cross reference- Special assessments for street lighting,  232.09; Light and Power Board, Ch. 292; Utilities generally, Ch. 1040; Electricity generally, Ch. 1046; Electrical connections,  1480.01 
State Law reference- Gas plants and systems in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4e, 117.4f; Oil and gas generally, M.C.L.A.  319.1 et seq., 486.251 et seq.; Electricity generally, M.C.L.A.  486.201 et seq.; 
State Constitution reference- Electricity generally, Mich. Const. Art. 7,  24, 25 

Chapter 262 - Planning Department[19] 
Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 262. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- Administrative departments,  39; Investigation of departments,  41; Planning Commission,  160 
State Law reference- Improvements in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4d et seq.; Community planners, M.C.L.A.  339.2301 et seq. 
Cross reference- Planning Commission, Ch. 1220; Duties of Planning and Zoning Administrator re flood plain management,  1458.04 

Chapter 264 - Engineering Department[20] 
Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 264. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- Administrative departments,  39; Investigation of departments,  41; City Engineer,  48; Special assessments for public improvements, Ch. X 
State Law reference- Improvements in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4d et seq. 
Cross reference- Special assessments for public improvements, Ch. 232; City Engineer, Ch. 250; Streets, Ch. 1020; Sidewalks, Ch. 1022; Sewers, Ch. 1042; Water, Ch. 1044; Improvement guarantees,  1252.0 

Chapter 266 - Employees Generally[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note- Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to compensation and benefits are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk. 
Charter reference- Qualifications of elective officers,  14; Appointment of administrative officers and employees,  38; Investigations,  41; Delivery of property of office to successor,  50; Restrictions on official positions,  152; Conflicts of interest,  154; Civil service,  155; Hold-over officers and employees,  170 
State Law reference- Municipal Employees' Retirement Act of 1984, M.C.L.A.  38.1501a et seq.; Compensation and salaries in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3, 117.5, 117.17, 117.19, 117.20, 117.28, 117.32, 117.33 
Cross reference- Local Officers Compensation Commission, Ch. 276 

266.01 - Right of entry. 
(a)  Generally. For purposes of enforcement of these Codified Ordinances, the City Manager, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief, the Building Code officials and the City Assessor, or their authorized representatives, may enter any premises for the purpose of inspection at any and all reasonable times. No person shall deny any such official entrance to the premises for inspection purposes. 
(b)  Shutting off utility service. The officials named in subsection (a) hereof may shut off and discontinue the service provided to any structure by any utility company when, in the opinion of any of them, the continuance of service will endanger the public peace, health or safety. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.10) 
266.02 - Municipal retirement system. 
(a)  All eligible Municipal employees of the City shall come under the provisions of the retirement plans provided in the Municipal Employees Retirement Act of 1984, Act 427 of the Public Acts of 1984, as amended (M.C.L.A. 38.1501 et seq.). 
(b)  The City Manager shall make all wage and salary deductions on behalf of the employees of the City required by law and shall pay the same to the Retirement Board established by the Act, together with such amounts as the City is required to make on behalf of its employees under the Act. 
TITLE TEN - COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND AUTHORITIES 
Chapter 270 - Civil Service Commission[22] 
Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 270. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- Civil service,  155 
State Law reference- Compensation and salaries in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3, 117.5, 117.17, 117.19, 117.20, 117.28, 117.32, 117.33; Civil service in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Shortening or extending term of office, M.C.L.A.  117.5 
Cross reference- Employees generally, Ch. 266 

Chapter 272 - Historic Districts Commission[23] 
Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 272. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
State Law reference- Power to establish, M.C.L.A.  399.204; Powers and duties, M.C.L.A.  399.205 et seq. 
Cross reference- Con Foster Museum Historical Commission, Ch. 273; Historic areas, Ch. 1462 

Chapter 274 - Housing Commission[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of Housing Codes by reference,  33 
State Law reference- Municipal housing commissions, M.C.L.A.  125.653 et seq.; Adoption, promulgation and publication of rules, M.C.L.A.  125.694b; Acquisition and maintenance of housing projects, M.C.L.A.  125.731 et seq. 
Cross reference- Rental housing, Ch. 1482; State Housing Law, Ch. 1484 

274.01 - Establishment. 
    Pursuant to Act 18 of the Extra Session of 1933, as amended (M.C.L.A. 125.651 et seq.), there is hereby established in and for the City a Housing Commission. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.141) 
274.02 - Appointments. 
    The Mayor, with the approval of the City Commission, shall appoint the members of the Housing Commission. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.142; Ord. 194. Passed 3-3-86.) 
274.03 - Powers. 
    The Commission shall be a public body corporate. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or permitted to be vested in the Commission by Act 18 of the Public Acts of 1933, executive session, as amended, and any laws enacted which are supplemented thereto. All deeds, mortgages, contracts, leases, purchases, or other agreements regarding real property, including agreements to acquire or dispose of all real property, shall be approved and executed in the name of the Traverse City Housing Commission. 
    The Commission shall also, but not limited to, have the following powers: 
(1)  Sue and be sued in any court of this state. 
(2)  Form or incorporate nonprofit corporations under the laws of the state for any purpose consistent with the purposes of which the Commission was formed. 
(3)  Serve as a shareholder or member of a qualified nonprofit corporation organized under the law of this state. 
(4)  Authorize, approve, execute and file with the Michigan Department of Commerce those documents that are appropriate for form and continue one or more nonprofit corporations. 
(5)  Form or incorporate for profit corporations, partnerships and companies under the laws of this state for any purpose consistent with the purposes for which the Commission was formed. 
(6)  Act as a borrower for purposes of issuing bonds or notes under Public Act No. 18 of the Extra Session of 1933, as heretofore or hereafter amended. 
(Ord.745. Passed 5-21-07.) 
Chapter 276 - Local Officers Compensation Commission[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Charter reference- Compensation of library employees,  138; Civil service,  155 
State Law reference- Compensation and salaries in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3, 117.5, 117.17, 117.19, 117.20, 117.28, 117.32, 117.33 
Cross reference- Employees generally, Ch. 266 

276.01 - Establishment; appointments; terms of office; qualifications. 
    There is hereby established in and for the City a Local Officers Compensation Commission. The Commission shall determine the salaries of all local elected officials. The Commission shall consist of five members who are registered electors of the City, appointed by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation by the City Commission. The term of office shall be five years, except that of the members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years. All first members shall be appointed within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter (Ordinance 93, passed April 16, 1979). Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government, and no member of the immediate family of such member or employee, shall be eligible to be a member of the Local Officer's Compensation Commission. 
(Ord. 93. Passed 4-16-79.) 
276.02 - Determination of compensation. 
    The Local Officers Compensation Commission shall determine the salaries of local elected officials, which determination shall be the salaries, unless the City Commission, by resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote, rejects it. The determination of the Local Officers Compensation Commission shall be effective thirty days following its filing with the City Clerk, unless rejected by the City Commission. In case of rejection, the existing salaries shall prevail. Any expense, allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials, in addition to salary, shall be for expenses incurred in the course of City business and shall be accounted for to the City. The Local Officers Compensation Commission shall also make a recommendation regarding the compensation of local appointed officials who hold positions on boards, commissions and committees under the jurisdiction of the City Commission and who are not full-time or part-time employees of the City. 
(Ord. 93. Passed 4-16-79.) 
276.03 - Meetings; quorum; organization; compensation. 
    The Local Officers Compensation Commission shall meet for not more than fifteen session days in every odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within forty-five calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of the Commission constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the Commission. The Commission shall take no action and shall make no determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the Commission. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members. "Session day," as used in this section, means any calendar day on which the Commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. 93. Passed 4-16-79.) 
276.04 - Amendments. 
    The City Commission shall implement this chapter by resolution. After one year following the date this chapter goes into effect (Ordinance 93, passed April 16, 1979), the procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by Charter amendment or revision. ;hn0 (Ord. 93. Passed 4-16-79.) 
276.05 - Referendum. 
    Within sixty days after the effective date of this chapter (Ordinance 93, passed April 16, 1979), a petition for referendum on this chapter may be filed in accordance with the procedure provided in the City Charter, or otherwise, by filing a petition with the City Clerk, containing the signatures of at least five percent of the registered electors of the City on such effective date. In such case, the election shall be conducted in the same manner as an election on a Charter amendment. If a petition for referendum is filed, no determination of the Local Officers Compensation Commission shall be effective until this chapter has been approved by the electors. 
(Ord. 93. Passed 4-16-79.) 
Chapter 277 - Parks and Recreation Commission[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
State Constitution reference- Parks generally, Mich. Const. Art. 7,  23 
Charter reference- Authority of City re parks, Ch. XIII 
State Law reference- Parks and recreation facilities in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4e, 117.5; Sale of park property, M.C.L.A.  117.5; Misapplication of park funds, M.C.L.A.  123.67 
Cross reference- Harbor and waterfront, Ch. 1062; Parks generally, Ch. 1064 

277.01 - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a Parks and Recreation Commission pursuant to Section 30 of the City Charter and upon recommendation of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 332. Passed 7-6-92.) 
277.02 - Composition; terms of office; compensation; expenses. 
    Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be registered electors of the City and who shall have evidenced interest in the advancement of public parks, recreation and cemetery services. One member shall be the City Manager or his or her designee ex officio with voting authority; such member may be a non-registered city elector. Other members shall be appointed by the City Commission to terms of three years, except that the initial appointments shall be two members for one-year terms, two members for two-year terms and two members for three-year terms. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in Commission activities. 
(Ord. 332. Passed 7-6-92. Ord. 840. Passed 7-20-09.) 
277.03 - Vacancies. 
    In the event of a vacancy on the Parks and Recreation Commission, the City Commission shall appoint a replacement to serve the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. 332. Passed 7-6-92. Ord. 840. Passed 7-20-09.) 
277.04 - Organization. 
(a)  The Parks and Recreation Commission shall schedule regular meetings to be held at least once each month and at other times as necessary. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(b)  At the first regularly scheduled meeting, the Parks and Recreation Commission shall develop by-laws governing the operations of such Commission. 
(c)  At the first regularly scheduled meeting, a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson shall be elected to a term of one year. City staff shall be the Recording Secretary of the Commission. Officers thereafter shall be elected to one-year terms upon the expiration of the terms of the previously elected officers. 
(d)  Four members shall be considered a quorum for the transaction of business of the Commission. 
(Ord. 332. Passed 7-6-92. Ord. 840. Passed 7-20-09.) 
277.05 - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the Parks and Recreation Commission to serve in an advisory capacity and to make recommendations to the City Commission on matters relating to the operation, development and planning of parks (excluding the Clinch Park Marina) and recreation and cemetery services, facilities and programs. 
(b)  Annually, the Parks and Recreation Commission shall submit, to the City Commission and Planning Commission, a report of the year's activities. 
(c)  The Parks and Recreation Commission shall submit to the City Manager a proposed budget for funds necessary for the capital improvements and general operation of parks and recreation and cemetery systems through the normal budget process. 
(d)  The Parks and Recreation Commission shall prepare a six-year capital improvements plan to be submitted not later than January 30 of each year to the City Manager, which is to be submitted as a part of the City's six-year capital improvements plan for review by the City Planning Commission. 
(e)  The Parks and Recreation Commission may solicit and recommend that the City receive any gifts, bequests of money, grants or other real or personal property to be applied for parks, recreation or cemetery purposes. The use and disposal of any gifts, bequests of money, grants or other real or personal property received for such purposes, shall be subject to the approval of the City Commission. 
(f)  The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have such other duties as designated by the City Commission. 
(Ord. 332. Passed 7-6-92. Ord. 840. Passed 7-20-09.) 
Chapter 278 - Planning Commission[27] 
Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Editor's note- Provisions relating to the Planning Commission are codified in Chapter 1220 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code. 

Chapter 279 - Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 1034, passed June 20, 2016, amended ch. 279 to change the title from the United States Coast Guard Committee to Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee. 

279.01 - Establishment. 
    In recognition of the fact that Traverse City became a Coast Guard City in 2010, and to foster this special historical relationship, there is hereby established a Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee pursuant to Section 30 of the City Charter and upon recommendation of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 921, Passed 8-15-11; Ord. 1034 , Passed 6-20-2016) 
279.02 - Composition; terms of office; compensation; expenses. 
    The Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee shall consist of eight members who may be non-registered electors of the City and who shall have evidenced interest in the advancement of the United States Coast Guard. One member shall be the City Manager or his or her designee ex officio with voting authority, and one member shall be the Commander serving at Coast Guard Air Station Traverse City or his or her designee ex officio with no voting authority . Other members shall be appointed by the City Commission to terms of three years, except that the initial appointments shall be two members for one-year terms, two members for two-year terms and four members for three-year terms. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in Committee activities. 
(Ord. 921, Passed 8-15-11; Ord. 925, Passed 10-17-11; Ord. 931, Passed 2-6-12; Ord. 1034 , Passed 6-20-2016) 
279.03 - Vacancies. 
    In the event of a vacancy on the Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee, the City Commission shall appoint a replacement to serve the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. 921, Passed 8-15-11; Ord. 1034 , Passed 6-20-2016) 
279.04 - Organization. 
(a)  The Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee shall schedule regular meetings to be held at least quarterly and at other times as necessary. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(b)  At the first regularly scheduled meeting, the Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee shall develop by-laws governing the operations of such Committee. 
(c)  At the first regularly scheduled meeting, a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson shall be elected to a term of one year. City staff shall be the Recording Secretary of the Committee Officers thereafter shall be elected to one-year terms upon the expiration of the terms of the previously elected officers. 
(d)  Four members shall be considered a quorum for the transaction of business of the Committee. 
(e)  Four affirmative votes to take action. 
(Ord. 921, Passed 8-1-11; Ord. 932, Passed 2-6-12; Ord. 1034 , Passed 6-20-2016) 
279.05 - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee to serve in an advisory capacity and to make recommendations to the City Commission on matters relating to the operation, development and planning of the United States Coast Guard services, facilities and programs within the city of Traverse City. 
(b)  Annually, the Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee shall submit, to the City Commission, a report of the year's activities. 
(c)  The Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee shall submit to the City Manager a proposed budget for funds necessary for the capital improvements and general operation of the Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee systems through the normal budget process. 
(d)  The Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee may solicit and recommend that the City receive any gifts, bequests of money, grants or other real or personal property to be applied for the Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee's purposes. The use and disposal of any gifts, bequests of money, grants or other real or personal property received for such purposes, shall be subject to the approval of the City Commission. 
(f)  The Traverse City Coast Guard City Committee shall have such other duties as may be designated by the City Commission. 
(Ord. 921, Passed 8-15-11; Ord. 1034 , Passed 6-20-2016) 
Chapter 280 - Election Commission[29] 

Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Charter reference- Election generally, Ch. II; Election Commission,  7; Recall; initiative; referendum, Ch. XV; Adoption of Charter,  166 et seq. 
State Law reference- Boards of election commissioners, M.C.L.A.  168.21 et seq.; Compensation of boards of election commissioners,  M.C.L.A  168.28, 168.682 
Cross reference- Election generally, Ch. 206 

280.01 - Creation. 
    The Traverse City Charter, Section 7, creates the City Election Commission consisting of the City Clerk and three registered voters of the City. The Election Commission shall be non-partisan. 
280.02 - Appointments. 
    The City Commission shall appoint the three registered voter members of the Election Commission. In order to be eligible for appointment, these persons shall not be in default to the City, meaning that they do not owe any delinquent bill or back taxes to the City. No member shall be appointed or continue to sit on the Election Commission if they or any member of their immediate family are a candidate to be voted on at the upcoming election. Upon discovering such candidacy, an Election Commissioner shall immediately notify the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 520. Passed 2-5-01.) 
280.03 - Chairperson and secretary. 
    The City Clerk shall be the Chairperson and Secretary of the Election Commission. 
280.04 - Terms. 
    The City Clerk shall be a member ex officio with full voting authority. The other members of the Election Commission shall serve for three-year terms expiring on the second Monday in December. The first appointments shall be staggered for approximately one, two and three years. 
280.05 - Quorum and voting. 
    Three members of the Election Commission shall constitute a quorum. Action may be taken by a majority of those qualified members present at a meeting. No action shall be taken at a meeting at which the City Clerk is not present. 
280.06 - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the Election Commission shall be as called by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 469. Passed 12-7-98.) 
Chapter 282 - Act 345 Retirement Board[30] 
Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 282. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
State Law reference- Municipal Employees' Retirement Act of 1984, M.C.L.A.  38.1501 et seq. 
Cross reference- Municipal Retirement System,  266.02 

Chapter 284 - Board of Library Trustees[31] 
Footnotes: 
--- (31) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 284. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
State Constitution reference- Libraries generally, Mich. Const. Art. 8,  9 
Charter reference- Library taxes,  101; Public libraries, Ch. XIV; Board of Library Trustees,  133 et seq. 
State Law reference- Libraries generally, M.C.L.A.  397.11 et seq.,  450.691 et seq.; City library reports, M.C.L.A.  397.207; Contracts for joint municipal libraries, M.C.L.A.  397.213 et seq. 

Chapter 286 - Board of Review[32] 

Footnotes: 
--- (32) --- 
Charter reference- Board of Review,  43; Taxation, Ch. IX; Meetings of Board of Review,  93, 94; Special assessments, Ch. X 
Cross reference- Special assessments, Ch. 232 

286.01 - Creation. 
    The Traverse City Charter, Section 43, creates the Board of Review consisting of five citizens who are owners of property assessed for taxes in the City, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Commission. 
286.02 - Appointments; terms. 
(a)  The City Commission shall appoint five citizens who are owners of property assessed for taxes in the City to the Board of Review. Beginning January 1, 2001, one member shall be appointed to a term of one year expiring December 31, 2001, two members shall be appointed to terms of two years expiring December 31, 2002, and two members shall be appointed to terms of three years expiring December 31, 2003. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed to a term of three years. 
(b)  The members of the Board of Review shall be appointed on the basis of their knowledge and experience in property valuation and taxation. 
286.03 - Compensation. 
    The Traverse City Charter, Section 43, states that the City Commission shall fix the compensation of the members of the Board of Review and that the Board of Review shall elect its own clerk who may, at the pleasure of the Board, be the City Assessor. 
286.04 - Meetings. 
    The Traverse City Charter, Sections 93 and 94, create the procedures for meetings of the Board of Review. 
(Ord. 507. Passed 8-21-00.) 
Chapter 288 - Board of Zoning Appeals[33] 
Footnotes: 
--- (33) --- 
Editor's note- Provisions relating to the Board of Zoning Appeals are codified in Chapter 1325 of Part Thirteen - the Planning and Zoning Code. 

Chapter 290 - Construction Board of Appeals[34] 
Footnotes: 
--- (34) --- 
Editor's note- Provisions relating to the Construction Board of Appeals are codified in Chapter 1442 of Part Fourteen - the Building and Housing Code. 

Chapter 292 - Light and Power Board[35] 

Footnotes: 
--- (35) --- 
State Constitution reference- Electricity generally, Mich. Const. Art. 7,  24 and 25 
Charter reference- Utilities generally, Ch. XI; Municipally owned utilities, Ch. XII; Light and Power Department,  175 et seq.; Light and Power Board,  176 et seq. 
State Law reference- Gas plants and systems in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4e, 117.4f; Electricity generally, M.C.L.A.  486.201 et seq.; Oil and gas generally, M.C.L.A.  319.1 et seq., 486.251 et seq. 
Cross reference- Special assessments for street lighting,  232.09; Light and Power Department, Ch. 260; Utilities generally, Ch. 1040; Electricity generally, Ch. 1046; Electrical connections,  1480.01 

292.03 - Public wharves. 
    The Traverse City Light and Power Department of the City is hereby authorized to engage in public wharves, landings, yacht basins, harbors, docks, wharves, and terminal facilities. All powers and duties possessed by the Traverse City Light and Power Department and the Traverse City Light and Power Board pursuant to Chapter XVIII of the City Charter are hereby made applicable to these activities. The Traverse City Light and Power Board shall have general management over any public improvements which it now owns, acquires, or constructs in relation to those activities and shall be the governing body for all purposes including those described in the Revenue Bond Act of 1933. However, bonds for any such improvements or activities may not be authorized without the approval of the City Commission in accordance with Traverse City Charter Section 179(k). 
(Ord. 689. Passed 10-03-05.) 
Chapter 294 - Rental Housing Board of Appeals[36] 
Footnotes: 
--- (36) --- 
Editor's note- Provisions relating to the Rental Housing Board of Appeals are codified in Chapter 1482 of Part Fourteen - the Building and Housing Code. 

Chapter 296 - Building Authority[37] 
Footnotes: 
--- (37) --- 
Editor's note- There are no sections in Chapter 296. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Charter reference- Adoption of building codes by reference,  33 
State Law reference- Building codes in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3; Management and control of municipal buildings and grounds, M.C.L.A.  117.4j; State Construction Code, M.C.L.A.  125.1501 et seq.; Ch. 1420 
Cross reference- State Construction Code, Ch. 1420; Construction Board of Appeals, Ch. 1442 

Chapter 298 - Downtown Development Authority[38] 

Footnotes: 
--- (38) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal bonds, M.C.L.A.  117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4g, 117.5, 117.14a, 117.35a; Improvements in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4d et seq.; Business area redevelopment projects, M.C.L.A.  125.981 et seq.; Downtown Development Authority, M.C.L.A.  125.1651 et seq. 
Cross reference- Supervising Agency for Urban Redevelopment Corporation,  240.01 

298.01 - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings given to them in Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended M.C.L.A.  125.1651 et seq.; M.S.A.  5.3010(1) et seq., unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. In addition, as used in this chapter: 
(a)  Act 197 means Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as now in effect or hereafter amended (M.C.L.A. 125.1651 et seq.; M.S.A. 5.3010(1) et seq.). 
(b)  Authority means the Downtown Development Authority. 
(c)  Board or board of trustees means the Board of Trustees of the Authority, the governing body of the Authority. 
(d)  Chief executive officer means the Mayor of the City. 
(e)  Downtown district means the Downtown District designated by this chapter as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. 72. Passed 9-5-78.) 
298.02 - Determination of necessity. 
    The City Commission hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the City to halt property value deterioration and to increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the City, to eliminate the causes of deterioration and to promote economic growth by establishing a Downtown Development Authority pursuant to Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended. 
(Ord. 72. Passed 9-5-78.) 
298.03 - Establishment; general powers. 
    There is hereby established in and for the City, pursuant to Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, a Downtown Development Authority. The Authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of "Traverse City Downtown Development Authority." The Authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of the state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided in this chapter and in Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this chapter or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the Authority. (Ord. 72. Passed 9-5-78.) 
298.04 - Downtown district boundaries. 
    The Downtown District in which the Downtown Development Authority shall exercise its powers, as provided by Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, shall consist of the following described territory in the City, subject to such changes as may hereafter be made pursuant to this chapter and Act 197. An area in the City within the boundaries described as follows: that property lying southerly of Grand Traverse Bay and lying northerly of a line described as follows: 
    Beginning at a point on the Bay Shore that coincides with the northerly extension of the centerline of Oak Street; thence southerly along such centerline extension to its intersection with the centerline of the C & O Railroad tracks; thence southeasterly approximately 500 feet along the C & O Railroad tracks to the centerline of 2nd Street; thence southerly from 2nd Street approximately 1,050 feet along the centerline of the C & O Railroad tracks to the centerline of the alley between Front and 5th Streets; thence commencing at the northwest corner of Lot 8 of the Hannah, Lay and Company First Addition as recorded by the County Register of Deeds, Liber 3 of Plats on Page 25; thence southeasterly along the northeast boundary of Lot 8 to the northeast corner of Lot 8; thence southerly along the east line of such plat to the south right of way of Sixth Street (66 feet wide); thence easterly along the south right of way of Sixth Street to the west right of way of Locust Street (53 feet wide); thence southerly along the west right-of-way line of Locust Street to the south right-of-way line of Ninth Street (66 feet wide); thence easterly along the south right of way of Ninth Street to the east right-of-way line of the north-south ally (33 feet wide) east of Union Street, Block 6, as found in Hannah, Lay and Company's First Addition, recorded in Book One, Page 10; thence northerly along the east right of way of such alley to the south right-of-way line of 8th Street (66 feet wide); thence easterly along the south right of way of 8th Street to the thread of the Boardman River; thence northwesterly along the thread of the Boardman River to the centerline of Cass Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Cass Street to the centerline of the alley between State and Washington Streets; thence easterly approximately 300 feet to the east lot line of Lot 14, Block 7, of the original Plat of Traverse City; thence southerly approximately 213.5 feet to the centerline of Washington Street; thence easterly approximately 555 feet along the centerline of Washington Street to a point approximately 27 feet east of the west lot line of Lot 14, Block 21, original Plat of Traverse City; thence northerly approximately 213.5 feet to the centerline of the alley between State and Washington Streets; thence easterly to the centerline of Boardman Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Boardman Avenue to the centerline of the alley between Front and State Streets; thence easterly to the centerline of Railroad Avenue; thence northwesterly to the intersection of the centerlines of East Front Street and Railroad Avenue; thence easterly to the intersection of the centerlines of East Front Street and Grandview Parkway; thence northwesterly to the centerline of the Boardman River; thence northerly to Grand Traverse Bay and also including Lot 3 of Hannah, Lay and Company's 16th Addition, Liber 3 of Plat, Pages 6 and 7. 
(Ord. 72. Passed 9-5-78; Ord. 176. Passed 6-17-85.) 
298.05 - Board of trustees. 
    The Downtown Development Authority shall be under the supervision and control of a Board of Trustees consisting of the Mayor and eleven members as provided by Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the City Commission, and shall hold office for the terms provided in Act 197. For the office of Trustee established by Ordinance 180, the term shall expire on September 15, 1988; thereafter terms shall be for four years. All members shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. 
(Ord. 72. Passed 9-5-78; Ord. 147. Passed 12-6-82; Ord. 158. Passed 10-3-83; Ord. 180. Passed 8-19-85.) 
298.06 - Specific powers. 
    Except as specifically otherwise provided in this chapter, the Downtown Development Authority shall have all powers provided by law, subject to the limitations imposed by law and in this chapter. The Authority may levy ad valorem taxes on real and tangible personal property not exempt by law and as finally equalized in the Downtown District at the rate of not more than two mills each year if the City Commission annually approves the levy thereof. 
(Ord. 72. Passed 9-5-78.) 
298.07 - Director; bond. 
    If a director is employed as authorized by Section 5 of Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, he or she shall post bond in the penal sum of $5,000.00 as required by such section. 
(Ord. 72. Passed 9-5-78.) 
298.08 - Fiscal year; budget; audits. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the Downtown Development Authority shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, or as otherwise adopted by the City. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the City Commission on the same date that the proposed budget for the City is required by the City Charter to be submitted to the Commission. The Board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the Commission. However, the Board may temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds were required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c)  The Authority shall submit financial reports to the Commission as requested by the Commission. The Authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the City, and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the Commission. 
(Ord. 72. Passed 9-5-78.) 
Chapter 299 - Public Art 

299.01 - Purpose and intent. 
    The City Commission of Traverse City finds that the presence of public art advances the interests of the City, increases its desirability, aids in the enhancement of property values, promotes economic growth, and contributes to the general welfare of the City's citizens. The City Commission believes that public art should be encouraged and, therefore, establishes the following regulations to direct the inclusion of the works of art in the public spaces of the City. 
(Ord. 1014. Passed 2-17-15) 
299.02 - Definitions. 
(a)  Arts commission shall mean the Traverse City Arts Commission established pursuant to Section 30 of the City Charter. 
(b)  Art selection panel shall mean a seven-member panel appointed by the Traverse City Arts Commission, who reviews proposals made under this ordinance and makes recommendations to the Arts Commission. 
(c)  Eligible fund shall mean a source fund for construction projects from which art is not precluded as an object of expenditure. Eligible funds shall exclude those funds expended for construction of utilities. 
(d)  Public arts trust shall mean a fund established by the City Treasurer to be used consistent with its duties as outlined in this chapter. 
(e)  Public art shall mean works of art located in highly visible public areas or private property areas that are highly visible from public areas. These are: 
(1)  Outdoor areas on public property or outdoor areas on private property that are highly visible from public areas. 
(2)  Interior areas that are highly traveled public areas in public or private buildings. Specifically excluded are interior areas not accessible to the general public (offices, work stations, cafeterias). 
(3)  Interior and exterior wall surfaces on or in public or private buildings when the work of art is attached to the wall surface, such as a mosaic or mural and the wall surface is visible from an area that is highly traveled by the public. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Chapter, unless funding from the Public Arts Trust is provided for the Public Art, this Chapter shall not apply to Public Art to be located on real property not otherwise subject to City authority. 
(f)  Works of art shall mean all forms of original creations of visual art, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Sculpture: In the round, bas relief, high relief, mobile, fountain, kinetic, electronic, etc., in any material or combination of materials. 
(2)  Painting: All media, including portable and permanently affixed words, such as murals and frescoes. 
(3)  Architectural Design Features: Visual interest that may be freestanding or placed on roadway structural features such as noise walls, retaining walls, sidewalks, bridges, bike paths or approved engineered structures. 
(4)  Mosaics. 
(5)  Mixed media: Any combination of forms or media including collage. 
(6)  Digital art: An artistic work or practice that uses digital technology as an essential part of the creative or presentation process. 
(7)  Photography. 
(Ord. 1014. Passed 2-17-15; Ord. No. 1074 . Passed 5-21-18) 
299.03 - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established an Arts Commission pursuant to Section 30 of the City Charter and upon recommendation of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1014. Passed 2-17-15) 
299.04 - Establishment of public arts trust. 
    There is hereby established a "Public Arts Trust" fund into which will be deposited the funds appropriated pursuant to this Chapter and from which expenditures may be made for the acquisition, commission, exhibition, and maintenance of works of art consistent with this chapter. 
(1)  Funding for public art: The City Commission shall annually appropriate funds from the general fund to the Public Arts Trust following adoption of the Public Arts Master Plan by the City Commission to be used in accordance with this Chapter. The Downtown Development Authority shall annually appropriate funds to the Public Arts Trust following adoption of the Public Arts Master Plan by the City Commission to be used in accordance with this Chapter within the Downtown District. 
(2)  Private funding of public art: All funds placed into the Public Art Fund through private donations or donations creating an exemption shall be expended for public art as hereafter provided. 
(Ord. 1014. Passed 2-17-2015) 
299.05 - Inclusions and exclusions relative to expenditures for public art. 
(a)  Inclusions. The portion of the Public Arts Trust reserved for works of art may be expended for the following: 
(1)  The cost of the public art and its installation. 
(2)  Identification plaques and labels. 
(3)  Waterworks, electrical and mechanical devices and equipment which are an integral part of the public art. 
(4)  Frames, mats, and simple pedestals necessary for the proper presentation of the public art. 
(5)  Maintenance and repair of the surface of the public art. 
(6)  Fees to artists for the execution of final proposals for the arts commission to select from. 
(7)  Exhibitions, marketing and educational programs. 
(8)  For the support of artistic special events at a cost not to exceed five percent of the appropriation reserved for the public art. 
(9)  Administrative expenses at a cost not to exceed fifteen percent of the appropriation reserved for the work of art. 
(b)  Exclusions. The portion of the Public Arts Trust reserved for works of art may not be expended for the following: 
(1)  Reproductions by mechanical or other means of original works of art, however, limited editions controlled by the artist may be included. 
(2)  Art objects which are mass produced or of standard designs, such as playground sculpture or fountains. 
(Ord. 1014. Passed 2-17-15) 
299.06 - Traverse City Arts Commission; composition; terms of office; compensation; expenses. 
    The Traverse City Arts Commission will consist of seven members who will be registered electors of the City or members of the Downtown Development Authority Board of Directors and will have evidenced interest in the advancement of Public Art in the City of Traverse City. The City Commission will appoint two members from the following public bodies of the City: one from the Downtown Development Authority Board of Directors, and one from the City Commission. The City Commission will appoint the remaining four members of the Traverse City Arts Commission from the registered electors of the City. The City Manager, or the designee of the City Manager, shall be a member of such an advisory committee with full authority of vote. 
    All members of the Traverse City Arts Commission, excluding those appointed from the Downtown Development Authority Board of Directors, and City Commission, will be appointed to terms of three years. All members of the Traverse City Arts Commission appointed from the Downtown Development Authority Board of Directors, and City Commission will be appointed to terms of three years or for the length of their terms on their respective public bodies, whichever is shorter. Members will be eligible for reappointment. Members will serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in Commission activities consistent with this Chapter. 
    The Art Selection Panel, a seven-member panel appointed by the Traverse City Arts Commission, will review proposals and make a recommendation to the Traverse City Arts Commission. The Art Selection Panel shall be comprised of one representative from the Arts Commission and six arts professionals, who have knowledge of the visual arts and/or design (public art administrators, artists, architects, landscape architects, art historians, museum and exhibition curators, art critics, educators) and who understand the challenges of Public Art, actively participate in the selection process of artists and/or artists teams. Members of the Art Selection Panel will be appointed to terms of three years; provided, however, for the two seats that were added to the Art Selection Panel in 2018, they shall initially be two-year terms to provide for staggering and thereafter shall be three-year terms. 
    In cases where there are one or more stakeholders, the Arts Commission may choose to appoint additional non-voting members representing stakeholders to the Art Selection Panel. 
(Ord. 1014. Passed 2-17-15; Ord. No. 1073 . Passed 5-21-18; Ord. No. 1074 . Passed 5-21-18) 
299.07 - Vacancies. 
    In the event of a vacancy on the Arts Commission that cannot otherwise be filled consistent with this section, the City Commission will appoint a replacement to serve the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. 1014. Passed 2-17-15) 
299.08 - Organization. 
(a)  The Arts Commission will schedule regular meetings to be held at least once each month and at other times as necessary. All meetings shall comply with the Open Meetings Act. 
(b)  At the first regularly scheduled meeting, the Arts Commission will develop by-laws governing the operations of such Commission. 
(c)  At the first regularly scheduled meeting, a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson will be elected to a term of one year. Administrative staff may act as the Recording Secretary and Administrative Manager of the Arts Commission. Officers thereafter will be elected to one-year terms upon the expiration of the terms of the previously elected officers. 
(d)  Five members will be considered a quorum for the transaction of business of the Arts Commission. 
(Ord. 1014. Passed 2-17-15; Ord. No. 1073 . Passed 5-21-18) 
299.09 - Duties. 
(a)  The Arts Commission will develop a Public Art Master Plan and recommend its adoption to the City of Traverse City Planning Commission, Parks and Recreation Commission and City Commission. The Arts Commission shall regularly assess its consistency with City Master Plan and Parks and Recreation five-year plan. The Arts Commission shall conduct a formal review and update of its Master Plan every five years and ensure its consistency with the City Master Plan and the Parks and Recreation five-year plan. Upon recommendation by the Arts Commission, the Public Art Master Plan shall be re-adopted by the City Planning Commission and City Commission every five years. Prior to the re-adoption of the Public Art Master Plan by the City Commission, the Parks and Recreation Commission shall review it and provide any recommendations to the City Commission. 
(b)  It will be the duty of the Arts Commission to study and recommend a policy and guidelines to carry out the City's public art program and Public Art Master Plan, and any amendment thereto, which will include, but will not be limited to, a method or methods for the selection of artists or works of art and for the placement of Public Art in the City. 
(c)  Recommend the purchase of works of Public Art or commission the design, creation, execution, and/or placement of works of Public Art and the payment therefore from the Public Arts Trust pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  Prior to sending out a Request for Proposal (RFP) or Request for Qualifications (RFQ), the Arts Commission shall present a conceptual project to the City Commission and seek authorization from the City Commission for an authorized budget of funds from the Public Arts Trust and for authorization for the appropriate signatories to enter into an agreement on behalf of the City with an artist to be selected and recommended by the Arts Commission for the specific project under consideration. If the City approves the conceptual project the City Commission shall authorize the necessary individuals to execute documents necessary to carry out the project subject to recommendation of the artist by the Arts Commission. If the proposed location for the conceptual project is within a City park, prior to seeking City Commission approval, the Arts Commission shall seek the input of the Parks and Recreation Commission as to the location of the conceptual project, the input shall be provided to the City Commission for its consideration. The Parks and Recreation Commission should consider factors such as planned improvements to the park and the conceptual project's impact, if any on such improvements; consistency with the five-year Parks and Recreation Plan as appropriate; and the character of the park. 
(2)  The Arts Commission will then assess the project, establish selection criteria and meet with stakeholders, if any, to be involved in the vision. 
(3)  The Arts Commission will seek approval of a site plan from the appropriate staff. 
(4)  The Arts Commission will prepare and send out the RFP or RFQ. 
(5)  The Arts Commission shall evaluate the proposals submitted in response to the RFP/RFQ and select an artist for the project. 
(6)  Once an artist is selected and a final budget agreed upon, the City will enter into a contract with the artist. The dollar amount of the contract is subject to the funds approved by City Commission and allocated to the project and the artists' fees and fabrication costs, as well as other expenses as allowed under the terms of this Chapter. 
(d)  The Arts Commission shall be responsible for promoting arts in the community, to include, but not be limited to, dissemination of knowledge with regard to arts, recognizing local artists and their work when appropriate, and cooperation with metropolitan agencies also dealing in the arts. 
(e)  The Arts Commission shall be responsible for reviewing Public Art proposed to be donated to be in compliance with the public art program and Public Art Master Plan. If the Arts Commission determines the proposed Public Art is not in compliance, it shall advise and provide steps to have the proposed donated Public Art comply with the applicable requirements and standards. 
(f)  Recommend that site plans be approved by appropriate department heads. 
(g)  Recommend that any proposed Public Art will be reviewed by the department head responsible for operation or maintenance. 
(h)  Study and recommend rules and regulations consistent with this Chapter to facilitate the implementation of its duties and responsibilities under this Chapter. 
(i)  Advise the City Commission on matters pertaining to the arts programs within the city including review of requests for support, monetary or otherwise, submitted to the City; advise on the priority of such requests for or donations and placement of Public Art. 
(j)  The Arts Commission will have such other duties as designated by the City Commission from time to time. 
(Ord. 1014, Passed 2-17-15; Ord. 1037 , Passed 8-1-16) 
PART FOUR - TRAFFIC CODE 
Chapter 410 - Traffic Codes[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Traffic Violations Bureau,  69 
State Law reference- Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities, MCL  117.4h; Traffic rules and regulations generally, MCL  257.601et seq., 257.634 et seq.; Uniform Traffic Code, MCL  257.951 et seq.; Motor Vehicle Code, MCL  257.1-257.923 
Cross reference- Parking Violations Bureau, Ch. 488; Traffic citations,  488.05 

410.01 - Adoption by reference. 
(a)  Uniform Traffic Code. The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, sometimes hereinafter referred to in this Traffic Code as the Uniform Traffic Code, promulgated by the Director of State Police and published in the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code, and amendments as published in the 1981 and 2002 Annual Supplement to the Michigan Administrative Code, in accordance with Act 62 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended (Administrative Rules R 28.1001 - 28.2075), except as hereafter may be amended or deleted, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, except as may be hereinafter amended or deleted. 
(b)  Michigan Vehicle Code . The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300; MCL 257.1 to 257.923, as amended, is adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein, except as may be amended or deleted. References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to local "authorities" shall mean the City of Traverse City. The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the City may not impose a penalty of imprisonment for greater than 93 days. 
(Ord. 204. Passed 6-16-86. Ord. 580. Passed 10-21-02.) 
410.02 - Definitions. 
    References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, as adopted in Section 410.01, to the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Governmental unit shall mean the City. 
(b)  Traffic engineer shall mean the City Manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. 338. Passed 9-21-92.) 
410.03 - Amendments to uniform traffic code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, as adopted in Section 410.01, are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. 
R 28.1001 Rule 1. (Amended) Words and phrases. 
1.  As used in this code: 
(j)  (Added) "Marked crosswalk" means any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by appropriate markings, signs, barriers, or other devices to give notice thereof. 
(s)  (Added) "Through or thru," when prohibited, means a vehicle traveling a highway or street that does not have an origin, destination, or scheduled stop on that highway or street. 
(a)  Rule 159. Presumption of vehicle weight. (Added) A presumption of the minimum weight of a vehicle shall be established by evidence of the weight indicated on the Michigan registration certificate for the truck or other commercial vehicle in question. 
(b)  Rule 160. Authority of City Engineer; closing streets. (Added) Unless otherwise provided by law, the City Engineer is hereby authorized to close any highway, street, alley or other right-of-way or portion thereof which is under process of construction, improvement or repair, by placing traffic control devices in accordance with the Michigan Vehicle Code. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(c)  Rule 551. Boarding or alighting from vehicles. (Added) No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(d)  Rule 619. Lights and reflectors. (Added) No person shall operate a bicycle on any street, alley or public place from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, unless the bicycle is equipped with lights and reflectors as required by the Motor Vehicle Code applicable to bicycles, and unless the same are operating. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(e)  Rule 631. Bicycle parking. (Added) No person shall park a bicycle in any street, alley or public place, except in a standing position, and no person shall park a bicycle on any sidewalk except in standards provided therefore. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(f)  Rule 702. Pedestrians; right-of-way in crosswalk; violation as a civil infraction. (Amended) 
1.  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield the right-of-way to every pedestrian within a marked crosswalk. 
2.  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to every pedestrian within an unmarked crosswalk. 
3.  A pedestrian shall not suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle that is so close that it would be impossible for the driver to stop and yield. 
4.  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked or unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
5.  A person who violates this rule is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(g)  Rule 706. Pedestrians; yielding right-of-way; violation as a civil infraction. (Deleted). 
(h)  Rule 1076. Snowmobile operation. (Added) Unless otherwise permitted by State statute or the Uniform Traffic Code, no person shall operate a snowmobile in the City unless authorized by the Police Chief. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 204. Passed 6-16-86. Ord. 320. Passed 12-16-91. Ord. 366. Passed 7-6-93. Ord. 401. Passed 11-21-94. Ord. 597. Passed 3-17-03. Ord. 664. Passed 03-21-05. Ord. 924. Passed 10-3-11. Ord. 1048 . Passed 5-1-17) 
410.04 - Amendments to motor vehicle code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Michigan Vehicle Code, as adopted in Section 410.01, are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. 
(a)  MCL 257.252d(1)(l) Impoundment and immobilization (Added). Subsection (1)(l) is added to read in its entirety as follows: 
(l)  If a vehicle is unattended and the registered owner of the vehicle has six (6) or more unanswered parking violation notices or citations regarding illegal parking, in any combination, all of which have been issued for a violation of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, as amended, or the Uniform Traffic Code, as amended any police officer or authorized City employee may impound the vehicle or attach or cause to be attached to said vehicle an immobilizing device which will prevent the vehicle from being moved or driven. If an immobilization device is attached, there shall also be attached securely to the vehicle a notice which states: 
"CAUTION: THIS VEHICLE HAS BEEN MADE IMMOBILE BY A WHEEL-LOCKING DEVICE. SERIOUS DAMAGE TO THE VEHICLE WILL RESULT IF YOU ATTEMPT TO MOVE THE VEHICLE. RELEASE CAN BE OBTAINED BY: 
(1)  Paying the outstanding civil infraction citations or parking violation notices, together with the fee established to cover the costs of attachment and removal of the locking device, or 
(2)  Posting a bond to cover the above costs and requesting a hearing. 
PAYMENT MUST BE MADE TO THE TRAVERSE CITY PARKING SERVICES OFFICE IN THE LARRY C. HARDY PARKING DECK DURING REGULAR BUSINESS HOURS; OR AT OTHER TIMES, TO THE TRAVERSE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT. ARRANGEMENTS MUST BE MADE WITHIN 48 HOURS AFTER INSTALLATION OF THE DEVICE OR THE VEHICLE WILL BE REMOVED BY IMPOUNDMENT PURSUANT TO MCL 257.606(B) City Ordinance Section 410.04(a)." 
    Whenever any police officer or authorized City employee shall issue or have issued an order to impound or immobilize a vehicle as provided herein, it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to drive or otherwise remove said vehicle if he or she has knowledge of its impending impoundment or immobilization. 
    MCL 257.252d(6) (Added) to read in its entireties as follows: 
(1)  Any bond required for release of a vehicle impounded or immobilized pursuant to subsection (1) shall not exceed the sum of $500.00. 
(b)  MCL 257.252e. Abandoned Vehicle; jurisdiction of court. (Amended) Subsection A is amended to read in its entirety as follows: The following courts shall have jurisdiction to determine if a police agency has acted properly in processing a vehicle under section 252a, 252b(6) to (10), or 252d: 
(1)  The district court shall have jurisdiction to determine if a police agency has acted properly in processing a vehicle under sections 252a, 252b(6) to (10), or 252d. 
(2)  The court specified in the notice prescribed in section 252b(6), or 252d(2)(c) shall be the court which has territorial jurisdiction at the location from where the vehicle was removed or deemed abandoned. Venue in the district court shall be governed by section 8312 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, being Sec. 600.8312 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(3)  If the owner fails to pay the accrued towing and storage fees, the towing and storage bond posted with the court to secure the release of the vehicle under section 252a, 252b or 252d shall be used to pay the towing and storage fees. 
(c)  MCL 257.674(1)(w) Prohibited parking; exceptions; violation as civil infraction. (Amended). Subsection (1) (w) is amended to read in its entirety as follows: In violation of an official sign restricting the period of time for manner of parking, including on any paved street between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day, except for undertakers, physicians and drivers of emergency vehicles while they are on emergency calls, and further subject to the following: 
(i)  From November 16 through the following April 14, vehicles found parked on any street or alley between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. may be towed away at the owner's expense. 
(ii)  From April 15 through November 15, overnight parking between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. is allowed on Saturday, Sunday and Monday mornings only on any street where parking is otherwise allowed, but excluding Bay Street during the National Cherry Festival, and the central business district which, for purposes of this section, is described as follows: Bounded by Grandview Parkway on the North; Union Street south to the River; Boardman River west, south and east back to Union Street; Union Street north to the alley south of State Street; alley east to Cass; Cass south to Washington, Washington east to Boardman; Boardman north to Front Street; Front Street east to Wellington; Wellington north to Grandview Parkway. 
(iii)  Parking may be allowed between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. all year and at all times on paved streets by Permanent Traffic Control Orders for vehicles with valid overnight parking permits issued by the City provided that the vehicle is parked as permitted by the Permanent Traffic Control Order. 
(d)  MCL 257.674(1)(aa) Prohibited parking; exceptions, violation as civil infraction. (Added) Subsection (1)(aa) is added to read in its entirety as follows: 
(aa)  On any street, alley or public parkway without valid registration plates on the vehicle. 
(e)  MCL 257.682(1) Stopping for school bus displaying flashing red lights; exception; violation as civil infraction; meeting stopped school bus on divided highway; evidence; community service. (Added) The following shall be added to subsection 1: No school bus driver shall activate the alternating flashing red lights while loading, discharging or waiting to load or discharge passengers at a school or any public street or place so designated by traffic control order. 
(Ord. 597, Passed 3-15-03; Ord. 715, Passed 1-2-07; Ord. 752, Passed 6-4-07; Ord. 807, Passed 7-21-08; Ord. 836, Passed 6-15-09; Ord. 849, Passed 11-5-09; Ord. 1077 , Passed 8-20-18.) 
410.05 - Application to Northwestern Michigan College property. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, and the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300; MCL 257.1 to 257.923, as amended, as adopted in Section 410.01 and as amended. 
    Uniform Traffic Code 410.05 in Section 410.03, is hereby made applicable to the property of Northwestern Michigan College located in the City, more particularly described as College Drive between Munson Avenue and Front Street. 
    This extension of the Uniform Traffic Code and the Michigan Vehicle Code is done pursuant to MCL 257.961, as amended, authorizing the adoption of ordinances governing the operation, parking without fees and speed of motor vehicles upon the property of a community college district. 
(Ord. 204. Passed 6-16-86. Ord. 595. Passed 3-17-03.) 
Chapter 420 - Bicycles and Coaster Toys[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Bicycle paths,  410.03 (UTC 4.21); Bicycles generally,  410.03 (UTC 6.28 et seq.) 

420.01 - License required; display; fee. 
    No person shall ride or propel by muscular power any bicycle on any street, alley or public place, unless such bicycle has been licensed and unless the required license is attached so that it is clearly visible. A fee as determined from time to time by the City Commission shall be charged for each license issued or upon a change of ownership. 
420.02 - Term of license; renewals. 
    Bicycle licenses shall be of the permanent type, undated and renewable only upon transfer to a new owner or when the license becomes unreadable. 
(1976 Code  25.062) 
420.03 - Transfer of license. 
    Upon the sale or transfer of a licensed bicycle to another owner, a new license will be issued. 
420.04 - Bicycles and coaster toys prohibited in certain areas. 
    The City Commission may, by resolution, prohibit the use of bicycles, coaster toys, skateboards, toy vehicles, roller skates, roller blades, in-line skates or other similar wheeled, self-propelled vehicles in certain areas. No person shall ride a bicycle, coaster toy, skateboard, toy vehicle, roller skates or roller blades, in-line skates or other similar wheeled, self-propelled device upon any public property or sidewalk where it is prohibited by resolution of the City Commission and so posted. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 439. Passed 6-17-96.) 
420.05 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief, the marina security officers and the appointed officers of the Police Department or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCLA 764.9c(2); MSA 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 449. Passed 6-16-97.) 
420.99 - Penalty. 
    Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be assessed a civil fine of not more than $100.00. 
Chapter 480 - Parking Generally[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4h; Traffic rules and regulations generally, M.C.L.A.  257.601, 257.634 et seq.; Parking generally, M.C.L.A.  257.672 et seq.; Municipal violations in counties of 100,000 or more, M.C.L.A.  725.301 
Cross reference- Parking meters, Ch. 484; Parking Violations Bureau, Ch. 488; Parking in parks,  1064.14; Off-street parking and loading, Ch. 1374 

480.01 - Unattended vehicles; removal of ignition key. 
(a)  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended in any public place, or on any used or new car lot, without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the ignition key from the vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever any police officer finds a motor vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, such police officer may remove such key from such vehicle and deliver such key to the police officer in charge of the police station. 
(c)  The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this section shall be held responsible for such violation. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.05) 
480.02 - Parking lots at Northwestern Michigan College. 
(a)  Pursuant to M.C.L.A. 257.961; M.S.A. 9.2660, as amended, this section is adopted for the purpose of governing parking by motor vehicles, without fees, upon the property of Northwestern Michigan College, located within the City, and located generally in the vicinity of the intersections of Front Street, Munson Avenue and College Drive. 
(b)  Parking on such property shall be permitted during certain times only if a valid parking sticker has been issued by the College to the motor vehicle in question, and only if such sticker is visibly displayed on the rear window of the automobile or on any other designated location of other motor vehicles. A parking lot may contain clearly designated visitor parking spaces where such stickers shall not be required. 
(c)  Parking shall be regulated pursuant to traffic control orders adopted in the same manner as traffic control orders under the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages. Such orders shall designate the parking area in question, the time of regulation and the regulations pertaining to such parking area. The control order shall also specify the signage necessary. 
(d)  The Parking Violations Bureau shall handle all violations of this section and traffic control orders issued hereunder. 
(e)  Parking violations may be alleged by the issuance of a traffic citation by a police officer, or by the issuance of a notice of violation by a police officer or specially designated parking enforcement officer authorized to issue such notices by directive of the City Manager. Such notice shall be called a parking ticket and shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the Parking Violations Bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is open and the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued, and it shall advise that a complaint against the person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought if such person fails to respond within the time limit. 
(f)  The City Manager shall adopt an administrative policy for the enforcement of City parking ordinances and the method and degree of training which the parking enforcement personnel receive. 
(Ord. 364. Passed 6-21-93.) 
480.03 - Parking on public property. 
(a)  Parking prohibited: Unless otherwise allowed by the City Manager, no person shall park or place a vehicle, boat or any other object in any City parking lot for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle, boat or object for sale, for storage or for advertising purposes. 
(b)  Enforcement; penalty: The uniformed employees of the Traverse City Parking Services or police officers are authorized to issue notices of violations and dispose of violations of this section. The civil fine for a violation of this section is $15 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. The processing of violations and nonpayment of fines shall be handled pursuant to Chapter 488. 
(Ord. 562. Passed 5-20-02.) 
480.99 - Penalty. 
(a)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be assessed a civil fine of not more than $100.00, provided, however, that the offense may be disposed of as provided in Section 488.06 if it is an offense listed as disposable under such section and if the civil fine is paid within the periods stipulated therein. 
Chapter 482 - Parking on Residential Lots[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Penalties,  202.99 

482.01 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, to enhance the visual environment of the City, and to preserve residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. 756. Passed 7-2-07.) 
482.02 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter: 
(1)  Front lot line means any lot line adjacent to a street. 
(2)  Front yard means all land extending across the width of a property and lying between the building line and the front line on the street upon which the address has been assigned. 
(3)  Inoperable and inoperative means unable to operate for the normally intended use as the result of a mechanical, electrical, or other defect, malfunction or condition. 
(4)  Landscaped area includes, but is not limited to, turf, unaltered soil, planting beds, planted trees, vines, groundcover, mulch, decorative stone or those areas typically so treated. 
(5)  Residential lot means a lot with a building designed for or used exclusively for residential purposes and containing one or more dwelling units. 
(6)  Treelawn means the area of public right-of-way lying between the curb line of a curbed street or developed travelway of a noncurbed street and the nearest private property line substantially parallel to said street. 
(7)  Unlicensed means any motor vehicle, snowmobile, trailer or water craft which does not have a current state registrationwhich is displayed by a license plate or other authorized means. 
(8)  Vehicle means any self-propelled device intended for use on land. 
(9)  Rear yard means all land extending across the width of a property and lying between the principal building and the rear property line and is opposite the front yard. 
(Ord. 756. Passed 7-2-07.) 
482.03 - Parking in a front yard or treelawn. 
(a)  Front yards. No person shall park any vehicle, trailer or water craft in a landscaped area of a front yard of a residential lot. 
(b)  Treelawn parking prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle, trailer or water craft on the treelawn portion of the right-of-way (1) on a curbed street; or (2) on a non-curbed street unless permitted by sign. 
(Ord. 756. Passed 7-2-07. Ord. 968. Passed 6-3-13) 
482.04 - Registered owner presumption. 
    Except for leased vehicles, in a proceeding for a violation of this chapter, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was parked in violation of this chapter, together with proof from the Secretary of State that the respondent named in the citation was at the time of the violation the vehicle's registered owner, creates in evidence a presumption that the vehicle's registered owner was the person who parked the vehicle at the time that the violation occurred. 
(Ord. 756. Passed 7-2-07.) 
482.05 - Violations. 
    A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the penalties provided in  202.99. 
(Ord. 756. Passed 7-2-07.) 
Chapter 484 - Parking Meters[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4h; Traffic rules and regulations generally, M.C.L.A.  257.601 et seq.,  257.634 et seq.; Parking generally, M.C.L.A.  257.672 et seq.;  410.03 (UTC 8.10); Uniform Traffic Code, M.C.L.A.  257.951 et seq.; Municipal violations in counties of 100,000 or more, M.C.L.A.  725.301 
Cross reference- Uniform Traffic Code, Ch. 410; Abandoned motor vehicles,  410.03 (UTC 2.5a et seq.); Parking generally, Ch. 480; Parking Violations Bureau, Ch. 488 

484.01 - Establishment of zones. 
    Zones to be known as parking meter zones may be established by traffic control orders issued as provided in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, as adopted in Section 410.01, on any street or City operated off-street parking area. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.041; Ord. 40. Passed 11-21-77.) 
484.02 - Installation and operation. 
(a)  Single space parking meters installed in parking meter zones shall be placed adjacent to each parking space. Each parking meter shall display by a signal that the parking space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the currency to be deposited and the time limitations for each payment method deposited. Virtual account payments may reflect date and paid duration in the account without visible reflection on the meter. Upon the expiration of the time limit, for payments made at the meter rather than by virtual account, the parking meter shall indicate by a signal that the lawful parking period has expired. In the case of the expired meter, the right of the motor vehicle to occupy such a space shall cease and the driver, possessor or person having control thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 484.99. 
(b)  Multi-space (pay station) parking meters installed centrally within streets or surface lots. Each parking space shall be identified by a stall number. Each parking meter shall indicate by proper legend the currency or accepted credit card types to be deposited and the time limitations for each payment method deposited. Virtual account payments will reflect date and paid duration in the account. Upon the expiration of the time limit for payments made at the meter, the printed receipt will indicate that the lawful parking period has expired. In the case of the expired meter, the right of the motor vehicle to occupy such a space shall cease and the driver, possessor or person having control thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 484.99. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.042; Ord. 40. Passed 11-21-77. Ord. 1011. Passed 1-5-15) 
484.03 - Lines and markings; manner of parking. 
    The City Manager is hereby authorized to install single-space and multi-space parking meters in spaces and to have lines or markings painted upon the curb, street or lot surface controlled by each parking space for which the meter is to be used. No person shall park any vehicle upon or across any such line or marking. The vehicle, insofar as possible, shall be centered within the designated parking space. The City Manager is hereby authorized to install numbered stall signs or stall numbers painted within the parking space to designate the stall number of the space. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.043; Ord. 40. Passed 11-21-77. Ord. 1011. Passed 1-5-15) 
484.04 - Parking meters. 
(a)  Meter activation required. Except for fully-electric vehicles which are not required to activate the parking meter, whenever a vehicle is parked within a designated parking meter space, the operator of the vehicle shall activate the meter by depositing in the meter a United States currency of a denomination indicated on the parking meter legend, or using a credit card type accepted by the parking meter, or by activating the meter through the virtual account and if the meter is a manual type by turning or pressing the lever, handle, crank or other device provided upon such meter. Thereupon such parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time indicated on such meter, printed receipt or virtual paid duration. The parking meters must be activated from 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday except holidays and except such other times or circumstances as designated by the City Manager. 
(b)  Overtime parking. Except for a Mobile Food Vendor with a valid license issued under these codified ordinances. No person shall leave any vehicle in any metered parking space when the meters must be activated for longer than the time indicated on the parking meter, printed receipt or virtual paid duration. Fully-electric vehicles shall not remain in any metered parking space for a period of time longer than legal parking time established for the parking space. No person shall make any form of payment for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space or stall number. It shall be a separate offense to park at a metered space or stall for each period of time equal to the maximum allowed on the meter. 
(c)  Civil infraction. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction subject to the fine indicated in Section 488.06. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.044; Ord. 40. Passed 11-21-77; Ord. 109. Passed 6-2-80. Ord. 477. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 543. Passed 10-1-01. Ord. 751. Passed 5-21-07. Ord. 696. Passed 6-3-13. Ord. 1011. Passed 1-5-14) 
484.05 - Parking meter damage. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substitute for a United States currency; or 
(2)  Remove, deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. 
(3)  A person who violates section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.045. Ord. 40. Passed 11-21-77. Ord. 478. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 1011. Passed 1-5-15) 
484.06 - Use of revenues. 
    All revenues derived from the use of parking meters as provided in this chapter shall be used to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic on the streets, to cover the costs of developing and purchasing or leasing parking facilities, and to cover the costs of supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking spaces, lots and meters. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.046; Ord. 40. Passed 11-21-77.) 
484.07 - Collection from meters. 
    Collections of money deposited in parking meters shall be made as provided by direction of the City Treasurer. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.046; Ord. 40. Passed 11-21-77.) 
484.99 - Penalty. 
(a)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be assessed a civil fine of not more than $100.00, provided, however, that the offense may be disposed of as provided in Section 488.06 if it is an offense listed as disposable under such section and if the civil fine is paid within the periods stipulated therein. 
(b)  Whoever violates Section 484.05 is guilty of a misdemeanor and should be subject to the penalty provided in Section 202.99 of the Administration Code. 
Chapter 488 - Parking Violations Bureau[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities MCL  117.4h; Traffic rules and regulations generally, MCL  257.601 et seq.,  257.634 et seq.; Parking tickets, MCL  257.675d; Parking generally, MCL  257.672 et seq.; Uniform Traffic Code, MCL  257.951 et seq.; Motor Vehicle Code, MCL  257.1,  257.1-257.923 
Cross reference- Motor Vehicle Code, Ch. 410; Uniform Traffic Code, Ch. 410; Parking of bicycles,  410.03 (UTC 6.31); Parking generally,  410.03 (UTC 8.10); Parking meters,  484; Parking in parks,  1064.14 

488.01 - Establishment; supervision by city treasurer. 
    Pursuant to Section 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act, as added by Act 154 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A. 600.8395), there is hereby established in and for the City a Parking Violations Bureau for the purpose of handling alleged parking violations in the City. The Bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the City Treasurer. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.10) 
488.02 - Office; administration by city treasurer; operation by Traverse City downtown development authority. 
    The Parking Violations Bureau shall be located at the Governmental Center and the Larry C. Hardy Parking Deck. The City Treasurer shall administer the Parking Violations Bureau. The Traverse City Downtown Development Authority shall operate the Parking Violations Bureau. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.101. Ord. 715. Passed 1-2-07.) 
488.03 - Authority re disposition of violations. 
    No violation that is not scheduled in Section 488.06 shall be disposed of by the Parking Violations Bureau. The fact that a violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to disposition of the violation at the Bureau. In any case, the person in charge of the Bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation, in which case any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.103) 
488.04 - Rights of alleged violators. 
    No violation may be settled at the Parking Violations Bureau except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense. In no case shall the person who denies having committed the offense or the person who is in charge of the Bureau determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the Bureau. Any person shall be entitled to have such violation processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if he or she so desires. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the Bureau shall not prejudice him or her or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded to him or her by law. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.104) 
488.05 - Traffic citations; notices of violations. 
    The issuance of a traffic citation by a police officer of the City, or the issuance of a notice of violation by a police officer of the City, or a qualified person other than a police officer duly authorized to issue such a notice by ordinance or directive of the City Manager, shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic citation or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the Parking Violations Bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is open and the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued, and it shall advise that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought if such person fails to respond within the time limit. 
(1976 Code Sec. 25.105; Ord. 5. Passed 10-4-76. Ord. 659. Passed 12-20-04.) 
488.06 - Schedule of civil fines. 
    The Parking Violations Bureau or a police officer may issue notices of violations and dispose of the following offenses and civil fines. Violations shall be considered civil infractions. 
Violation Description Base Fee 16-30 Days 31-60 Days > 60 Days < 90 Days (Collections)* (1) Direction of parking and along curb $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (2) Angle parking $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (3) Obstructing traffic $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (4) On sidewalk $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (5) In front of driveway $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (6) Within an intersection $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (7) Within 15 feet of fire hydrant $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (8) On a crosswalk $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (9) Too close to intersection or crosswalk $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (10) Too close to traffic control device $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (11) Too close to safety zone $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (12) Too close to railroad crossing $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (13) Too close to fire station $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (14) Next to obstruction $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (15) Double parking $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (16) On bridge or in tunnel $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (17) Too close to accident $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (18) In front of theater $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (19) Blocking emergency exit $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (20) Blocking fire escape $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (21) Where prohibited by sign $40.00 $60.00 $80.00 * (22) Handicapped parking $100.00 $200.00 * (23) Overnight during winter (November 16-April 14) $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (24) Overnight on paved street (April 15-November 15) $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (26) Past time limit on sign $10.00 $20.00 $30.00 * (27) In alleys $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (28) For a prohibited purpose $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 *   A. Sale $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 *   B. Washing or repair $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 *   C. Advertising Selling Merchandise $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 *   E. Storage for over 48 hours $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (29) On one-way street $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (30) Too long in passenger loading zone $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (31) In freight loading zone $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (32) In bus or taxicab area $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (33) Meter violation - first violation 
A. $5.00 if paid in person or online by 11:59 p.m. on issue date (for the first five violations per calendar year) 
B. $10.00 if paid in person or online by 11:59 p.m. on issue date (after more than five violations per calendar year) $10.00 $20.00 $30.00 * (34) Parking beyond time allowed on meter (Codified Ordinances Sec. 484.04) $10.00 $20.00 $30.00 * (35) Parking beyond time allowed on meter - for each additional violation at the same meter on the same day $15.00 $30.00 $45.00 * (36) Improper parking $15.00 ~ $30.00 $45.00 * (37) Parking without a permit or failure to display permit $10.00 $20.00 $30.00 * (38) Parking beyond time allowed on meter - 12 or more violations within a one-calendar-year period $75.00 * *Additional Collections Fees are based on Balance Due at time of transfer, and the Collection Fee as listed in the Collection Agency Contract.  
(References to other sections in this schedule are for convenience only, and changes to those referenced provisions shall not affect the validity of this schedule.) Response to the citation must be made by requesting a court appearance within 15 calendar days of the date of issue of the citation or by payment of the citation. In addition, the Parking Violations Bureau may have citations issued for those violations and transfer these matters to the District Court. The District Court shall then establish the civil fine for the offense, up to the maximum allowed by law. The Bureau may extend these time limits in its discretion. At the discretion of the City Treasurer, parking violations not paid within 90 days after the issuance of the notice of violation may be transferred to a collection agency and administrative cost may be added. 
(Ord. 363. Passed 6-7-93. Ord. 369. Passed 8-16-93. Ord. 382. Passed 4-18-94. Ord. 479. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 598. 3-17-03. Ord. 754. Passed 6-4-07. Ord. 891. Passed 11-15-10. Ord. 927. Passed 11-7-11 Ord. 930. Passed 12-19-11 Ord. 935. Passed 3-19-11; Ord. No. 1056 . Passed 8-7-17; Ord. No. 1057 . Passed 8-17-17) 
PART SIX - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE 
Chapter 605 - Non-Discrimination 

605.01 - Intent, purpose and construction. 
(a)  It is the intent of the City of Traverse City that no person be denied the equal protection of the laws; nor shall any person be denied the enjoyment of his or her civil rights or be discriminated against because of their actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation, or gender identity. 
(b)  The prohibitions against discrimination as provided for in this ordinance are intended to supplement state and federal civil rights law prohibiting discrimination in the areas of employment, public accommodations, and housing. Provided, however, this ordinance shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent with First Amendment jurisprudence regarding the freedom of speech and exercise of religion. 
(c)  Nothing in this ordinance shall require preferential treatment of any person or group on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10) 
605.02 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the following meanings: 
(1)  Age. Chronological age. 
(2)  City manager. The City Manager of the City of Traverse City or his or her designee. 
(3)  Contractor. A person who by contract furnishes services, materials or supplies. "Contractor" does not include persons who are merely creditors or debtors of the City, such as those holding the City's notes or bonds or persons whose notes, bonds or stock is held by the City. 
(4)  Discriminate. To make a decision, offer to make a decision or refrain from making a decision based in whole or in part on the actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental disability, family status, sexual orientation, or gender identity, of another person. 
a.  Discrimination based on sex includes sexual harassment, which means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct or communication of a sexual nature when: 
1.  Submission to such conduct or communication is made a term or condition either explicitly or implicitly to obtain employment, public accommodations, or housing. 
2.  Submission to or rejection of such conduct or communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting such individual's employment, public accommodations or housing. 
3.  Such conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's employment, public accommodations or housing, or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive employment, public accommodations, or housing environment. 
b.  Discrimination based on actual or perceived physical or mental limitation includes discrimination because of the use by an individual of adaptive devices or aids. 
(5)  Employer. Any person employing one or more persons. 
(6)  Employment agency. A person who undertakes to procure employees for an employer or procures opportunities for individuals to be employed by an employer. 
(7)  Family status. The state of being in a family. 
(8)  Family. Includes either of the following: 
a.  An individual who is pregnant; or 
b.  Two or more individuals related by blood within three degrees of consanguinity, marriage, adoption, in a foster care relationship or legal custody relationship. 
(9)  Gender identity. The gender with which one identifies regardless of that person's biological makeup. 
(10)  Housing facility. Any dwelling unit or facility used or intended or designed to be used as the home, domicile or residence of one or more persons including, but not limited to, a house, apartment, rooming house, housing cooperative, hotel, motel, tourist home, retirement home or nursing home. 
(11)  Labor organization. An organization of any kind or structure in which employees participate or are members and which exists for the purposes, in whole or part, of dealing with employers concerning the terms and conditions of employment of its participants or members, whether or not such organization is subordinate to or affiliated with a national or international labor organization. 
(12)  Marital status. The state of being married, never married, divorced, or widowed. 
(13)  Perceived. Refers to the perception of the person who acts, and not to the perception of the person for or against whom the action is taken. 
(14)  Physical or mental disability. A determinable physical or mental characteristic resulting from disease, injury, congenital condition of birth, or functional disorder and is unrelated to one's ability to safely perform the work involved in jobs or positions available to such person for hire or promotion; or unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent and maintain property; or unrelated to one's ability to utilize and benefit from the goods, services, activities, privileges and accommodations of a place of public accommodation "Physical or mental disability" does not include any condition caused by the current illegal use of a controlled substance or the use of alcohol liquor by an individual. 
(15)  Place of public accommodation. An educational, governmental, health, entertainment, cultural, recreational, refreshment, transportation, financial institution, business or facility of any kind, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public. 
(16)  Religious organization. An organization, church, group, or body of communicants that are organized not for pecuniary profit that regularly gathers for worship and religious purposes, and includes a religious-based private school that is not organized for pecuniary profit. 
(17)  Sexual orientation. Male or female homosexuality, heterosexuality or bisexuality, whether by orientation or practice. Sexual orientation does not include the physical or sexual attraction to a minor by an adult. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.03 - Discriminatory housing practices. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
(1)  No person shall discriminate in leasing, selling or otherwise make available any housing facilities. 
(2)  No person shall discriminate in the terms, conditions, maintenance or repair in providing any housing facility. 
(3)  No person shall refuse to lend money for the purchase or repair of any real property or insure any real property solely because of the location in the City of such real property. 
(4)  No person shall promote real estate transactions by representing that changes are occurring or will occur in an area with respect to race, religion, national origin, sexual orientation, or gender identity. 
(5)  No person shall place a sign or other display on any real property which indicates that the property is for sale or has been sold when it is not for sale or has not recently been sold. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.04 - Discriminatory public accommodation practices. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, no person shall discriminate in making available full and equal access to all goods, services, activities, privileges, and accommodations of any place of public accommodation. 
(b)  Nothing in this ordinance permits or requires access to any place of public accommodation for the purpose or intent of engaging in criminal conduct. 
(c)  Nothing in this ordinance shall require the construction or provision of unisex, single-user restrooms, changing rooms, locker rooms, or shower facilities nor effect policies regarding the use of restroom, changing rooms, locker rooms, or shower facilities. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.05 - Discriminatory employment practices. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
(1)  No employer shall discriminate in the employment, compensation, work classifications, conditions or terms, promotion or demotion, or termination of employment of any person. 
(2)  No labor organization shall discriminate in limiting membership, conditions of membership, or termination of membership of any person in any labor union or apprenticeship program. 
(3)  No employment agency shall discriminate in the procurement or recruitment of any person for possible employment with an employer. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.06 - Other prohibited practices. 
(a)  No person shall adopt, enforce or employ any policy or requirement, publish, post or broadcast any advertisement, sign or notice which discriminates or indicates discrimination in providing housing, employment or public accommodations. 
(b)  No person shall discriminate in the publication or distribution of advertising material, information or solicitation regarding housing, employment or public accommodations. 
(c)  No agent, broker, labor organization, employment agency or any other intermediary shall discriminate in making referrals, listings or providing information with regard to housing, employment or public accommodations. A report of the conviction of any such person for a violation of this ordinance shall be made to the applicable licensing or regulatory agency for such person or business. 
(d)  No person shall coerce, threaten or retaliate against a person for making a complaint or assisting in the investigation regarding a violation or alleged violation of this ordinance, nor require, request, conspire with, assist or coerce another person to retaliate against a person for making a complaint or assisting in an investigation. 
(e)  No person shall conspire with, assist, coerce or request another person to discriminate in any manner prohibited by this ordinance. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.07 - Non-discrimination by city contractors. 
(a)  All contractors proposing to do business with the City of Traverse City shall satisfy the nondiscrimination administrative policy adopted by the City Manager in accordance with the guidelines of this section. All contractors shall receive approval from the City Manager prior to entering into a contract with the City, unless specifically exempted by administrative policy. 
(b)  A contractor shall, as a condition of being deemed a responsible bidder, at the time of its submission to the City in responding to an invitation for bids or request for proposals, certify in writing that it is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  All City contracts shall provide further that breach of the obligations not to discriminate shall be a material breach of the contract. 
(d)  In addition, the contractor shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the City in obtaining from other sources the work and services to be rendered or performed or the goods or properties to be furnished or delivered to the City under the contract. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.08 - Discriminatory effects. 
    No person shall adopt, enforce or employ any policy or requirement which has the effect of creating unequal opportunities according to actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, family status, sexual orientation, marital status, physical or mental disability, or gender identify, for a person to obtain housing, employment or public accommodation, except for a bona fide business necessity. Such a bona fide business necessity does not arise due to a mere inconvenience or because of suspected or actual objection to such a person by neighbors, customers, or other persons but shall require a demonstration that the policy or requirement is reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the person's business. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.09 - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in this ordinance, the following practices shall not be violations of this ordinance: 
(1)  For a religious organization to restrict the occupancy of any of its housing facilities or accommodations which are operated as a direct part of religious activities to persons of the denomination involved or to restrict employment opportunities for officers, religious instructors and clergy to persons of that denomination. It is also permissible for a religious organization to restrict employment opportunities, educational facilities, housing facilities, and homeless shelters or dormitories that are operated as a direct part of its religious activities to persons who are members of or who conform to the moral tenets of that religious organization. 
(2)  Standards established for the construction, repair, maintenance, improvement, occupancy, lease or sale of one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  For the owner or operator of a housing facility or public accommodation facility, respectively, devoted entirely to the housing and accommodation of individuals of ones sex, to restrict occupancy and use on the basis of sex. 
(4)  To limit occupancy in a housing project or to provide public accommodations or employment privileges or assistance to persons of low income, persons over 55 years of age or disabled persons. 
(5)  To engage in a bona fide effort to establish an affirmative action program to improve opportunities in employment consistent with applicable state and federal law. 
(6)  To discriminate based on a person's age when such discrimination is required by state, federal, or local law. 
(7)  To refuse to enter a contract with an unemancipated minor. 
(8)  To refuse to admit to a place of public accommodation serving alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages. 
(9)  To refuse to admit to a place persons under 18 years of age to a business providing entertainment or selling literature that the operator of said business deems unsuitable for minors. 
(10)  For an educational institution to limit the use of its facilities to those affiliated with such institution. 
(11)  To provide discounts on products or service to students, or on the basis of age. 
(12)  To discriminate in any arrangement for the shared ownership, lease or residency of a dwelling unit. 
(13)  For a governmental institution to restrict any of its facilities or to restrict employment opportunities based on duly-adopted institutional policies that conform to federal and state laws and regulations. 
(14)  To restrict participation in an instructional program, athletic event or on an athletic team on the basis of age, sex, height, or weight consistent with applicable federal and state law. 
(15)  To restrict membership in a private membership organization that is not open to the general public except to the extent that the private membership organization permits members to invite guests on the premises are not exempted as it concerns a member's guest. 
(16)  To the employment of an individual by one's family. 
(17)  To the use of marital status or family status limitations in a health or pension plan consistent with applicable federal and state laws and regulations. 
(18)  To the rental of housing facilities in a building which contains dwelling units for not more than two families living independently of each other if the owner of the building or a member of the owner's family resides in one of the dwelling units, or to the rental of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling by an individual if the lessor or a member of the lessor's family resides in the dwelling. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.10 - Information and investigation. 
(a)  Any person claiming a violation of this ordinance shall file a signed, written complaint with the City Manager or his or her designee setting forth the details, including the names, dates, witnesses and other factual matters relevant to the claim within 180 days of the incident forming the basis of the complaint. 
(b)  No person shall provide false information to any authorized employee investigating a complaint regarding a violation of this ordinance. 
(c)  In the course of the investigation, the City Manager or his or her designee may request a person to produce books, papers, records or other documents which may be relevant to a violation or alleged violation of this ordinance. If said person does not comply with such request, the City Attorney may apply to the Grand Traverse County Circuit Court for an order requiring production of said materials. 
(d)  Within 30 days of a written complaint being filed, the City Manager or his or her designee shall undertake an investigation of any complaint alleging a violation of this chapter not currently recognized or proscribed by Michigan or federal anti-discrimination statutes, and cause all other complaints to be referred to an appropriate state or federal agency for review. After the completion of an investigation, the City Manager or his or her designee shall give written notice of the results of the investigation to the person who filed the complaint and the person accused of the violation. If the investigation establishes that a violation of this ordinance occurred, the City Manager shall either refer the matter to Conflict Resolution Services or a similar mediation service who will attempt to resolve the matter by mediating a conciliation agreement or refer the complaint to the City Attorney for prosecution in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.11 - Conciliation agreements. 
    A conciliation agreement may include agreements whereby persons agree to methods of terminating discrimination or to reverse the effects of past discrimination. Violations of such agreements shall be a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.12 - Injunctions. 
    The City Attorney may commence a civil action to obtain injunctive relief to prevent discrimination prohibited by this ordinance, to reverse the effects of such discrimination or to enforce a conciliation agreement. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.13 - Prosecution. 
(a)  At the discretion of the City Attorney, prosecution for violation of this ordinance may be initiated by complaint of the affected person on the basis of a violation of a conciliation agreement or by the City Manager on the basis of an investigation undertaken by the City Manager. 
(b)  Violation of this ordinance shall be prosecuted by the City Attorney as a municipal civil infraction pursuant to the provisions of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, MCL 600.101, et seq. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.14 - Penalties. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this ordinance is a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, plus all costs of the action. The court may issue and enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce this ordinance. This may include reinstatement, payment of lost wages, hiring and promotion, sale, exchange, lease or sublease of real property, admission to a place of public accommodation, and other relief deemed appropriate. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to limit in any way the remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the City or any person for the prevention or correction of discrimination. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.15 - Repealer. 
    All former ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are repealed. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
605.16 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, that portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 882. Passed 10-4-10.) 
Chapter 608 - Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco Products[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Limitations on local laws penalizing intoxication, drunkenness, or incapacitation, M.C.L.A.  333.6523; Intoxicating liquors generally, M.C.L.A.  436.1 et seq.; Sales on Sundays and municipal election days, M.C.L.A.  436.19e; Youth Tobacco Act, MSA  25.281, et seq.; Food Service Establishment, Michigan Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368 
Cross reference- DUI,  410.03 (UTC 5.15 et seq.); Liquor licenses,  834; Alcoholic beverages in parks,  1064.09; Alcoholic beverages in cemeteries,  1066.03 

608.01 - Open house parties. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by weight. The percentage of alcohol by weight shall be determined in accordance with M.C.L.A. 436.2, as amended. 
(2)  Control means immediate dominion, including a possessory right, but does not include the interest of a landlord, land contract seller or motel or hotel operator or owner, or a similar interest. 
(3)  Minor means a person not legally permitted, by reason of age, to possess alcoholic beverages pursuant to M.C.L.A. 436.33b, as amended. 
(4)  Open house party means a social gathering of persons at a residence or premises, other than the owner thereof, persons with rights of possession thereto or their immediate family members. 
(5)  Residence or premises means a motel room, hotel room, home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit, including the cartilage of the dwelling unit, or a hall, meeting room or other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for social functions and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation. 
(b)  Possession or consumption of alcohol by minors. A person having control of any residence or premises shall not allow an open house party to take place at such residence or premises if any alcoholic beverage is possessed or consumed at such residence or premises by a minor, where the person knew that an alcoholic beverage was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at such residence or premises, and where the person failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage by such minor at such residence or premises. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to legally protected religious observances or to legally protected educational activities. 
(Ord. 228. Passed 6-1-87.) 
608.02 - Sales to minors. 
(a)  Licensees. No licensee of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, and no agent, servant or employee of any such licensee, shall give, furnish or sell any alcoholic beverage to any minor, except upon authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician. 
(b)  Nonlicensees. No person, other than a licensee of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission or any agent, servant or employee of any licensee of the Commission, shall willfully give, furnish or sell any alcoholic beverage to any minor, except upon authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician. 
(c)  Purchase or consumption by minors. No minor shall purchase or consume any alcoholic beverage in the City, except upon the authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.10; Ord. 143. Passed 10-4-82.) 
608.03 - Possessing or using tobacco products by minors. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  Chewing tobacco means loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of tobacco that is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked. 
(2)  Tobacco snuff means shredded, powdered or pulverized tobacco that may be inhaled through the nostrils, chewed or placed against the gums. 
(b)  Possession and use by minors in public prohibited. A person under 18 years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars; or possess or chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff; or possess or use tobacco in any other form on a public highway, street, alley, park or other lands used for public purposes or in a public place of business or amusement. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(c)  Participation in health and risk reduction program; community service. The court may require a person who violates this section to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program, if available. A person who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program under this section is responsible for the costs of participating in the program. In addition, a person who violates this section is subject to the following: 
(1)  For the first violation, the court may order the person to do one of the following: 
a.  Perform not more than 16 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility. 
b.  Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program, as described in this subsection. 
(2)  For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not more than 32 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility. 
(3)  For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not more than 48 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility. 
(d)  Non-interference with rights of parent or guardian. This section does not interfere with the right of a parent or legal guardian in the rearing and management of his or her minor children or wards within the bounds of his or her own private premises. 
(Ord. No. 448. Passed 6-2-97). 
608.04 - Tobacco free areas. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the public health and welfare by regulating tobacco in work sites, public places and certain other areas. 
(b)  Findings. The United States Surgeon General has determined that: (1) secondhand smoke exposure causes disease and premature death in people who do not smoke; (2) children exposed to secondhand smoke are at an increased risk for sudden infant death syndrome, acute respiratory problems, ear infections and asthma attacks; (3) exposure of adults to secondhand smoke has adverse effects on the cardiovascular system and causes heart disease and lung cancer; and (4) there is no risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke. These findings are adopted. It is also found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution. People who are at special risk from secondhand smoke include infants, children, teens, pregnant women, elderly people, nonsmokers with long-term exposure to secondhand smoke, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function. Establishing smoke-free work places is the most effective way to ensure that exposure to secondhand smoke does not occur in the workplace. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) considers e-cigarettes to be a tobacco product and has not approved e-cigarettes as a quit tobacco device. The FDA has reported finding ingredients of e-cigarette cartridges to contain levels of cancer-causing and toxic chemicals. The World Health Organization warns that nicotine exposure, whether through inhalation, ingestion, or skin contact, can be hazardous to the health and safety of children, young people, pregnant women, nursing mothers, people with heart conditions, and the elderly. The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services indicates that e-cigarettes are not a safe alternative to other forms of tobacco. These findings are adopted. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has found that smokeless tobacco causes leukoplakia, a disease causing white patches to form in the user's mouth that can become cancerous; and smokeless tobacco products are known to cause lung, larynx, esophageal, and oral cancer. The National Institutes of Health has recognized the carcinogens NNN and NNK are found in the saliva of those who use chewing tobacco. The Mayo Clinic has recognized that the candy-like appearance or flavors of smokeless tobacco products make them attractive to children and ingestion of these products can cause nicotine poisoning. Effects of nicotine poisoning in children may include nausea, vomiting, weakness, convulsions, unresponsiveness, impaired breathing and death. Saliva spit from smokeless tobacco contains nicotine, as well as infectious bacteria and diseases. Smoking and use of other tobacco products in parks sends a deleterious health message to youth and a public health approach to tobacco addiction should include preventing initiation of use, facilitating cessation, and promoting abstinence from all tobacco products by current users. These findings are adopted. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  Business means any partnership, joint venture, corporation or other for-profit or not-for-profit entity, including but not limited to any retail establishment, where goods are sold or services are delivered. 
(2)  Business vehicle means a car, bus, van or other motorized unit which is owned or leased by an employer for the use of employees. 
(3)  Employee means any person who is employed by any employer, whether for wages, profit, or on a volunteer basis. 
(4)  Employer means any person or business, including any governmental entity that has one or more employees besides the owner of the Business. 
(5)  E-Cigarette means an electronic, noncombustible device that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, battery, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. This term shall include any device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other such product name or descriptor 
(6)  Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all of the space inside. 
(7)  Food service establishment. The term "food service establishment" has the same meaning as it does in the Michigan Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, as amended, and includes bars. When a portion of a facility is licensed as a food service establishment, then only that portion of the facility shall be considered a food service establishment under this ordinance. 
(8)  Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to any business, retail store, health facility, manufacturing facility, convention hall, meeting hall, sports arena, theater, gymnasium, health spa, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink, bowling alley, laundromat, professional office, school, or public building. 
(9)  Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or related substance or product. 
(10)  Tobacco product means a preparation of tobacco to be inhaled, chewed, sucked or placed in a person's mouth, including e-cigarettes. 
(11)  Worksite means any enclosed area under the control of an employer which employees frequent during the course of their employment, including but not limited to: work areas, common areas, lounges, restrooms, lobbies, conference rooms, class rooms, cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a "worksite" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility. 
(d)  Prohibitions. Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed areas of all of the following places and sites: 
(1)  Worksites; 
(2)  Public places; 
(3)  Buses, taxicabs, and other means of public transit and including bus shelters; 
(4)  Business vehicles that are occupied by more than one person; 
(5)  Semi-private rooms of health facilities; 
(6)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; 
(7)  Public places where bingo games are held; 
(8)  Public places in hotels and motels, plus at least 80 percent of the rooms rented to guests at each hotel and motel; and 
(9)  Any facility, site or vehicle where the owner, operator, or manager of such facility, site or vehicle has prohibited smoking and has posted that prohibition prominently in writing or has given actual notice of the prohibition to the person who is smoking or who is intending to smoke. 
(e)  Responsibility. Both the person who is smoking and the employer, owner, operator, or manager of the area in which smoking is prohibited is responsible for violations of this Ordinance. 
(f)  Outside smoking. Smoking is prohibited within 15 feet of entrances, open windows and ventilation systems of all places where smoking is otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance. This prohibition shall not apply to persons who pass by such an entrance, open window, or ventilation system while traveling on a public street or sidewalk. 
(g)  Exemptions. The following areas are exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance: 
(1)  Food service establishments; 
(2)  Private residences and private vehicles, except when used or in connection with the child care, health care facility or adult day care facility; 
(3)  Tobacco specialty stores. 
(h)  Non-retaliation. It shall be unlawful for any person or employer to discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because that person seeks enforcement of this Ordinance. 
(i)  Other laws. This Ordinance shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted or prohibited by other applicable laws or public health regulations. 
(j)  Penalty. A person found to violate this Ordinance shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction subject to the sanctions as provided in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. 744. Passed 5-7-07; Ord. 1061 . Passed 11-20-17; Ord. 1062 . Passed 1-2-18) 
608.05 - Possession or consumption of open alcohol on city-owned property. 
    The City Manager may, by Executive Order, ban the possession or consumption of open alcohol on city-owned property. Any such Executive Orders issued prior to enactment of this ordinance shall constitute a ban under this ordinance. A ban of the possession or consumption of open alcohol shall be posted on signs at such points within or at the perimeter where the ban is in effect. A person who violates this section shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 or imprisoned by not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. 
(Ord. 755. Passed 6-18-07.) 
608.06 - Restricting smoking and use of tobacco and marihuana products in city parks. 
(a)  Definitions. The definitions contained in Section 608.04(c) shall apply to this subsection. 
(b)  Smoking and use of tobacco and marihuana products prohibited in public parks. A person shall not smoke or use tobacco and marihuana products in any park or designated beach area owned or operated by the City. All parks and designated beach areas owned or operated by the City shall be so posted. 
(c)  Violations and penalties. A person who violates or fails to comply with this section shall be subject to any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Being asked to stop smoking or using tobacco and marihuana products; 
(2)  Being asked to leave the premises; 
(3)  Responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in Section 202.99 of this Code. 
(Ord. 848, Passed 10-19-09; Ord. 1061 , Passed 11-20-17; Ord. 1092 , Passed 5-20-19) 
608.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 610 - Animals[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Animal pounds, M.C.L.A.  123.301 et seq., 750.70; Animal diseases generally, M.C.L.A.  287.708 et seq.; Animals generally, M.C.L.A.  750.49, 752.21 et seq. 
Cross reference- Pet shops,  848; Injuring animals,  1064.03; Animals in parks,  1064.11; Animals in cemeteries,  1066.03 

610.01 - Prohibited animals. 
(a)  Annoying animals. No person shall harbor or keep any animal or bird which causes annoyance or disturbance in a neighborhood, by making sounds common to its species or otherwise, or which endangers the safety of any person or property. 
(b)  Fowl; bees. No person shall keep, harbor, raise or hatch domestic fowl, pigeons or bees in the City. 
(c)  Livestock. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall keep within the City any cattle, cow, horse, sheep, swine, goat, mule, donkey, pony or other livestock. 
(d)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the prohibitions of this section. 
(1)  Animals may be kept in a municipal zoo, 
(2)  Honeybees may be kept according to the following conditions: 
a.  A maximum of two hives may be kept per parcel. 
b.  A flyway barrier at least six feet in height shall shield any part of a property line that is within 25 feet of a hive. The flyway barrier shall consist of a solid wall, solid fence, dense vegetation or a combination thereof. 
c.  A constant supply of water shall be provided for all hives. 
d.  Hive enclosures shall be located in the rear or side yard at least 25 feet from any dwelling on a neighboring parcel and at least ten feet from any sidewalk, roadway or alley. 
e.  No honeybees shall be kept on parcels with more than one dwelling. 
f.  The City Clerk's Office shall notify the abutting property owners of the license application in writing; and shall approve the license one week after providing such notification if all conditions of this section have been met. 
g.  The owner or tenant registers and obtains a revocable honeybee license from the City Clerk's Office annually. 
h.  A honeybee license may be revoked if the use allowed per the license becomes a public nuisance as defined by Traverse City Code of Ordinances Section 660.01, Public Nuisance Defined, and/or ceases to comply with the conditions of this section. 
(3)  Chickens may be kept according to the following conditions: 
a.  A maximum of four hens may be kept per parcel. Roosters are prohibited. 
b.  Slaughtering chickens outdoors is prohibited. 
c.  Chickens shall be provided, and remain within, a fully enclosed shelter with an optional covered fenced enclosure in the rear yard. 
d.  Enclosures shall be located at least 25 feet from any dwelling on a neighboring parcel. 
e.  No chicken shall be kept on parcels with more than one dwelling. 
(4)  Livestock may be kept with the advanced written permission of the City Manager which shall be given if the following are demonstrated: 
a.  The animals are kept securely and humanely; 
b.  The animals are not kept within 100 feet of any residence; 
c.  All laws and ordinances regarding sanitation of the premises or buildings where the animals are kept are complied with; 
d.  There is no adverse effect upon adjoining public or private property; 
e.  The animals are not kept for more than thirty days within a twelve-month period; and 
f.  It is otherwise legal to keep such animals. 
(e)  Penalty. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 7.01; Ord. 441. Passed 7-1-96; Ord. 485. Passed 1-18-00. Ord. 845. Passed 9-8-09. Ord. 955. Passed 12-3-12) 
610.02 - Confinement to premises. 
    The owner or custodian of any animal or bird shall keep such animal or bird confined to his or her own premises if necessary to avoid annoyance or disturbance in the neighborhood. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 7.02. Ord. 486. Passed 1-18-00.) 
610.03 - Access to public ways and places. 
    No person shall tie, stake or fasten any animal in such a manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, alley or public place. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 7.022. Ord. 487. Passed 1-18-00.) 
610.04 - Removal of defecation. 
    No owner or person having custody of any dog or other animal shall permit such dog or other animal to defecate on any school grounds, public street, alley, sidewalk, tree lawn, park, other public grounds or private property in the City, other than on the premises of such owner or person, unless such defecation is removed immediately. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 185. Passed 10-7-85. Ord. 417. Passed 5-15-95.) 
610.05 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1067 , passed 2-20-18, repealed  610.05 in its entirety. Former  610.05 pertained to dogs and derived from the 1976 Code Sec 7.03; Ord. 186, passed October 7, 1985; Ord. 187, passed December 16, 1985; and Ord. 945, passed June 4, 2012. 
610.06 - Sanitation of premises. 
    The owner or custodian of any animal or bird shall maintain the premises wherein such animal or bird is kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rodents, vermin and disagreeable odors. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 7.04. Ord. 418. Passed 5-15-95.) 
610.07 - Cruelty; poisoning. 
    No person shall be cruel to any animal or bird. No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed public or private place where it may endanger any animal. 
(1976 Code Sec. 7.05) 
610.08 - Burning of animal matter. 
    No person shall burn any feathers, hides or other animal matter in the City unless the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The activity is accessory to either a veterinary clinic, laboratory research facility or animal control pound or shelter. 
(2)  Emissions into the air from the activity do not exceed State or Federal requirements. 
(3)  The odor emitted shall not be noxious or considered a nuisance and shall not be harmful to the environment or to residents. 
    A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 7.07; Ord. 210. Passed 9-2-86. Ord. 419. Passed 5-15-95.) 
610.09 - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  Prohibited locations. No person shall deposit, place or throw any dead or fatally sick or injured animal, or part thereof, on any public or private place, in the City dump, into any reservoir, or into any stream, lake, pond, sewer, well or other body of water, or onto the banks thereof. 
(b)  Burial. No person shall bury any dead, fatally sick or injured animal, or part thereof, in the City, except that the owner or occupant of any unplatted property may bury thereon any dead animal owned by him or her, which animal died on such premises, after having obtained a written permit to do so from the Health Department. Such burial shall be made at a distance of not less than 200 yards from any residence or well, and the carcass shall be placed underground and well covered with at least four feet of earth from the surface of the ground to the upper part of the carcass. 
(c)  Immediate disposal required. No person shall fail to immediately dispose of any dead animal found upon property under his or her possession or control, either in the manner specified in this section, by disposal at the City dump or by other suitable means outside the City. 
(d)  Transporting. No person shall carry or convey any dead animal through or upon any street, alley or public place unless the same is so covered that no part of it is exposed to view and no odors can emanate therefrom. 
(e)  Civil infraction. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 7.08 Ord. 420. Passed 5-15-95.) 
610.10 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A. 764.9c(2); M.S.A. 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 349. Passed 5-17-93.) 
610.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 614 - Controlled Substances[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- All language contained in all capitalized letters as well as certain additional language contained in section 614.01 was enacted by the voters of the City of Traverse City at the City General Election held on November 8, 2005. For sections that are invalid; see cross reference - City Attorney W. Peter Doren's November 14, 2005, legal opinion to the Chief of Police regarding the sections of this ordinance which were voted on by the electorate on November 8, 2005. 
State Law reference- Power to expend funds for prevention of substance abuse, M.C.L.A.  333.6131; Drugs and medicine generally, M.C.L.A.  333.17701 et seq.; Marihuana, M.C.L.A.  333.7212, 333.7401 et seq.; Intoxicating liquors generally, M.C.L.A.  436.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- DUI,  410.03(UTC 5.15 et seq.); Intoxicating liquors generally, Ch. 608 

614.01 - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, as used in this section: 
(1)  FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, "AUTHORIZED CAREGIVER" SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO INCLUDE ANY INDIVIDUAL WHO IS CHARGED WITH OR ASSUMES THE DUTY TO PROVIDE FOR THE IMPORTANT MEDICAL NEEDS OF A PATIENT USING A DEVICE FOR INGESTING, INHALING, OR OTHERWISE INTRODUCING INTO THE BODY MARIJUANA UNDER THE DIRECTION, RECOMMENDATION, SUPERVISION OR GUIDANCE OF A PHYSICIAN LICENSED UNDER STATE LAW. 
(2)  Cocaine spoon means a spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is to hold or administer cocaine, and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical, lawful uses of a spoon. A cocaine spoon may or may not be merchandised on a chain and may or may not be labeled as a cocaine spoon or coke spoon. 
(3)  Controlled substance shall be as defined in Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended (M.C.L.A. 333.7104). 
(4)  Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing or injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance, including: 
a.  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or cannabis, or from which a controlled substance or cannabis can be derived; 
b.  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance or cannabis; 
c.  Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or cannabis; 
d.  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of, a controlled substance or cannabis; 
e.  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring a controlled substance or cannabis; 
f.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting a controlled substance or cannabis; 
g.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
h.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding a controlled substance or cannabis; 
i.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of a controlled substance or cannabis; 
j.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing a controlled substance or cannabis; and 
k.  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls; 
2.  Water pipes; 
3.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
4.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
5.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
6.  Chamber pipes; 
7.  Carburetor pipes; 
8.  Electric pipes; 
9.  Air-driven pipes; 
10.  Chillums; 
11.  Bongs; and 
12.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(5)  Marijuana or hashish pipe means a pipe characterized by a bowl which is so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is the smoking of marijuana or hashish, rather than the lawful smoking of tobacco, and which may or may not be equipped with a screen. 
(6)  Person means an individual, corporation, government, governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association. 
(b)  Determinations. In determining whether or not an object is a cocaine spoon, marijuana or hashish pipe or drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled substance; 
(3)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this section; 
(4)  The proximity of the object to a controlled substance; 
(5)  The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the object; 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this section, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(7)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
(8)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(9)  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(11)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(12)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and 
(13)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(c)  Prohibitions; exceptions. No person shall sell, offer for sale, display, furnish, supply or give away any cocaine spoon, marijuana pipe, hashish pipe or drug paraphernalia. This subsection shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists or embalmers in the normal lawful course of their respective businesses or professions; to common carriers or warehousers or their employees engaged in the lawful transportation of such paraphernalia; to public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their official duties; or to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. (Ord. 159. Passed 12-19-83. Ord. 691. Passed 11-8-05.) 
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL NOT APPLY TO AUTHORIZED CAREGIVERS WHO DELIVER DEVICES FOR MEDICAL USE BY QUALIFIED PATIENTS. 
614.02 - Medical use. 
    ALLOCATION OF LAW ENFORCEMENT PRIORITIES OF THE CITY OF TRAVERSE CITY SHALL MAKE THE USE, DELIVERY OR POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA BY A PATIENT UNDER THE DIRECTION, RECOMMENDATION, SUPERVISION OR GUIDANCE OF A PHYSICIAN LICENSED UNDER STATE LAW, AND/OR THE MEDICAL ASSISTANCE OF SUCH PATIENTS BY AUTHORIZED CAREGIVERS, THE LOWEST LAW ENFORCEMENT PRIORITY OF THE CITY. 
(Ord. 691. Passed 11-8-05.) 
614.03 - Severability of amendments. 
    IN THE EVENT ONE OF THE AMENDMENTS, OR SUBSECTION THEROF, TO THE EXISTING CITY CODE OF ORDINANCES IS HELD TO BE INVALID OR UNENFORCEABLE BY A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION OR ANY OTHER SUCH LEGAL AUTHORITY, THEN THE REMAINING SECTION OR SUBSECTIONS SHALL REMAIN IN SUCH FULL FORCE AND EFFECT AS PERMITTED BY LAW. 
(Ord. 691. Passed 11-8-05.) 
614.99 - Penalty. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 159. Passed 12-19-83.) 
Chapter 652 - Noise Control[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Disorderly persons, M.C.L.A  750.167; Disturbing meetings, M.C.L.A  750.169; 750.170 
Cross reference- Noise from watercraft,  1062.04(f), (g); Muffler noise, M.C.L.A  257.707(a)-(e) 

652.01 - Findings; application of chapter. 
    Excessive sound and vibration are a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety and quality of life, and a substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound and vibration may be substantially abated. The people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize their health, welfare or safety or degrade the quality of life. The damage and discomfort caused to the people arises both from stationary and from non-stationary sound and vibration and this chapter shall apply to both. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00.) 
652.02 - Definitions. 
    All terminology used in this chapter and not defined in this section shall be in conformity with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. In addition, as used in this chapter: 
(1)  Commercial area means land primarily being used as office, governmental, retail, or other commercial type uses. 
(2)  Decibel (dB) means a unit of measuring the volume of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm of the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
(3)  Industrial area means land primarily being used as a manufacturing or industrial site, including airports. 
(4)  Multi-family area means land primarily being used for structures housing three or more families. If a multiple family use occurs as a mixed use with commercial uses, the primary use of the property will be determined by the ground floor. 
(5)  Noise control officer means the Chief of Police and his or her agents who have lead responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(6)  Noise disturbance means any sound which either exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels of this chapter or which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or endangers or injures personal or real property. 
(7)  Noise sensitive zone means areas in the City which contain noise sensitive activities, such as schools, libraries, churches, hospitals and nursing homes, as designated by resolution of the City Commission. 
(8)  Pure tone means a single or compact range of frequency that may be perceived as a whine, hum, squeal, or buzz. The measured sound levels must not fluctuate by more than plus or minus 3 dB. Such sound sources include, but are not limited to: heating, ventilating or air-conditioning units; refrigeration units; and transformers. 
(9)  Real property boundary means the imaginary line which represents the legal limits of property (including an apartment, condominium, room, or other dwelling unit) owned, leased, or otherwise occupied by a person, business, corporation or institution. In cases involving sound from an activity on a public street or other public right of way, the "real property boundary" shall be the nearest boundary of the public right-of-way. 
(10)  Residential area means land primarily being used as a one or two family dwelling and located adjacent to or near other such residentially used land. 
(11)  Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels and that meets the standards of ANSI S-14 1983 or its successor. 
(12)  Weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00. Ord. 582. Passed 10-21-02.) 
652.03 - Authority of noise control officer. 
(a)  Powers. This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Noise Control Officer. In order to implement and enforce this chapter, and for the general purpose of noise abatement and control, the Noise Control Officer shall have, in addition to any other authority vested in him or her, the power to: 
(1)  Conduct or cause to be conducted research, monitoring and other studies related to sound and vibration; and 
(2)  Upon presentation of proper credentials, enter and inspect any private property or place and inspect any report or record at any reasonable time when granted permission by the owner or by some other person with apparent authority to act for the owner. When permission is refused or cannot be obtained, a search warrant may be obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction upon a showing of probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter may exist. Such inspection may include the administration of any necessary tests. 
(3)  Promulgate rules and procedures to establish techniques for measuring noise, and to provide for clarification, interpretation, and implementation of this chapter; and 
(4)  Review at least every three (3) years the provisions of this chapter and recommend revisions consistent with technology to reduce noise, or to address new sound sources within the City. 
(b)  Duties. In order to implement and enforce this chapter effectively, the Noise Control Officer shall, within a reasonable time after the effective date of this chapter: 
(1)  Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter; 
(2)  Delegate functions, where appropriate, under this chapter, to personnel within the Police Department and to other agencies or departments, subject to the approval of the City Manager; and 
(3)  Prepare recommendations, to be approved by the City Commission, for the designation of noise sensitive zones. 
(c)  Enforcement. The administration and enforcement of noise control shall be controlled by the following standards: 
(1)  The primary means of detection of a noise disturbance shall be by means of the Noise Control Officer's and other properly delegated enforcement officials' ordinary auditory senses of hearing not enhanced by any mechanical device, such as a microphone or hearing aid. 
(2)  An enforcing officer or other witness need not determine the particular words or phrases being produced or the name of any song or artist producing the sound. 
(3)  The detection of any rhythmic base or reverberating type of sound is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound which may constitute a noise disturbance. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00.) 
652.04 - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall unreasonably make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any noise disturbance. 
(b)  Radios, musical instruments and similar devices. No person shall operate or play, or permit the operation or playing of, any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create a noise disturbance on public property or streets, across a real property boundary, or within a noise sensitive zone. If such a device is plainly audible on the property of another or within a building other than that within which the device is located, and if a complaint is made to the Noise Control Officer regarding annoyance or disturbance as a result of such device, this shall serve as prima-facie evidence of a violation. 
(2)  Create a noise disturbance when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right of way, public space or space open to the general public, or in a boat on public waters. If such a device is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction, between the hours of 10;00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or 100 feet in any direction between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., this shall serve as prima facie evidence of a violation. 
(c)  Loudspeakers. No person shall use or operate for any noncommercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system or similar device between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day so that the sound there from creates a noise disturbance across a residential area or multi-family area boundary or within a noise sensitive zone. No person shall use or operate for any commercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system or similar device so that the sound there from creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone, or between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day on a public right of way or public space. 
(d)  Sound amplifiers. No person shall operate any sound amplifying device for the purpose of advertising announcing an event, or attracting the attention of the public. However, a school, governmental unit, or bona fide nonprofit organization may secure a permit from the Noise Control Officer to use such a device. No permit will be granted for such use on a Sunday or at any other time or duration or under any other conditions which, in the opinion of the Noise Control Officer will constitute a nuisance. 
(e)  Heavy equipment. Except for work on essential services, no person shall use any pile driver, shovel, hammer, derrick, hoist, tractor, roller or other construction apparatus between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, within 600 feet of a residential area, multi-family area, or noise sensitive zone. 
(f)  Loading and unloading. No person shall load, unload, open, close or otherwise handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage trucks, garbage cans or similar objects between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across the boundary of a residential area or multi-family area, or within a noise sensitive zone. 
(g)  Stationary non-emergency signaling devices. No person shall permit the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device intended primarily for nonemergency purposes. Such devices, when used in conjunction with places of religious worship, shall be exempt from this subsection. 
(h)  Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use. No person on private property shall create a continuous sound which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land category in the following table when measured at or within the property boundary of the receiving land which source of sound shall be deemed prima-facie to be a noise disturbance. "Continuous sound" means any sound having a duration of one second or more. For any source of sound which emits a pure tone, the maximum sound level limits set forth in the following table shall be reduced by five dBA. 
MAXIMUM SOUND LEVELS TABLE Receiving Land Category Sound Level Limit (dBA) A-weighted Time Residential area 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 60 Multi-Family area 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 65 Commercial area 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 65 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 70 Industrial area 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 70 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 75 Noise sensitive areas 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. Established by 
Resolution Noise sensitive areas 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Established by 
Resolution  
(i)  Impulsive Sound. Impulse sounds may exceed the permissible limits in the above Table by ten decibels if they occur less than ten times in any hour between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., or less than four times in any hour between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. If any impulsive sound exceeds these frequencies, then the permissible limits in the Table apply. "Impulsive sound" means any sound having a duration of less than one second. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00. Ord. 581. 10-21-02.)) 
652.05 - Exceptions and variances. 
(a)  Emergencies. This chapter shall not apply to creating sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or to creating sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(b)  Lawn maintenance equipment. Customary lawn maintenance equipment for residential use, such as lawn mowers, leaf blowers and chain saws, from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., if in good working order and if used only as needed, may exceed the maximum sound levels established above. 
(c)  Residential snow removal. Snowblowers for residential use if in good working order and if used only as needed may exceed the maximum sound levels established above. 
(d)  Commercial snow removal. Snow removal from commercial or industrial property by any internal combustion device is permitted at all times if the snow removal equipment has a properly functioning muffler. However, commercial or industrial property within 600 feet of a residential area or multi-family area shall not have snow removal under taken by commercial equipment in excess of 15,000GVW prior to 6:00 a.m., unless permission is granted by the owners of that residential or multi-family area. 
(e)  Municipal, school district and hospital equipment. This chapter shall not apply to sound made by municipal street and sidewalk maintenance equipment or snow removal equipment used by the City, a school district, a hospital or their agents. 
(f)  Special variances. 
(1)  The Noise Control Officer may, consistent with this section, grant special variances which may be requested. 
(2)  Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this section shall file an application with the Noise Control Officer. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the special variance is sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community or on other persons. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by the allowance of the special variance may file a statement to that effect with the Noise Control Officer containing any information to support his or her claim. If the Noise Control Officer finds that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an application, a public hearing may be held. 
(3)  In determining whether to grant or deny an application, the Noise Control Officer shall balance the hardships of the applicant, the community and other persons of not granting the special variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected and any other adverse impacts of granting the special variance. Applicants for a special variance and persons contesting the special variance may be required to submit any information the Noise Control Officer may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the Noise Control Officer shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the special variance. 
(4)  Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including the time limit on the permitted activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to the provisions of this chapter regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special variance was granted. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00. Ord. 583. Passed 10-21-02.) 
652.05.1 - Continuous and impulsive sound levels threatening health and welfare; orders to abate. 
(a)  The Noise Control Officer shall order an immediate halt to any sound which exposes any person, except those excluded pursuant to subsection (b) hereof, to continuous sound levels or to impulsive sound levels which endanger or injures a person's health or safety Following the issuance of such an order, the Noise Control Officer may remove or modify the source of the noise. 
(b)  No order pursuant to subsection (a) hereof shall be issued if the only person exposed to dangerous sound levels is exposed as a result of trespass, invitation upon private property by persons causing or permitting the sound or employment met by the person or by a contractor of the person causing or permitting the sound. 
(c)  Any person subject to an order issued pursuant to subsection (a) hereof shall comply with such order until the sound is brought into compliance with the order, as determined by the Noise Control Officer, or until a judicial order has suspended the Noise Control Officer's order. No person shall violate an order issued pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00.) 
652.07 - Civil actions. 
    Any person aggrieved by a violation of this chapter may commence a civil action on his or her own behalf against any person who is alleged to be in violation of Section 652.04. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy there from, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other law. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00.) 
652.08 - Tampering with measuring devices. 
    No person shall damage, interfere with or tamper with any sound measuring device used to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00.) 
652.09 - Retaliation. 
    If there is any evidence of retaliation by any offender against any complainant or witness, such evidence shall be communicated to the District Court. When sentencing any violator, the District Court shall first examine the evidence of retaliation, and if such is shown, shall consider such acts and sentence the violator accordingly. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00.) 
652.10 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCL 764.9c(2); MSA 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00.) 
652.99 - Penalty. 
(a)  A person found in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a civil infraction and shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(b)  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(c)  The minimum fine shall be doubled for a second violation and tripled for a third violation within any 90-day period. 
(Ord. 505. Passed 8-7-00.) 
Chapter 656 - Offenses Relating to Property[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Destruction of library or books,  139; Damage claims,  159 
State Law reference- Malicious destruction of property by minors, M.C.L.A.  600.2913; Theft generally, M.C.L.A.  750.356 et seq.; Malicious destruction of property, M.C.L.A.  750.377a, 750.377b; Malicious destruction of trees and shrubs, M.C.L.A.  750.382,  1028.08(a), (c) 
Cross reference- Destruction of parking meters,  484.05; Destruction of public buildings and places of worship,  668.13; Destruction of sewerage system property,  1042.14; Destruction of water equipment,  1044.14; Property destruction in parks,  1064.03; Property destruction in cemeteries,  1066.02 

656.01 - Property destruction. 
    No person shall maliciously destroy, deface or injure any public property or private property that is not his or her own. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.03) 
656.02 - Damaged buildings. 
(a)  Removal or repair. It is unlawful to fail to remove, demolish, or repair any building that is a Damaged Building as defined in this section. 
(b)  Types of damaged buildings. A damaged building shall include, but not be limited to, buildings that have been substantially damaged by vandalism, weather, fire, water, insects, or decay. Visible unfinished construction, remodeling or repair for a period longer than the construction code permit issued for the work, or three months, if conducted without such a permit, shall be deemed to be a damaged building under this ordinance. 
(c)  Notice. Notice of a violation shall be given in writing to the owner and occupant, if any, of the building with a demand to remove, demolish, or repair within a specific time as given in the notice. Property tax records shall be deemed conclusive proof of ownership for purposes of notice. 
(Ord. 702. Passed 6-5-06.) 
656.99 - Penalty. 
(a)  Civil infraction. A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction subject to the sanctions of this Code. 
(b)  City costs. Any sanction, fine, and surcharge imposed for violation of this chapter, and the cost of the City in correcting the violation, shall be collected as a debt from the owner maintaining or permitting the violation and shall be assessed against the real estate involved as are other special taxes. City costs shall include, but not be limited to, actual attorney fees and expense of removal, demolition, or repair by the City of the damaged building. Upon the recording of the amount of such costs in the City Treasurer's office, and the City Treasurer's Affidavit of such recording being filed with the Register of Deed's office, such costs shall become a lien on the real estate. 
(Ord. 682. Passed 9-06-05.) 
Chapter 660 - Public Nuisances[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Constitution reference- Health and sanitation generally, Mich. Const. Art. 4,  51 
State Law reference- State Housing Law, M.C.L.A.  125.401 et seq.; Nuisance abatement; damages and expenses, M.C.L.A.  600.2940; Nuisances generally, M.C.L.A.  600.3801 et seq.; Health and sanitation generally, M.C.L.A.  750.466 et seq. 
Cross reference- Animal defecation,  610.04; Garbage and rubbish on public property,  668.03; Sewers as nuisances,  1042.14; Zoning Code violations as nuisances,  1252.05; State Housing Law, Ch. 1484 

660.01 - Public nuisance defined. 
    "Public nuisance," as used in this chapter, means a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which continues for such a length of time as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; 
(3)  Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or 
(4)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way. 
(1976 Code Sec. 6.111) 
660.02 - General prohibitions. 
    No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance in the City or within its police jurisdiction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 6.10) 
660.03 - Public health nuisances. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of Section 660.01: 
(1)  All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public; 
(2)  Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed, or which may constitute a fire hazard; 
(3)  All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply; 
(4)  Garbage cans which are not fly-tight; 
(5)  The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust in the City in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property; 
(6)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, river, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances, or the obstruction of any watercourse, drainage ditch or ravine; 
(7)  Any use of any property, substance or thing in the City emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisesome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odor, effluvia or stench extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons and which annoys, discomforts, injures or inconveniences the health of any appreciable number of persons in the City; and 
(8)  All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use. 
660.04 - Morals and decency nuisances. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of Section 660.01: 
(1)  All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling; 
(2)  All gambling devices and slot machines; 
(3)  All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by these Codified Ordinances or state law; 
(4)  Any place or premises in the City where City ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated; and 
(5)  Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the state or the ordinances of the City. 
(1976 Code Sec. 6.113) 
660.05 - Peace and safety nuisances. 
    The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the definition of Section 660.01: 
(1)  All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport to be or which may be mistaken as official traffic control devices, placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing; 
(2)  All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk; 
(3)  All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use, or as to be an invitation to children and endanger the lives of such children, or which, because of their condition, have become a fire hazard; 
(4)  All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than fifteen feet above the surface of the street or ground; 
(5)  All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the City, or obstructions which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished; 
(6)  Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire hazard or which will impair extinguishing a fire; 
(7)  Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk, which use causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the street or sidewalk; and 
(8)  Any nuisance described in the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
660.06 - Abatement. 
(a)  Inspection of premises. Whenever a complaint is made that a public nuisance exists or has existed in the City, the Chief of Police, the Building Inspector or some other City official whom the City Manager designates, or a representative of any of such persons, shall forthwith inspect or cause to be inspected the premises and shall make a written report of findings. Whenever practical, the inspection officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises and shall file the same in the office of the City Clerk. 
(b)  Summary abatement. 
(1)  Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is great and immediate danger or emergency to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the City Manager may direct that a notice be served on the owner or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance, and that a copy of the notice be posted on the premises. If one or more of the owner, occupant or person responsible for the nuisance condition cannot be found, the notice shall be published once in a local newspaper. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such nuisance within a definite time and shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the City will cause the same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the same, as the case may be. By recording the amount of such costs in the City Manager's office, it shall become a lien on the real estate. Whenever possible, except for emergency conditions, the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance shall be given notice to abate such nuisance within five days. 
(2)  Abatement by city. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the Chief of Police, the Building Inspector or some other City official whom the City Manager designates, or a representative of any of such persons, shall cause the abatement or removal of such nuisance. (Adopting Ordinance) 
(c)  Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance exists on private premises, but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, such officer shall file a written report of findings with the City Manager, who shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the name of the City upon motion or resolution by the City Commission declaring a nuisance to exist. 
(d)  Costs; liens. In addition to any other penalty imposed for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the City shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as other special taxes. By recording the amount of such costs in the City Treasurer's office, it shall become a lien on the real estate. 
(1976 Code Sec. 6.12) 
Chapter 664 - Railroads[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Railroads generally, M.C.L.A.  750.511 et seq. 
Cross reference- Excavations by railroads,  1024.02; Zoning provisions,  1299.02 

664.01 - Unlawful uses of railroad vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall use, occupy or park a vehicle designed to travel on rails as an office, dwelling unit or similar use in any district in the City, except as permitted in this section. 
(b)  A railroad company licensed to operate as a public carrier in the State shall be permitted to store any vehicle designed to travel on wheels and used in transporting goods, materials, or passengers by rail, or used as an accessory thereto, in an I District except as follows: 
(1)  A vehicle designed to travel on wheels by rail and intended to be used in the future for transporting goods, materials, or persons shall not be stored more than 45 days in any year. 
(2)  A vehicle designed to travel on wheels by rail and intended to be scrapped or salvaged shall not be stored more than 30 days in any year. 
(c)  A railroad company may park other vehicles designed for rail travel within any district for the purpose of transporting, loading and unloading goods or materials assigned to shipment, or transporting, loading, and unloading passengers. 
(d)  In the event any provision of this section is held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction or any other such legal authority, then the remaining subsections shall remain in such full force and effect as permitted by law. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.15. Ord. 899. Passed 12-20-10.) 
664.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 668 - Safety, Sanitation and Health[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Constitution reference- Health and sanitation generally, Mich. Const. Art. 4,  51 
State Law reference- Health and sanitation in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3, 117.4i; Health and sanitation generally, M.C.L.A.  750.466 et seq. Public safety generally, M.C.L.A.  750.493 et seq. 
Cross reference- Safety nuisances,  660.05; Sanitation in animal premises,  610.06; Sanitation in pet shops,  848.03; Sanitation in rental dwellings,  1482.15 

668.01 - Incorporation of state laws. 
    The statutes of the state relating to public health, sanitation, prevention of disease and the spreading thereof, and the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health, and all amendments or additions thereto, are hereby expressly incorporated into and made a part of this chapter. No person shall violate any such law, rule or regulation. 
(1976 Code Sec. 6.01) 
668.02 - Undesirable accumulations on private property; junk; motor vehicles; building materials. 
    No owner or person having possession of land shall permit the accumulation thereon of stumps, brush, debris, junk or dismantled motor vehicles or parts thereof, or the storage of new or used motor vehicles, except as otherwise provided in these Codified Ordinances. No building materials of any kind shall be stored on any private property for more than six months unless a building permit has been issued under the Building and Housing Code, except as otherwise provided in these Codified Ordinances. A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.01. Ord. 402. Passed 11-21-94.) 
668.03 - Littering and deposits on public property; open burning. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall place or throw any goods, wares, merchandise, machinery, junk, wood, rubbish, manure, leaves, grass, sawdust, ashes, garbage or refuse upon any public street, alley or sidewalk, except that leaves may be placed at the curbline of streets for collection by City forces during a period designated by the City Manager for such collection. 
(b)  Removal. Any person having the care, either as owner or occupant, of any premises bordered by a public street, alley or graded or paved sidewalk shall remove any of the materials described in subsection (a) hereof from that portion of the public street or alley abutting the premises and bordered by the nearest limit of the traveled portion of the street or alley. 
(c)  Building materials; permits. No person shall use any street or alley for the temporary storage of building material, equipment, facilities or merchandise, or for barricading or protecting building operations, without first obtaining a permit therefor. No building material, equipment or facilities so stored shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with the normal drainage of the street or alley. 
(d)  Burning rubbish. No person shall burn leaves, grass, wood, rubbish or other matter on any street, alley or public right-of-way. 
(e)  Penalty. A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 335. Passed 8-17-92. Ord. 656. Passed 12-16-04.) 
668.04 - Smoke. 
(a)  Emission of dense smoke prohibited. No person shall cause or allow the emission of dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof into the atmosphere in the City from any building, premises or machine. 
(b)  Exceptions. The emission of dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof for 20 minutes in any hour, once every 24 hours, when a new fire is being kindled in or under a cold boiler, cold furnace or other device shall not constitute a violation of this section. The emission of dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof for a period aggregating six minutes in any one hour and not exceeding two minutes of continuous emission of such dense smoke and/or ingredients thereof shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
(c)  Measurement of density. For the purpose of determining, by comparison, the degree of darkness of smoke and/or the ingredients thereof, a color scale measurement is adopted, which measurement shall determine the density prohibited hereby. One thickness of grey glass of sufficient capacity to cut off 60 percent of light from a flame having the lighting power of 16 candles shall be taken as the basis of the scale, and four thicknesses of such glass shall be known and designated as the No. 1 scale. The standard smoke tester or umbrascope which complies with these requirements is hereby adopted as the standard measurement for comparison of the degree of darkness of smoke. Smoke of a greater degree of darkness than the No. 1 scale shall be considered dense smoke. 
(d)  Property destruction. No person shall create or produce smoke of a density which causes substantial injury to the property of another, which produces material annoyance or inconvenience to the occupants of adjacent dwellings or which defiles carpets, curtains, linen or other household furnishings in adjacent dwellings. 
(e)  Smokestacks. No person shall operate a boiler unless the top of the smoke stack is of sufficient height or distance from nearby buildings, trees or other structures so that smoke emanating therefrom will be distributed above the level of the upper windows of adjacent dwellings. 
(f)  Unnecessary smoke. No person shall operate a boiler in such a manner that unnecessary smoke is created thereby. 
(g)  Violation. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 6.06. Ord. 403. Passed 11-21-94.) 
668.05 - Noxious weeds. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of every occupied and unoccupied premises to cut down, remove, destroy or otherwise obliterate all ragweed, Canada thistles, wild carrot, poison ivy, dodders, mustards, bindweed, perennial sowthistle, hoary alyssum ragweed, poison sumac, grass over 8 inches in height (except for grasses located along or in a body of water or wetlands), or other plants which are declared by the City Commission to be a nuisance, or which are declared a nuisance by Section 2 of Act 359 of the Public Acts of 1941, as amended (M.C.L.A. 247.61 et seq.), growing on property owned by such person or under his or her possession or control, or on that portion of the public street or alley abutting the property and bounded by the established curb or gutter line. Any such grass over eight inches in height or such weeds are declared to be a public nuisance and shall be cut and removed or destroyed by the City, and the cost of such cutting, removal or destruction shall be collected as a lien on said premises. 
(b)  The word grass shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens, including but not limited to native plantings used for aesthetic and/or to offset and control any soil loss problems either occurring or predicted. 
(c)  There is a hereby adopted and made applicable in the City Act 359 of the Public Acts of 1941, as amended (M.C.L.A. 247.61 et seq.). 
(d)  The City may publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the County during the month of March that grass over eight inches in height and weeds not cut by May 1 and as necessary through November 1 of that year may be cut by the City and that the owner of the property will be charged with the cost thereof under Section 4 of Act 359. The publication shall also contain all other information required of the notice provided for in such Section 4. The City may cut grass over eight inches in height and weeds as many times as is necessary and charge the cost thereof to the property owner. The provision of this section relative to the entering of property for the cutting of grass over eight inches in height and weeds shall not be applicable to railroads, which railroads shall continue to be subject to Section 11 of such Act. Such notice may be in the following form: 
NOTICE 
GRASS OVER 8 INCHES IN HEIGHT AND NOXIOUS WEED CUTTING 
Pursuant to Section 4a of Act 359 of the Public Acts of 1941, as amended (M.C.L.A. 247.61 et seq.), notice is hereby given that noxious weeds described in Section 2 of such Act and in Section 668.05 of the Codified Ordinances and grass over 8 inches in height as described in that section shall be cut by May 1, and as necessary through November 1 by owners of property on which they exist, or the same may be cut by the City and charged to the land owner or become a lien on the property. 
By Order     CITY OF TRAVERSE CITY 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 423. Passed 6-19-95. Ord. 560. Passed 4-1-02. Ord. 683. Passed 09-06-05.) 
668.06 - Barbed wire fences. 
    No person shall place or maintain any barbed wire fencing or any strands of barbed wire along the line of or in any street, alley or public place. No person shall place or allow barbed wire fencing or barbed wire to remain between any premises owned or occupied by him or her and the adjoining premises, or place or allow to remain any barbed wire fencing or barbed wire in any place where it may expose any person to injury. However, a person may place such barbed wire at the top of a legal fence when placed not less than six feet from the ground. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.04. Ord. 405. Passed 11-21-94.) 
668.07 - Discarded refrigerators and airtight containers. 
(a)  No person shall own, discard or permit to be stored unattended on any premises within his or her control any discarded or unused ice box, refrigerator, safe or other closed container capable of trapping a child or other person inside. 
(b)  No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight snap lock or door, without first removing the lock or door from the ice box, refrigerator or container. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.21) 
668.08 - Barricades and warning lights for excavations. 
    Any person making any excavation on public or private property, which excavation may endanger the public or be an attractive nuisance to children, or the owner of the property on which such excavation exists, shall erect sufficient barriers around the excavation to ensure public safety and shall keep an adequate number of lighted lamps on such barriers at night. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.22. Ord. 406. Passed 11-21-94.) 
668.09 - Picketing. 
(a)  No person shall hinder or prevent, by mass picketing, threats, intimidation, force or coercion of any kind, the pursuit of any lawful work or employment; obstruct or interfere with entrance to or egress from any place of employment; or obstruct or interfere with free and uninterrupted use of public roads, streets, highways, railways, airports or other ways of travel or conveyance. No person, acting either individually or as one of a group, shall engage in picketing a private residence by any means. Picketing, to the full extent that the same is authorized under constitutional provisions, shall not be prohibited. 
(b)  No person shall hinder or prevent, or attempt to hinder or prevent, by mass picketing, the pursuit of any lawful work or employment. 
(c)  This section shall not prevent lawful picketing to the extent that the same is authorized under constitutional provisions. However, individuals forming or constituting any picket line on a public street or highway shall maintain such distance from one another so that persons desiring to pass through such picket line may do so. 
(d)  No picket line shall interfere with the free passage of motor vehicles when such picket line is located in a public street, highway or alley. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.26) 
668.10 - Radio interference. 
(a)  General prohibition. No person shall knowingly or wantonly operate or cause to be operated any machine, device, apparatus or instrument between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, the operation of which machine, device, apparatus or instrument causes reasonably preventable electrical interference with the operation of any radio receiving set or with radio reception in the City. X-ray pictures, examinations or treatment may be made at any time if the machines or apparatus used therefor are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with radio reception and are not negligently operated. 
(b)  Inspections. The City Manager or his or her authorized representative may enter any premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspecting the installation and working of all apparatus coming within the meaning of this section. 
(c)  Fluorescent fixtures. No person shall install, use or operate any fluorescent electrical fixture unless such fixture is equipped with proper condensers in such a condition that radio interference is not caused by the operation of the fixture. 
(d)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any transmitting, broadcasting or receiving instrument, apparatus or device used or useful in interstate commerce, the operation of which instrument, apparatus or device is licensed or authorized under any act of Congress. (1976 Code Sec. 26.25) 
(e)  Violation. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 408. Passed 12-19-94.) 
668.11 - Removal of snow and ice; responsibility; costs. 
(a)  The removal of snow and ice from private property and the sidewalk abutting or crossing private property shall be the responsibility of the occupant of such private property. However, if there is no occupant or if the occupant cannot be determined due to multiple occupancy of the property, then the responsibility shall be the owners of such private property. The removal of snow and ice from public property and the sidewalk abutting or crossing such public property shall be the responsibility of the political subdivision or governmental agency that either owns or occupies the public property. 
(b)  No person shall place snow removed from private property or accumulated on private property upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property. No person shall conduct or cause to be conducted snow removal operations which remove snow from commercial, industrial, motel or multifamily residence premises or parking lots and deposit it upon private property that is zoned for single or two-family residences. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. In addition to the standard sanction imposed by these Codified Ordinances, any person whose act or omission violates this section and results in the City causing work to be done for the removal of snow and ice shall be liable to the City for the cost of such work, plus an administrative and overhead charge of ten percent of the cost of such work. 
(Ord. 50. Passed 4-3-78. Ord. No. 409. Passed 12-19-94.) 
668.12 - Distribution of handbills. 
(a)  Littering streets. No person shall distribute, post, throw, drop or scatter in any street, alley or public place any posters, handbills, cards, samples or matter used for the purpose of advertising in such a manner as to result in the littering of any street, alley or public place. 
(b)  Littering private property. No person shall distribute handbills, cards, samples or advertising matter on private property in such a manner as to cause the littering of any private property not his or her own. 
(c)  Depositing on vehicles. No person shall attach any handbills, cards, papers or advertising material to any portion of any motor vehicle parked in any public place, or deposits such material within or upon such vehicle. 
(d)  At night. No person shall go about the streets, alleys or other public places for the purpose of distributing posters, handbills, cards, samples or matter used for the purpose of advertising from sunset to sunrise of the following day. 
(e)  Violation. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.11. Ord. 639. Passed 5-3-04.) 
668.13 - Defacing and littering public buildings and places of worship. 
    No person shall mar or litter any hallway, stairway, sidewalk or step to any public building or place of worship. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.03) 
668.14 - Bird and waterfowl feeding. 
(a)  Purpose. The presence of large numbers of certain species of birds and waterfowl cause a public health nuisance by contaminating beaches and nearby public swimming areas, shoreline parks, river ways, buildings in the core downtown, sidewalks and pathways used by the public. Accordingly, this Ordinance is adopted to prevent such conduct as may attract and concentrate certain species on and around Grand Traverse Bay, Boardman River, Boardman Lake, Kids Creek and its tributaries, City Parks and the core downtown in the City of Traverse City. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Core downtown shall mean that the area of Traverse City Business District described as coinciding with the official boundaries of the Downtown Development Authority districts. 
(2)  Shoreline shall mean Grand Traverse Bay, Boardman Lake, the Boardman River, Kids Creek, and their tributaries, including beaches of such. 
(3)  Domestic waterfowl shall mean non-native ducks, geese and swans not retained in agricultural operations. 
(4)  Feed and feeding shall mean the act of feeding or the furnishing of food or other sustenance in any form to bird or waterfowl species regulated by this Ordinance. 
(5)  Migratory waterfowl shall mean ducks, geese and swans native to North America. 
(6)  Pigeon shall mean any of the various birds of the widely distributed family Columbidae, especially the rock dove or any of its domesticated varieties. 
(c)  Prohibition on feeding. 
Migratory and Domestic Waterfowl: 
(1)  No person shall feed, cause to be fed, or provide food for domestic or migratory waterfowl or gulls located on lands either privately or publicly owned within 100 feet of the Shoreline, in the Core Downtown, or in any City Park. 
(2)  No person shall create or foster any condition, or allow any condition to exist or continue, which results in a congregation or congestion of domestic or migratory waterfowl or gulls on lands either privately or publicly owned within 100 feet of the Shoreline, in Duncan Clinch Marina, the Core Downtown, or in any City Park. 
Pigeons: 
(1)  No person shall feed, cause to be fed, or provide food for pigeons located in the Core Downtown area. 
(2)  No person shall create or foster any condition, or allow any condition to exist or continue, which results in a congregation or congestion of pigeons within the Core Downtown area. 
(d)  Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit humane acts towards waterfowl in individual cases, such as the temporary nurturing of a wounded bird on one's own premises, or birdfeeders erected and maintained for the purpose of feeding other avian species. 
(e)  Penalty. A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. 790. Passed 3-17-08.) 
668.15 - Entertainment in the C-4 and D districts. 
    No person shall cause or allow live public entertainment in the C-4 (Regional Center) District and D (Development) District to take place between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction. This section does not apply to live entertainment on January 1 or entertainment associated with city-approved festivals. This section may be waived by the City Manager in the event that such entertainment will not detrimentally affect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 908. Passed 03-21-11.) 
668.16 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A. 764.9c(2); M.S.A. 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 351. Passed 5-17-93.) 
668.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty is no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 670 - Personal Conduct Offenses[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Indecency and immorality, M.C.L.A.  750.335 et seq.; Prostitution, M.C.L.A.  750.448 et seq. 
Cross reference- Morals and decency nuisances,  660.04 

670.01 - Indecency; swimming; exhibitionism; profanity. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any indecent, insulting, immoral or obscene conduct in any street, alley or public place. 
(b)  No person shall swim or bathe in any public place without wearing proper apparel. 
(c)  No person shall make any immoral exhibition or exposure of his or her person. 
(d)  No person shall utter any profanity or indecent or improper language in a public place. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.11) 
670.02 - Public urination and defecation. 
    No person shall urinate or defecate on any street, alley or other open public place. 
(Ord. 522. Passed 2-20-01.) 
670.03 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A. 764.9c(2); M.S.A. 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 352. Passed 5-17-93.) 
670.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 690 - Weapons and Explosives[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Teaching or demonstrating use of, M.C.L.A.  750.528a; Arson, M.C.L.A.  750.71 et seq.; Construction or possession of explosive devices, M.C.L.A.  750.211a 
Cross reference- Shooting galleries, Ch. 860; Weapons and explosives in parks,  1064.08; Weapons and explosives in cemeteries,  1066.03; Storage of weapons and explosives,  1610.08; Blasting,  1610.10 

690.01 - Unlawful discharge. 
    No person shall discharge a bow and arrow, slingshot, paint pellet gun, BB gun, mechanical gun, air gun, firearm or air rifle, or other device designed to shoot, project, throw or hurl a projectile or projectiles made of steel, lead or other hard substances by means of compressed gas or air or other mechanical means, or explode any, explosive or stench bomb, except by written permission of the Police Chief. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.02. Ord. 606, Passed 7-7-02. Ord. 950, Passed 9-4-12) 
690.02 - Consumer fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Consumer fireworks means devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
    Low impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
    National holiday means any of the following: New Year's Day (January 1); Martin Luther King Jr. Day (third Monday in January); Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February); Memorial Day (last Monday in May); Independence Day (July 4); Labor Day (first Monday in September ); Columbus Day (second Monday in October); Veterans Day (November 11); Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November); and Christmas Day (December 25). 
    Novelties means that term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(1)  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
(2)  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph (i) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(3)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in diameter. 
(4)  Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy smoke devices. 
(b)  Prohibition on use of consumer fireworks. No person shall ignite, discharge or use Consumer Fireworks within the city, except this prohibition shall not preclude any person from igniting, discharging and using Consumer Fireworks on the following days after 11:00 a.m.: 
(1)  December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1; 
(2)  The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days; 
(3)  June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days; 
(4)  July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m.; 
(5)  The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(c)  Penalty. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. 950, Passed 9-4-12; Ord. 977, Passed 7-15-13; Ord. 1091 , Passed 5-20-19) 
690.03 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A. 764.9c(2); M.S.A. 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 353. Passed 5-17-93.) 
690.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
PART EIGHT - BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE 
TITLE TWO - BUSINESS REGULATION 
Chapter 802 - Licenses and Permits Generally[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Outdoor advertising licensing and permits, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Coordinated collection of State license fees, M.C.L.A.  205.1; Liability insurance for municipalities, M.C.L.A.  691.1409 
Cross reference- Bicycle licenses,  420.01 et seq.; Dog licenses,  610.05(b); Building permits,  1440.04, 1440.05; Licensing of contractors,  1446.01 

802.01 - Licenses. 
(a)  Required. No person shall engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is required by this Business Regulation and Taxation Code without first obtaining such license from the City in the manner provided in this section. (1976 Code Sec. 23.01) 
(b)  Application. Unless otherwise provided, an application for a license shall be made to the City Clerk, upon forms provided by him or her, and the applicant shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for or be applicable to the granting of such license. (1976 Code Sec. 23.02) 
(c)  Payment of fees. The fees required for the issuance of any license shall be paid at the office of the City Clerk before the granting of the license. (1976 Code Sec. 23.03) 
(d)  Bond and insurance. All required bonds shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. Where policies of insurance are required, such policies shall be approved as to substance and form by the City Attorney, and satisfactory evidence of coverage shall be filed with the City Clerk before the license is issued. (1976 Code Sec. 23.04) 
(e)  Certification. In all cases where the certification of any City or State officer is required prior to the issuance of any license by the City Clerk, such certification must be presented to the City Clerk before such license is issued. (1976 Code Sec. 23.05) 
(f)  Denial of issuance or approval to debtors of city. No license shall be issued, nor shall approval be granted, where Municipal approval is required for any State or Federal license, to any person who is indebted to the City upon any claim, tax or account which is more than sixty days delinquent. (1976 Code Sec. 23.06) 
(g)  Term. Unless otherwise provided, the license year shall begin on July 1 of each year and shall terminate at 12:00 midnight on June 30 of the following year. Where this chapter permits the issuance of a license for a period of less than one year, the effective date of such license shall commence with the date of issuance. (1976 Code Sec. 23.07) 
(h)  Exhibition. Every licensee shall carry his or her license upon his or her person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted. However, where such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, the license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in the place of business. The licensee shall exhibit the license when applying for a renewal and upon the demand of any police officer or person representing the issuing authority. (1976 Code Sec. 23.08) 
(i)  Transfer. Unless otherwise provided, no license shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by action of the City Commission. (1976 Code Sec. 23.09) 
(j)  Suspension and revocation. 
(1)  Authority. Any license issued by the City may be suspended by the City Manager for cause or if conditions precedent to the granting of the license are not complied with. 
(2)  Hearings. The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the City Commission on any such action of the City Manager, provided a written request therefor is filed with the City Clerk within ten days after receipt of the notice of suspension. The Commission may confirm such suspension or revoke or reinstate any such license. The action taken by the Commission shall be final. 
(3)  Cause defined. "Cause," as used in this subsection, means and includes the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist, in connection with any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is granted or any premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is: 
a.  Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; 
b.  Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature; 
c.  Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license granted; 
d.  Forbidden by these Codified Ordinances or any duly established rule or regulation of the City applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license has been granted; or 
e.  The result of failure to continuously comply with all conditions required as precedent to the approval of the license. (1976 Code Sec. 23.10) 
802.02 - Permits. 
(a)  Required; issuance. 
(1)  No person shall perform any act for which a permit is required by this Business Regulation and Taxation Code without first obtaining a written permit therefor in the manner provided in this section. 
(2)  The issuance of a permit shall be contingent upon fulfillment of the requirements specified in this Business Regulation and Taxation Code or by subsequent regulations established by the City Manager and approved by the City Commission. (1976 Code Sec. 24.01) 
(b)  Application. Unless otherwise provided, an application for a permit shall be made to the City Clerk, upon forms prescribed by him or her, and the applicant shall answer upon oath, if requested, all questions put to him or her concerning the application. (1976 Code Sec. 24.02) 
(c)  Payment of fees. Applications shall be accompanied by the fees and deposits required, which fees and deposits will be returned to the applicant if a permit is not issued. (1976 Code Sec. 24.03) 
(d)  Bond and insurance. When an applicant is required to furnish a bond, the form of the bond shall be approved by the City Attorney. The obligation shall be such that the City is held free from all liability from accidents or injuries to persons or property arising out of the work or action for which the permit is issued. In lieu of a bond, the applicant may furnish one or more policies of insurance giving the same protection as called for in the bond. Any such policy of insurance shall be approved as to form and substance by the City Attorney. (1976 Code Sec. 24.04) 
(e)  Liability. The terms of the application shall be such that the applicant agrees to hold the City free and harmless from all liability which may be imposed on it, to reimburse the City for any legal liability that may be adjudged against it and to reimburse the City for all expenses of litigation in connection with the defense of claims, as such liability and claims may arise because of the issuance of the permit or because of negligence in the performance of the work for which the permit was issued. (1976 Code Sec. 24.05) 
(f)  Rejection of application. The City Clerk shall not be required to issue any permit if, in his or her judgment, the public interest and the interests of the City are not fully protected. (1976 Code Sec. 24.06) 
(g)  Expiration. Each permit shall show the date of expiration. (1976 Code Sec. 24.07) 
(h)  Exhibition. Every person receiving a permit shall keep the permit at the place where the operation is being performed at all times when the operation is in progress and until it is completed. Such permit shall be exhibited upon the demand of any City official. (1976 Code Sec. 24.08) 
(i)  Transfer. Unless otherwise provided, no permit shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by action of the City Commission. (1976 Code Sec. 24.09) 
(j)  Suspension and revocation. 
(1)  Authority. Any permit issued by the City may be suspended by the City Manager for cause or if conditions precedent to the granting of the permit are not complied with, or may be suspended or revoked for cause by the City Manager or the issuing authority. 
(2)  Hearings. The holder of the permit shall have the right to a hearing before the City Commission on any such action of the City Manager or issuing authority, provided a written request therefor is filed with the City Clerk within ten days after receipt of the notice of suspension or revocation. The Commission may confirm such suspension or revocation or revoke or reinstate any such permit. The action taken by the Commission is final. 
(3)  Cause defined. "Cause," as used in this subsection, has the same meaning as set forth in Section 802.01(j)(3). (1976 Code Sec. 24.10) 
802.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 806 - Auctioneers[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Auctions and auctioneers, M.C.L.A.  446.26 et seq. 
Cross reference- Sale of property recovered by police,  252.01; Sale of abandoned vehicles,  410.03(UTC 2.5a); Pawnbrokers, ch. 846; Secondhand stores, ch. 856 

806.01 - Intent. 
    It is in the interest of the public morals and welfare to regulate auctions and auctioneers for the preventing of deceit, misrepresentation and fraud in the selling of goods, wares, merchandise and personal property. 
806.02 - Permit required. 
    No person shall conduct an auction without first obtaining an auction permit from the City Clerk. This Chapter shall not apply to any public auction or sale made or conducted by a public officer or to an auction sale conducted solely for charitable purposes where none of the proceeds are paid to the auctioneer. 
(Ord. 942, Passed 5-21-12) 
806.03 - Application for permit; fee. 
    An applicant for an auction permit shall file with the City Clerk an application and such information as shall be required by the City Clerk and pay a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Commission. Any applicant for an auction permit shall request a permit from the City Clerk no later than three days prior to holding the auction. The applicant shall provide such information as shall be required by the City Clerk the applicant shall state on the application whether the auction sale shall be with our without reservation. 
(Ord. 942, Passed 5-21-12) 
806.04 - Bond. 
    Before an auction permit is issued, the applicant for such permit shall furnish to the City Clerk a surety bond in an amount established by resolution of the City Commission, which surety bond shall be conditioned for the due observance, during the time of the permit, of the laws of the state and City. Any person aggrieved by the action of any such permit shall have a right of action on the surety bond for the recovery of money or damages, or both. 
(Ord. 942, Passed 5-21-12) 
806.05 - False bidding or pretending to buy. 
    At any auction sale, no person shall act as "bidder" or what is commonly known as a "capper," "booster" or "shiller" or offer to make any false bid, or offer any false bid or pretend to buy any article sold or offered for sale at any sale by auction. 
(Ord. 942, Passed 5-21-12) 
806.06 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCLA 764.9c(2); MSA 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 942, Passed 5-21-12) 
806.07 - Civil infraction. 
    A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 415, Passed 2-6-95. Ord. 942, Passed 5-21-12) 
806.08 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
(Ord. 942, Passed 5-21-12) 
Chapter 810 - Business Registration[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 810, Business Registration, was mistakenly included in the codification process by the previous codifying company, although the ordinance had never been enacted. It has now been removed from the Traverse City Code of Ordinances. (8-23-1995) 

Chapter 814 - Common Carriers[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 852, passed January 18, 2010, repealed ch. 814. Nothing in this ordinance or the repeal of any inconsistent ordinances shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action required or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any charter be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance. 
State Law reference- Power to regulate, M.C.L.A.  91.1; Powers and jurisdiction of State Public Service Commission, M.C.L.A.  460.6 
Cross reference- Presumption of vehicle weight  410.03(UTC 2.59); Business licenses generally,  802.01 

Chapter 818 - Dance Halls[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 853, passed January 18, 2010, repealed ch. 818. Nothing in this ordinance of the repeal of any inconsistent ordinances shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action required or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any charter be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance. 
State Law reference- Minor children under age seventeen in; ordinances, M.C.L.A.  750.141; Alcoholic beverages in dance halls, M.C.L.A.  750.464a 
Cross reference- Roller skating rinks and other amusement businesses, Ch. 852 

Chapter 822 - Food Vendors[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 822 was repealed by Ordinance 389, passed July 5, 1994. See Chapters 862 and 863 for code sections covering food vendors. 
State Law reference- Vending machines; sales tax exemption, M.C.L.A.  205.54g 
Cross reference- Solicitors, Ch. 862; Transient Merchants, Ch. 863 

Chapter 826 - Garbage and Rubbish Collectors[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Garbage and refuse generally, M.C.L.A.  46.171 et seq., 123.361 et seq.; Municipal authority, M.C.L.A.  123.301 et seq. 
Cross reference- Garbage and rubbish on public property,  668.03; Garbage containers in trailer and tourist camps,  836.04; Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal, Ch. 1060; Garbage and rubbish in parks,  1064.04; Combustible waste,  1610.03 

826.01 - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of taking, carrying away and disposing of garbage, rubbish or ashes from dwellings or commercial establishments, or of transporting such garbage, rubbish or ashes along or upon public streets or alleys, without first obtaining a license therefor from Grand Traverse County. 
(1976 Code Sec. 8.041; Ord. No. 451. Passed 8-4-97.) 
826.02 - Collection vehicles and containers. 
    No license for taking, carrying away and disposing of garbage, rubbish or ashes shall be granted unless the licensee carries the material in vehicles or containers which are so constructed as to prevent the garbage, rubbish or ashes from leaking, sifting, blowing away or otherwise escaping therefrom or dropping to the surface of the street or alley. Such vehicles shall be subject to the approval of the Health Department. 
826.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 834 - Liquor Licenses[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Intoxicating liquors generally, M.C.L.A.  436.1101 et seq.; Sales on Sundays and municipal election days, M.C.L.A.  436.19e 
Cross reference- DUI,  410.03(UTC 5.15 et seq.); Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 608; Alcoholic beverages in parks,  1064.09; Alcoholic beverages in cemeteries,  1066.03 

834.01 - Intent; application of chapter. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide uniform standards for the City's regulation of liquor licenses and for recommendations regarding state liquor license decisions. This chapter shall apply to all individuals, corporations or entities who wish to sell intoxicating liquors in the city, except those licenses issued to nonprofit and similar organizations pursuant to the special license provisions of the State Liquor Control Act. 
(Ord. 169. Passed 7-2-84.) 
834.02 - License applications. 
    Applications for local approval of a new license to sell beer, wine or alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises shall be made to the City Clerk. Such application shall be made in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a partnership or corporation. Such application shall contain: 
(1)  In the case of an individual, the name, age and address of the applicant; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if an aggregate of more than five percent of the stock of such corporation is owned by any one person or his or her nominee, the name and address of such person; 
(2)  The nature and business of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the object for which it was formed; 
(3)  The length of time such applicant has been in business of that nature, or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its certificate of incorporation was issued; 
(4)  The location and description of the premises which are to be operated under such license; 
(5)  If the business of the applicant is to be operated or conducted by a local manager or agent, the name and address of such manager or agent; 
(6)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has, prior to this application, made application for a liquor license and the date, place and disposition of such application; 
(7)  A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive approval for a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter or in the laws of the state; 
(8)  A statement that the applicant and the applicant's employees and agents will not violate any of the ordinances of the City or the laws of the state or of the United States in the conduct of its business; 
(9)  A statement that, if any of the information provided in the application or any attachment thereto changes during the term of the license or any renewal thereof, the applicant shall notify the City Clerk, in writing, within 30 days of such change; 
(10)  A statement as to whether or not dancing or entertainment is to be provided on the premises, and if entertainment is to be provided, a description of the type of such entertainment; 
(11)  An eight and one-half inch by eleven inch building and grounds layout diagram showing the entire structure, premises and grounds, and in particular the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, noise control, means of egress and, where appropriate, plans for screening; 
(12)  A nonrefundable application fee which shall be established by the City Commission in such amount as it deems appropriate from time to time to defray the costs of processing the application; and 
(13)  Other information as required. 
(Ord. 169. Passed 7-2-84.) 
834.03 - Conditions for denial. 
    A liquor license application shall not be recommended for approval if any of the following conditions exist as to such application: 
(1)  The premises are determined by the City Commission to be unsuitable for the activity proposed by the application, considering: 
a.  The proximity of other premises licensed to sell beer, wine or alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption; 
b.  The lack of any other facilities or uses on the premises to be licensed which are compatible with a liquor license (e.g. restaurant, hotel); 
c.  The distance from public or private schools for minors or places where minors congregate, such as parks; 
d.  The proximity of an inconsistent zoning classification or land use; 
e.  The Zoning Code and the City Plan; 
f.  Traffic safety; 
g.  Public safety; 
h.  Accessibility to the site from abutting roads; 
i.  The capability of roads, utilities and public services to accommodate the commercial activity; or 
j.  Such other relevant factors as the City Commission may deem appropriate. 
(2)  It is determined by a majority of the City Commission that the premises do not or will not, within six months of the approval of the application by the Commission, or prior to the commencement of business, whichever occurs first, have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening or noise or nuisance control. However, upon timely request and for good cause shown, the Commission may extend any deadline established by this subsection. 
(3)  Except for applications to transfer ownership only, any premises which do not or will not, within three months of the approval of the application by the Commission, comply with current applicable construction codes, fire codes, zoning regulations or public health regulations. However, upon timely request and for good cause shown, the Commission may extend any deadline established by this subsection. 
(4)  The applicant does not own the premises for which the approval is sought or does not have a lease therefore. 
(5)  The applicant is a law enforcing public official or any member of the Commission. No such official may be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of beer, wine or alcoholic liquor. 
(6)  A person named in the application is, at the time of application for such approval, transfer or renewal, delinquent in the payment of any taxes, fees or other charges owed to or collected by the City. Additionally, an entity with two or less members or partners either of whom are delinquent in the payment of any taxes, fees, or other charges owed to or collected by the City at the time of the application for approval, transfer, or renewal. 
(7)  Ad valorem taxes, charges, or assessments imposed by the City on the premises identified in the application or personal property associated with the premises identified in the application for approval, transfer, or renewal are delinquent. 
(8)  The applicant has had a license revoked for cause within the last two years. 
(9)  One or more of the members of a copartnership do not qualify for approval of a license. 
(10)  One or more officers, managers or directors of a corporation, or a stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, are not eligible to receive approval for a license. 
(11)  If the applicant's place of business is operated or conducted by a manager or agent, such manager or agent does not possess the same qualifications required of the applicant. 
(12)  An applicant has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State law concerning the manufacture or sale of alcoholic liquor. 
(13)  An applicant has made a false statement in the application procedure or has submitted an incomplete application. 
(14)  For a Redevelopment Project Area Liquor License, as provided for in MCL  436.1521a, the premises licensed will or is intended to regularly close later than 11:00 p.m. or serve liquor after 11:00 p.m. on any day. A premises will or is intended to "regularly close" within the meaning of this subsection if such business is intended to or will not admit new customers after 11:00 p.m. at least five days a week. 
(15)  Other relevant factors as the City Commission may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. 169. Passed 7-2-84. Ord. 839. Passed 7-16-09. Ord. 926, Passed 10-17-11) 
834.04 - New licenses; selection of applicants. 
    When any new liquor license is available for issuance, either by lapse of a current license or by the authorization and allocation of additional licenses to the City, and where there exist more qualified applicants for such license than the number of new licenses available, the City Commission may choose for approval the most qualified applicant based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The location of the proposed new business and its desirability in light of its location, the preferability of locations in an existing business district as opposed to outlying locations, the surrounding land uses and its proximity to other premises licensed for on-premises consumption; 
(2)  The experience of the applicant; 
(3)  The other uses proposed to be included on the premises or in the development (e.g. restaurant, motel); 
(4)  The cost and size of the overall project and the number of jobs to be created by the new business; 
(5)  The relative suitability of the design and size of the new business to the property on which it is proposed to be located, as evidenced by the building and grounds layout diagram required to be submitted with the application; 
(6)  The overall development or redevelopment of the City; and 
(7)  Such other relevant factors as the City Commission may deem appropriate. 
    The City Commission may decide to not award a license until an application is submitted, which application meets the requirements of this chapter and best serves the goals and policies of the City. 
(Ord. 169. Passed 7-2-84.) 
834.05 - Conditions of issuance. 
    Approval of a liquor license application shall be upon the condition that any necessary remodeling or new construction for the use of the license required by the City Commission or indicated on the building and grounds layout diagram submitted with the application be completed within six months of the approval of the license by the Commission, or prior to the commencement of business, whichever occurs first. The Commission may impose other reasonable conditions on the approval of an application, which conditions are related to the health, safety and welfare of the City. 
(Ord. 169. Passed 7-2-84.) 
834.06 - Redevelopment project area liquor licenses. 
    To the extent that they do not conflict with this section, all provisions of this chapter shall apply to Redevelopment Project Area Liquor Licenses; if there is a conflict between a provision of this section and another provision contained in this chapter, the provision of this section shall control, and the remaining, non-conflicting provisions of this chapter shall survive. 
(1)  A premises operating under a Redevelopment Project Area Liquor License, as provided for in Michigan Public Act 501 of 2006, shall: 
a.  Regularly close no later than 12:00 a.m. A premises "regularly closes" within the meaning of this subsection if the premises does not admit new customers after 12:00 a.m. at least five days a week. 
b.  Not serve liquor between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., or other hours as otherwise prohibited by state law or Michigan Liquor Control Commission Promulgated Rule. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to Banquet Facility Permits or (i) Hotels or (ii) Hotel Licenses issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission as part of a Redevelopment Project Area Liquor License. 
(3)  A licensee who violates this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be fined $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. 839. Passed 7-6-09. Ord. 868. Passed 6-21-10. Ord. 898. Passed 12-20-10. Ord. 1008. Passed 7-21-14) 
834.07 - Liquor license registration requirement. 
(a)  No liquor licenses issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission shall be operated unless the same has been issued a registration by the City Clerk. In the event of a transfer of a Michigan Liquor Control Commission Liquor License, the license holder shall obtain a registration from the City Clerk. In order to receive registration from the City Clerk, the license holder shall make application to the City Clerk for registration with a non-refundable fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(b)  The holder of any liquor license currently in place upon the effective date of this ordinance shall be issued a registration by the City Clerk; and for such licenses currently in place, no fee shall be required. 
(c)  All applications for registration shall contain the same information as required in Section 834.02 of these ordinances. 
(d)  Conditions for denial of a registration shall be the same as those in Section 834.03 of these ordinances; provided, however, for those registrations that do not require City Commission approval, that the City Clerk shall determine if a condition for denial as outlined in Section 834.03 applies. 
(e)  The City Clerk is authorized to issue a registration under this Section provided none of the conditions for denial are determined applicable; provided, however, that the City Clerk may only issue a registration for any on-premise consumption license upon adoption by the City Commission of a resolution authorizing the City Clerk to issue such registration. 
(f)  In the case of any liquor license or subsidiary permit where City Commission approval is required by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission and the City Commission recommends approval, shall be issued a registration from the City Clerk. 
(g)  If the City Clerk denies a registration under this ordinance, the City Clerk shall provide written notice, by first class mail, to the address indicated on the application of such denial and the reasons for the denial. The notice of denial shall indicate that the City Clerk's denial may be appealed as provided for in this Section. The City Clerk shall provide a copy of Chapter 834 of the Traverse City Code of Ordinances with the notice of denial. 
(h)  Conditions for revocation of a registration shall be the same as those of denial as provided for in this Section of these ordinances; provided, however, for those registrations that do not require City Commission approval, that the City Clerk shall determine if a condition for revocation as outlined in Section 834.07 applies. 
(i)  If the City Clerk revokes a registration under this ordinance, the City Clerk shall provide written notice, by first class mail, to the address indicated on the application of such revocation and the reasons for the revocation. The notice of revocation shall indicate that the City Clerk's revocation may be appealed as provided for in this Section. The City Clerk shall provide a copy of Chapter 834 of the Traverse City Code of Ordinances with the notice of revocation. 
(j)  Denial or revocation by the City Clerk of a registration under this section may be appealed to the City Manager within 30 calendar days following the date of the notice of denial from the City Clerk. Such appeal shall clearly state the basis for appeal. The City Manager shall investigate the reasons for the City Clerk's denial of the registration and shall decide the appeal within 30 calendar days following the date the appeal was received by the City Manager. The City Manager's decision on the appeal shall be final. If the City Manager's decision is to overrule the City Clerk's denial or revocation of the registration and grant the registration, the City Clerk shall issue such registration, which registration shall take immediate effect. 
(k)  The liquor license registration shall be prominently displayed on the premises. 
(Ord. 1023. Passed 5-4-15.) 
834.08 - Annual renewal; license revocation; and appeal. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall annually convene a meeting of the Chief of Police and appropriate officials before February 1 to review on-premises liquor licenses to determine whether or not to object to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission's renewal of liquor licenses under its authority as set forth in MCL  436.1502(2). Investigations and recommendations as to each renewal request shall be undertaken and provided by the Police Department, Fire Department, appropriate building and zoning officials, and others deemed appropriate. Any recommendation to object to the renewal of a liquor license shall be made in writing to the City Manager. 
(b)  Upon a determination of a violation of the conditions set forth in this section, the City Manager will notify the licensee of the specific violation(s) and afford the licensee an opportunity to come into compliance with this section. Licensee must reach compliance in that time established by the City Manager, but in no event more than ten days after notification to licensee by city of such violation. Absent compliance within that time established the City Manager may then forward the recommendation for revocation or objection to renewal to the City Commission who shall hold a hearing as set forth in this section prior to the recommendation for revocation or objection to renewal of the liquor license for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to comply with all standards and plans and conditions established and approved at the time of issuance of the license or at a time of later city approval. 
(2)  Failure to timely pay all personal property taxes and all real property taxes or have delinquent any personal property tax or real property taxes or obligation due and payable to the City or Light & Power as of the date of the annual review. 
(3)  Repeated violations of state law. 
(4)  Violations of this chapter or other city ordinance, executive order, administrative order or policy by the licensee. 
(5)  Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed premises, including but not limited, to any of the following: 
a.  Violations of the building code, electrical code, fire prevention code, mechanical code, plumbing code, health code or other applicable code. 
b.  Violation of the zoning ordinance. 
c.  A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed premises,which is a violation of the law or disturbs the peace, order, and tranquility of the neighborhood including types of police, fire or medical services related to the licensed premises. 
d.  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of licensed premises, including litter, debris, or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties. 
e.  Entertainment on the licensed premises without a permit or entertainment that disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood of the licensed premises 
f.  Any advertising, promotion or activity in connection with the licensed premises that causes, creates or contributes to disorder, disobedience of rules, ordinances or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises. 
g.  Numerous police contacts with the licensed premises or the patrons of the premises. 
(6)  Repeated reports that the licensee is serving minors or intoxicated persons. 
(7)  Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises by the city's employees, agents and/or representatives in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Prior to filing with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission an objection to the renewal of a liquor license or a recommendation for the revocation of a liquor license, the City shall do the following: 
(1)  Serve written notice on the license, which shall include: 
a.  Notice of the proposed action and the reasons for the action. 
b.  Date, time and location of hearing on the matter and a statement that at the hearing, the licensee may present evidence and arguments on its behalf, confront witnesses and may be represented by a licensed attorney. 
c.  A statement requiring the licensee to notify the city attorney's office at least three days prior to the hearing date if they intend to contest the proposed action, and to provide the names of witnesses known at the time who will testify on their behalf. 
(2)  The hearing may be conducted by the City Commission as a whole or the City Commission may delegate to a hearing officer the function of holding the hearing. The hearing officer shall thereafter submit his or her findings and recommendations to the Commission. The licensee may, at his or her expense, employ a reporter to transcribe the testimony given at the hearing and make a transcript of such testimony. 
(3)  The City Commission shall make a written resolution as to its findings and determination and mail same to licensee and the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. 
(Ord. 839. Passed 7-16-09.) 
834.09 - Severability. 
    If any provision of this chapter is declared invalid by a court, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter or any part other than the part declared to be invalid. 
834.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 836 - Lodging Houses, Hotels, Motels, Tourist Cabins and Temporary Camps[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 854, passed January 18, 2010, repealed ch. 836. Nothing in this ordinance or the repeal of any inconsistent ordinances shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action required or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any charter be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance. 
State Law reference- Hotels; boarding and lodging houses, M.C.L.A.  427.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Tourist homes, Ch. 868; Application of rental housing regulations to lodging houses,  1482.16; Smoke detectors in lodging houses,  1610.14(b) 

Chapter 840 - Mechanical Amusement Device Arcades[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 855, passed January 18, 2010 repealed ch. 840. Nothing in this ordinance of the repeal of any inconsistent ordinances shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action required or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any charter be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance. 
State Law reference- Opening or attempting to open coin-operated devices, M.C.L.A.  750.113, 752.811, 752.812; Slugs, M.C.L.A.  752.801 et seq. 
Cross reference- Licenses in general, Ch. 802; Shooting galleries, Ch. 860 

Chapter 842 - Commercial Motion Picture, Television, Radio and Production Film Activities 

842.01 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Provide for the protection and reasonable management of City property. 
(2)  Allow for reasonable regulation of City property and City rights-of-way in order to more effectively preserve the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(3)  Promote continued and diverse economic growth in the City. 
(4)  Enable the City to compete fairly and effectively in the world marketplace for economic development opportunities that will provide for and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(5)  Enable the City to recover the cost of providing services to production films. 
(Ord. 863. Passed 3-15-10.) 
842.02 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Expenses shall mean all direct costs of wages, including a pro rata percentage of the employees benefits, vehicles and equipment and expendable items incurred by the City, or private person or corporation operating at the request or direction of the City, when providing services to a production company, and which expenses are attributable to a production film. Included in such costs are administrative expenses, attorney fees, testing, preparation of reports and other costs directly attributable, or as a result of, the production film. 
(2)  Low impact production film shall mean production film activities that: 
a.  Do not impede the public's use of or travel in the right-of-way; 
b.  Do not require the use of any City resources, including personnel; 
c.  Will occur for less than a four-hour period in one calendar day; 
d.  Do not involve more than five persons on the set; and 
e.  Do not place more than five pieces of film equipment upon City right-of-way; provided, however, that no equipment may be placed on a City street. 
f.  Do not use pyrotechnics or flame. 
(3)  Production film shall mean single media or multimedia entertainment content created in whole or in part in the City for distribution or exhibition to the general public by any means and media in any digital media format, film, or video tape, including but not limited to, a motion picture, a documentary, a television series, a television miniseries, a television special, interstitial television programming, long-form television, interactive television, music videos, interactive games, video games or commercials. Production film also includes any trailer, pilot, video teaser, or demo created primarily to stimulate the sale, marketing, promotion, or exploitation of future investment in a production film. 
(4)  Production company shall mean an entity in the business of producing production film. 
(5)  Set shall mean a place where a production film is created in whole or in part in any format and includes scenery and props. 
(Ord. 863. Passed 3-15-10. Ord. 978. Passed 8-5-13) 
842.03 - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall use any public right-of-way, or any public property, or facility for the purpose of producing, broadcasting, taking or making any production film unless such person shall have first made application to the City Clerk for and obtained, as prescribed in this chapter, a permit for each instance. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Current news productions, which includes reporters, photographers, or camera persons for a newspaper, news service, broadcasting station, or similar entity, including a documentary production, engaged in the broadcasting of news events in substantially the same manner with substantially the same impact; 
(2)  Production films which are conducted at or by the direction of the City; 
(3)  Video or multimedia broadcast or transmission of a live performance within a live entertainment; or 
(4)  Private events filmed or photographed for non-commercial purposes, such as private parties or weddings. 
(c)  Once a permit is issued, signs as defined in these ordinances located on a permitted set shall be considered scenery and props rather than signs and shall be permitted while the film permit is in effect. 
(d)  Once a film permit expires, the owner of any set on which a prohibited sign is located shall remove the sign or signs. 
(Ord. 863. Passed 3-15-10.) 
842.04 - Permit not required. 
    A permit is not required for low impact production films. 
(Ord. 863. Passed 3-15-10.) 
842.05 - Application. 
    A film permit application shall contain the following: 
(1)  Production company identification and contact information; 
(2)  Name and synopsis of the production; 
(3)  Location identification and description of production film activities to take place at each location, including any requested alterations to normal traffic flow, such as intermittent street closure, intermittent lane closure or complete street closure; 
(4)  Dates and times of production; 
(5)  A processing fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Commission to reimburse the City for the expenses associated with evaluating the application and establishing conditions for approval; and 
(6)  A statement of experience in the business; and if any experience in producing films in other communities, at least three references; and if no previous experience or experience in less than three communities, the balance of references shall be provided by professionals in the field that can attest to the competency of the applicant. 
(Ord. 863. Passed 3-15-10.) 
842.06 - Investigation. 
(a)  Investigation of application. The City Manager or designee shall be charged with investigating and processing any application submitted under this chapter. Upon receipt of the application for a permit required by this article, the City Manager or designee shall forward the application to the appropriate public officials as deemed necessary. Such officers, departments and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within a time frame established by the City Manager shall report their findings and recommendations to the City Manager or designee. 
(b)  Imposition of conditions. The City Manager or designee shall, at a minimum, require the following, as conditions of a production film permit: 
(1)  Security personnel. The permittee shall employ at its own expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the location of the filming activity and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of the filming activity. No permit shall be issued unless the Police Chief or designee is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the permittee for the duration of the production filming. 
(2)  Notification. The permittee shall notify affected residents, occupants and businesses, in advance of the filming, and as instructed by the City Manager or designee, of the duration and location of filming activities, including information about planned special effects, road and lane closures, "no parking" requests, sidewalk usage and the time that any barricades will be placed on the street and/or sidewalk. 
(3)  Access. Production vehicles may not block parking lot access drives, fire hydrants, or be parked in fire lanes, and must allow a minimum of 20 feet of clearance between vehicles parked on either side of the road for emergency response vehicles to pass. 
(4)  Base camps. Base camps may not be located on a public street. Only the necessary production vehicles, such as grip vehicles used for lighting and/or electricity, may be parked on a public street, if necessary, at the filming location. Crew parking, honeywagon, catering, and other non-essential production vehicles shall be at a predetermined location. 
(5)  Insurance. As a condition of issuing a permit under this Chapter, the permittee shall furnish insurance to be determined by the City Clerk but in no event in an amount less than $1,000,000.00, on an occurrence form basis, naming the City as additional insured, to protect the City against claims for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and shall indemnify the City claims for personal injury and for any damage to City property arising out of the permittee's activities. An additional minimum of $5,000,000.00 of general liability insurance shall be required in the event motor vehicles, aircraft, helicopters, explosives or pyrotechnics are used in the production activity. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard General Special Endorsement Form or the Certificate of Insurance in form acceptable to the City. The applicant shall also submit verification that adequate worker's compensation insurance coverage is maintained. 
(6)  Bonding. Before the issuance of a permit, a bond may be required at the discretion of the City Manager. 
(7)  Fire protection. The permittee shall at its expense take adequate steps as determined by the Fire Chief to ensure protection. 
(8)  Hold harmless. The permittee shall agree to hold harmless the City in a form acceptable to the City prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(9)  Other conditions. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the City Manager or designee may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or of citizens of the City, including a limitation on the duration of the permit and the location of the production film activities. 
(c)  Issuance of permits. Approval shall be valid for six months. In processing an application for a permit required by this chapter, the City Manager or designee may issue a permit as provided for in this chapter, after review of the application and such other information as may be otherwise obtained, if he/she finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring property or unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. Adequate advance notice of any street closure shall be given. 
(2)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or City operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the City incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant. 
(3)  The activity does not propose to include obscene matter or an obscene performance and will not involve conduct in violation of law, rules or regulations. 
(4)  At the determination of the City Manager or designee as well as the Police, Fire and other departments whose approval is deemed necessary by the City Manager or designee, that the condition of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or other type of hazard and all property safety precautions are being taken as determined by the heads of the aforementioned departments or their designees. 
(5)  The permit shall not authorize the production of a film that in any manner requires the use of property owned by or under control of the City in violation of 2008 Public Act 84, which prohibits such use when it includes obscene matter or an obscene performance or that requires that individually identifiable records be created and maintained for every performer as provided in 18 USC 2257. 
(6)  The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this Chapter or with any other applicable provision of law or state, local or federal rule or regulation. 
(d)  Extension of permits. Time extensions may be authorized by the City Manager or designee provided that the conditions in (c) are met. 
(e)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  The City Manager or designee may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter whenever the permittee, its employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any or all provisions and requirements set forth in this chapter, including the conditions imposed upon issuance of the permit, or with any or all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes or other law incorporated by reference in this chapter. 
(2)  The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document. 
(3)  A permit shall automatically be revoked if riotous, disorderly, obscene, or otherwise unlawful conduct occurs at a filming location or if an assembly exceeds 125 percent of the estimated attendance, as indicated on the application for a permit. In such instances, the premises may be closed by the Police Department and the assembly disbursed. 
(f)  Appeal of city manager decision. Any decision of the City Manager or designee may be appealed to the City Commission and may be modified, reversed or affirmed. Such appeal shall be filed within ten business days of the decision and the City Commission shall hear such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. 863. Passed 3-15-10.) 
842.07 - Savings clause. 
    All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired or incurred at the time this chapter takes effect are saved and may be consummated according to the law enforced when they are commenced. 
(Ord. 863. Passed 3-15-10.) 
842.08 - Severability. 
    The various parts, sections and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected. 
(Ord. 863. Passed 3-15-10.) 
Chapter 844 - Medical Marihuana Cultivation Facility 

844.01 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to license and regulate medical marihuana cultivation facilities to the extent they are permitted under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act. The City does not intend that licensing and regulation under this chapter be construed as a finding that such businesses are legal under state or federal law. Although some specific uses of medical marihuana are allowed by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, marihuana continues to be classified as a schedule 1 controlled substance under federal law and as such, growing, distributing, and possessing marihuana, other than as part of a federally authorized research program, as well as other activities as set forth in federal law is a violation of federal law. By requiring a license and compliance with requirements as provided in this chapter, the City intends to protect to the extent possible the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of and visitors to the City that may result from the activities of persons who unilaterally or on the advice of their own attorney determine that they may legally operate a medical marijuana cultivation facility. 
(Ord. 918. Passed 6-20-11) 
844.02 - Definition. 
(a)  Owner means any person who has equitable or legal title to any portion of the premises. 
(b)  Medical marihuana cultivation facility as used in this chapter has the same meaning as defined in the zoning ordinance, Section 1320.07. 
(Ord. 881. Passed 8-16-10) 
844.03 - License required. 
    No person shall operate a medical marihuana cultivation facility without first obtaining a license therefore as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 881. Passed 8-16-10) 
844.04 - Conditions for issuance. 
    A medical marihuana cultivation facility license shall be issued subject to the following conditions, which conditions, are in addition to conditions contained elsewhere in these Codified Ordinances: 
(1)  A medical marihuana cultivation facility shall be inspected at the time of application; shall be compliant with applicable Building, Electrical, Fire, and Plumbing Codes; and shall be inspected yearly by the Police Chief or its designee. 
(2)  The application shall contain a diagram of the medical marihuana cultivation facility demonstrating the number of facilities within the premises to be utilized for cultivation of medical marihuana and compliance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance for a medical marihuana cultivation facility. 
(3)  If the applicant is not the owner of the premises upon which the medical marihuana cultivation facility, the application shall include the owner's consent to the use of the premises as a medical marihuana cultivation facility. 
(Ord. 881. Passed 8-16-10) 
844.05 - Procedure for application. 
    Any person wishing to operate a medical marihuana cultivation facility shall file a medical marihuana cultivation facility license application with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 881. Passed 8-16-10) 
844.06 - License fee. 
    The annual license fee shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(Ord. 881. Passed 8-16-10) 
844.07 - Inspections. 
    A medical marihuana cultivation facility shall meet all conditions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. 881. Passed 8-16-10) 
844.08 - Revocation of license. 
    A license shall be revoked by the City Clerk if, upon receipt of written information or upon the Clerk's own investigation, the Clerk has reason to believe any of the following has occurred: 
(1)  The medical marihuana cultivation facility has received a citation for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the City Code, any statute of the state or federal law. 
(2)  The applicant has made a false material statement in the application or has otherwise become disqualified for the issuance of such a permit. 
(3)  The owner or operator of, or any person occupying the medical marihuana cultivation facility has violated any provision of this chapter, the City Code, any statute of the state or federal law, which violation has been documented by a written complaint certified by the City Clerk pursuant to  844.08. 
(4)  The medical marihuana cultivation facility has been conducted in a manner adverse to the protection of the public health, safety or welfare of the City. 
    Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the City Clerk to the property owner in person or by certified mail addressed to his or her place of business or residence address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the permit shall become null and void. 
(Ord. 881. Passed 8-16-10) 
844.09 - Complaints; appeals. 
    If a written complaint is filed alleging that the owner, operator, or person occupying the medical marihuana cultivation facility has violated any provisions of this chapter, the City Clerk shall promptly send a copy of the written complaint to the property owner, together with a notice that an investigation will be made as to the truth of the complaint. The property owner shall be invited to respond to the complaint and present evidence and respond to evidence produced by the investigation within 21 days from the date of notice. If the City Clerk, after reviewing all relevant material, finds the complaint to be supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the complaint shall be certified. 
    If a permit is denied or revoked by the City Clerk, the applicant or holder of a permit may appeal to the City Manager within 21 days from the date of the action appealed from. The City Manager shall hold a hearing and make a written determination, after presentation by the applicant and investigation by the City Clerk, as to whether or not the grounds for denial or revocation are true. If the City Manager determines that such grounds are supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the action of the City Clerk shall be sustained and the applicant may appeal the City Manager's decision to the City Commission within 21 days from the City Manager's determination. Review by the City Commission shall be under the same standards of review as the determination by the City Manager and shall be in accordance with rules of procedure established by the City Commission. The City Commission's decision may be reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 881. Passed 8-16-10.) 
Chapter 845 - MEDICAL MARIHUANA PERMITTING REGULATIONS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1090 , adopted February 19, 2019, amended Ch. 845 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Formerly, Ch. 845 was titled Medical Marihuana Licensing Regulations. 

845.01. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is, pursuant to the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., to: authorize the establishment of certain types of medical marihuana facilities in the City of Traverse City; provide for standards and procedures for the review, issuance, renewal, or revocation of permits for such facilities; and establish fees for such permits. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter, or in any companion regulatory provision adopted in any other provision of this Code, is intended to grant, nor shall they be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution for the growing, sale, consumption, use, distribution or possession of marihuana in any form or manner that is not in compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq., and all other applicable rules promulgated by the state of Michigan. 
(c)  Because federal law is not affected by state law or rules, nothing in this chapter, or in any companion regulatory provision adopted in any other provision of this Code, is intended to grant, nor shall any provision of this chapter or this Code, be construed as granting immunity from criminal prosecution under federal law. The Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq., and all other applicable rules promulgated by the state of Michigan do not protect patients, users, care givers, licensees, or the owners or occupants of properties on which the medical use of marihuana is occurring from federal prosecution, or from having their property seized by federal authorities under the Federal Controlled Substances Act. 
(d)  The City intends to issue permits for and to regulate marihuana facilities to the extent they are permitted under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq. The City does not intend that permitting and regulation under this chapter be construed as a finding that such facilities comply with any law. By requiring a City permit and compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the City intends to protect the public health, safety and welfare by: promoting the safe, regulated manufacturing, production, and sale by state-licensed facilities of medical marihuana, and to ensure the safe access to medical marihuana to the City's patients; discouraging the sale of unsafe and unlicensed medical marihuana products; preserving and protecting the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City and the general public by minimizing unsafe and unregulated medical marihuana production and sale; and establishing standards and procedures by which the siting, operation, and maintaining of a Medical Marihuana Facility shall be governed. 
(e)  This chapter is to be construed to protect the public over medical marihuana facility interests. The operation of a licensed medical marihuana facility is a revocable privilege and not a right in the City. Nothing in this chapter is to be construed to grant a property right for an individual or business entity to engage, obtain, or have renewed, a City-issued permit to engage in the use, distribution, cultivation, production, possession, transportation or sale of medical marihuana as a commercial enterprise in the City. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.02. - Indemnification of City. 
(a)  By accepting a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the holder waives and releases the City, its officers, elected officials, and employees from any liability for injuries, damages or liabilities of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of medical marihuana facility owners, operators, employees, clients or customers for a violation of state or federal laws, rules or regulations. 
(b)  By accepting a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the holder agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, elected officials, employees, and insurers, against all liability, claims or demands arising on account of any claim of diminution of property value by a property owner whose property is located in proximity to a licensed operating facility, arising out of, claimed to have arisen out of, or in any manner connected with the operation of a medical marihuana facility or any claim based on an alleged injury to business or property by reason of a claimed violation of the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), 18 U.S.C. 1964(c). 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.03. - Reservation of legislative prerogative. 
(a)  The City Commission reserves the right to amend or repeal this chapter in any manner, including, but not limited to the complete elimination of any type or number of medical marihuana facilities authorized to operate in the City. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter may be held or construed to grant or "grandfather" any medical marihuana facility a vested right, license, permit or privilege to continued operations within the City. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter may be held or construed to authorize recreational use of marihuana in the City. In the event the state of Michigan adopts regulations permitting recreational marihuana in the future, permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to authorize such use. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.04. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
(1)  Act means the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., as amended. 
(2)  Applicant means a person who applies for a permit under this Chapter. Applicant includes, with respect to disclosures in an application, for purposes of ineligibility for a permit, or for purposes of a transfer of interest, a managerial employee of the applicant, a person holding an indirect ownership interest of ten percent or more in the applicant, and the following for each type of applicant: 
a.  For an individual or sole proprietorship: the proprietor and spouse. 
b.  For a partnership and limited liability partnership: all partners and their spouses. For a limited partnership and limited liability limited partnership: all general and limited partners, not including a limited partner holding a direct or indirect ownership interest of less than 10 percent and who does not exercise control over or participate in the management of the partnership, and their spouses. For a limited liability company: all members and managers, not including a member holding a direct or indirect ownership interest of less than 10 percent and who does not exercise control over or participate in the management of the company, and their spouses. 
c.  For a privately held corporation: all corporate officers or persons with equivalent titles and their spouses, all directors and their spouses, and all stockholders, not including those holding a direct or indirect ownership interest of less than 10 percent, and their spouses. 
d.  For a publicly held corporation: all corporate officers or persons with equivalent titles and their spouses, all directors and their spouses, and all stockholders, not including those holding a direct or indirect ownership interest of less than 10 percent, and their spouses. 
e.  For a multilevel ownership enterprise: any entity or person that receives or has the right to receive 10 percent or more of the gross or net profit from the enterprise during any full or partial calendar or fiscal year. 
f.  For a nonprofit corporation: all individuals and entities with membership or shareholder rights in accordance with the articles of incorporation or the bylaws and their spouses. 
(3)  Board means the medical marihuana licensing board created in section 301 of the Act. 
(4)  Building means a combination of materials forming a structure affording a facility or shelter for use or occupancy by individuals or property. Building includes a part or parts of the building and all equipment of the building. A building shall not be construed to mean a building incidental to the use for agricultural purposes of the land on which the building is located, or a greenhouse. 
(5)  Duplicative application means more than one application for a provisioning center facility submitted by or on behalf of the same Applicant. For purposes of this chapter, an application shall be deemed duplicative if any of the individuals identified under the definition of Applicant overlap for more than one application. 
(6)  Grower means a licensee and permittee that is a commercial entity located in this city that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for sale to a processor or provisioning center. 
(7)  LARA means the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs. 
(8)  Licensee means a person holding a state operating license issued under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq. 
(9)  Marihuana means that term as defined in section 7106 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106. 
(10)  Marihuana facility means a location at which a licensee and permittee is licensed and permitted to operate as a grower, processor, provisioning center, safety compliance facility, or secure transporter under the Act and this chapter. 
(11)  Marihuana plant means any plant of the species Cannabis sativa L. 
(12)  Marihuana product means marihuana or marihuana-infused product, or both, as those terms are defined in the Act unless otherwise provided for in the rules and this article. 
(13)  Permittee means a person who has been issued a medical marihuana facilities permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(14)  Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability limited partnership, trust, or other legal entity, as well as those persons defined as applicants. 
(15)  Prequalified means the applicant has submitted all information to LARA required by Rule 5 and LARA has determined the applicant is approved for pre-qualification status. Proof of such determination by LARA shall be provided by the applicant to the City. 
(16)  Processor means a licensee and permittee that is a commercial entity located in this state that purchases marihuana from a grower and that extracts resin from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center or another processor. 
(17)  Proposed marihuana facility means a location at which an applicant plans to operate under the Act, rules, and this chapter if the applicant is issued a state license, and a permit under this chapter. 
(18)  Provisioning center means a licensee and permittee that is a commercial entity located in this city that purchases marihuana from a grower or processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana to registered qualifying patients, directly or through the patients' registered primary caregivers. Provisioning center includes any commercial property where marihuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers. A noncommercial location used by a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver through the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs' (LARA) marihuana registration process in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act is not a provisioning center for purposes of this chapter. 
(19)  Qualified applicant means an applicant whose application has not been denied as provided in this Chapter and the zoning provisions of this code and has been approved by the City Clerk to participate in the lottery. 
(20)  Rules mean the emergency and general rules of the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs adopted pursuant to the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., and the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
(21)  Safety compliance facility means a licensee and permittee that is a commercial entity that receives marihuana from a marihuana facility or registered primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the marihuana to the marihuana facility. 
(22)  Secure transporter means a licensee and permittee that is a commercial entity located in this city that stores marihuana and transports marihuana between marihuana facilities for a fee. 
(23)  Stacked license means more than one state operating license issued to a single licensee to operate as a grower of class C (1,500 plants) as specified in each license at a marihuana facility. 
(24)  State operating license or license means a license that is issued pursuant to the Act that allows the licensee to operate as one of the following, specified in the license: 
a.  A grower. 
b.  A processor. 
c.  A secure transporter. 
d.  A provisioning center. 
e.  A safety compliance facility. 
(25)  Statewide monitoring system or, unless the context requires a different meaning, "system" means an internet-based, statewide database established, implemented, and maintained by the department under the marihuana tracking act, that is available to licensees, law enforcement agencies, and authorized state departments and agencies on a 24-hour basis for all of the following: 
a.  Verifying registry identification cards. 
b.  Tracking marihuana transfer and transportation by licensees, including transferee, date, quantity, and price. 
c.  Verifying in commercially reasonable time that a transfer will not exceed the limit that the patient or caregiver is authorized to receive under section 4 of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act. 
(26)  Tracking Act means the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq. 
a.  Unless the context requires a different meaning, any term used in this article that is defined by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. shall have the definition given in that act. 
b.  Unless the context requires a different meaning, any term used in this article that is defined by the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., shall have the definition given in that act. 
c.  Unless the context requires a different meaning, any term used in this article that is defined by the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq. shall have the definition given in that act. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.05. - Number of permitted facilities. 
    The maximum number of each type of medical marihuana facilities permitted in the City is as follows: 
Type of Facility Number Grower No limit Processor No limit Secure Transporter No limit Provisioning Center 13 Safety Compliance Facility No limit  
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.06. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall own or operate a marihuana facility in the City without holding a valid Medical Marihuana Facilities Permit from the City Clerk and a state operating license. 
(b)  No person or entity that was open or operating any facility purporting to produce, manufacture, test, transfer or transport medical marihuana or marihuana prior to the adoption of this chapter by the City Commission shall be considered a lawful use or lawful nonconforming use. 
(c)  The permit requirement in this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements imposed by any other state or local law, including but not limited to state or local laws applicable to commercial entities performing functions similar to the functions performed by medical marihuana facilities. 
(d)  This chapter does not apply to, or regulate, any protected patient or caregiver conduct pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act of 2008. 
(e)  A permit issued under this chapter is valid only for the location of the facility and type of facility that is listed on the permit application and is valid only for the operation of the facility at that location by the permit applicant, provided the facility remains in compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  The revocation, suspension, and placement of restrictions by the state on a state operating license shall apply equally to a permit issued by the City. 
(g)  Acceptance of a permit from the City under this chapter constitutes consent by the permittee, owners, managers and employees to permit the City Manager or designee to conduct inspections of the facility to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.07. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Permit applications for medical marihuana facilities shall be received by the City Clerk annually during a period specifically designated by the City Clerk for that purpose, and at no other time. The City Clerk will initially begin receiving permit applications for marihuana facilities on a date determined by the City Clerk as soon after the effective date of this section as the City Clerk deems practicable. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, the City Clerk shall be responsible for establishing the procedure for receiving, reviewing and processing permits, establishing the beginning and ending dates during which permits will initially be received, establishing the beginning and ending dates during which permits may be received each year, and providing public notice regarding the permitting process and of the time period within which the City will receive permit applications. 
(c)  Any person desiring to secure a permit shall make application to the City Clerk upon a form provided by the City Clerk. All permit applicants must be prequalified for a medical marihuana facilities license by the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (LARA) before submitting an application. A copy of all applications received shall be distributed by the City Clerk to any other necessary City departments for review to determine that the application is complete. If an application is incomplete or missing information the City Clerk shall notify the applicant of the incomplete or missing information in writing by mail or electronic mail sent to the address provided by the applicant in the application or notification. The applicant shall have ten business days of the date of mailing of the written notice to provide the incomplete or missing information to the City Clerk. 
(d)  Information requested in the application shall be provided for each individual identified under the definition of applicant in the application; any other person who controls, directly or indirectly, the applicant; any other person who is controlled, directly or indirectly, by the applicant; and each stockholder or other person having a one percent or greater beneficial interest in the proposed marihuana facility. The application for a permit shall include at a minimum the information and documentation listed below under oath: 
(1)  The name, business address, business telephone number, social security number, and, if applicable, federal tax identification number of the applicant. 
(2)  All residential addresses of the applicant for the past three years. 
(3)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  A copy of the application submitted to LARA for prequalification and documentation evidencing that the applicant has been prequalified for a medical marihuana facilities license by LARA. 
(5)  Whether the applicant has been indicted for, charged with, arrested for, convicted of, pled guilty or nolo contendere to, or forfeited bail concerning, a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States, or a controlled substance-related felony, within the past ten years preceding the date of the application. 
(6)  Whether the applicant has been indicted for, charged with, arrested for, convicted of, pled guilty or nolo contendere to, or forfeited bail concerning, a misdemeanor involving a controlled substance, theft, dishonesty, or fraud in any state or been found responsible for violating a local chapter in any state involving a controlled substance, dishonesty, theft, or fraud that substantially corresponds to a misdemeanor in that state within the past five years. 
(7)  Whether the applicant has previously violated this chapter or a substantially similar chapter in another municipality preceding the date of the application. 
(8)  A comprehensive operating plan for the marihuana facility for which the application is being submitted that includes all of the information required for the Marihuana Facilities Plan to be submitted in connection with a state license pursuant to the rules, the operational standards in this chapter, as applicable, and the following at a minimum: 
a.  A description of the type of marihuana facility applied for. 
b.  A security plan for the marihuana facility that addresses all required security measures of the rules and addresses at a minimum the ability to meet the security measures of the rules. The security plan must contain the specific details of each piece of security equipment to be utilized by the marihuana facility and comply with the provisions of this chapter, as well as any other applicable provisions of the rules adopted by LARA. 
c.  An HVAC plan for the marihuana facility describing in detail among other things the equipment or systems that will be used to prevent any odor of marihuana from leaving the premises. 
d.  A staffing plan that addresses the number of persons estimated to be employed at the facility, and employee hiring, and an employee training manual that includes, but is not limited to, employee safety procedures, employee guidelines, security protocol, and educational training, including, but not limited to, where appropriate, marihuana product information, dosage and daily limits, or educational materials. 
e.  A marketing plan that at a minimum: 
1.  Details how the marihuana facility will comply with all municipal chapters and state law regulating signs and advertising; 
2.  Provides that marihuana products must be marketed or advertised as "medical marihuana" for use only by registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers; 
3.  Provides that marihuana products must not be marketed or advertised to minors aged 17 years or younger. 
f.  An inventory and record keeping plan. 
g.  A scaled conceptual site plan. 
h.  Written policies and procedures to timely address any concerns or complaints expressed by residents and businesses within the neighborhood surrounding the proposed location of the medical marihuana facility. 
i.  For growers, the operational plan shall also include a cultivation plan that includes but is not limited to: 
1.  The cultivation process or processes that will be used including a description of the grow medium, the equipment, and the fertilizer, herbicides and any other chemicals to be used; 
2.  The estimated electrical and water usage and a statement of the projected daily average and peak electrical load anticipated to be used by the marihuana facility, a certification from a licensed electrician that the premises are equipped to safely accept and utilize the required or anticipated electric load for the facility, and a certification from the electrical utility supplying electricity to the facility that the anticipated electrical loads required for the facility will not exceed the capacity of the electrical supply system; 
3.  A waste water plan that details how wastewater generated during the cultivation of marihuana shall be disposed of in compliance with applicable state and local laws and regulations; 
4.  A plant waste disposal plan that at a minimum: 
i.  Details how marihuana product waste will be destroyed, or rendered into an unusable and unrecognizable form and recorded in the statewide monitoring system. Disposal by on-site burning or via the sewer system is prohibited; 
ii.  Provides that all waste that is hazardous waste shall be disposed of pursuant to MCL 324.11101 to 324.90106; 
iii.  Provides that marihuana product waste shall be disposed of in a secured waste receptacle using one or more of the following: 
1)  A manned and permitted solid waste landfill; 
2)  A manned compostable materials operation or facility; 
3)  An in-vessel digester; and 
4)  Provides disposal will be in a manner in compliance with applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
5.  A mold, mildew and pest prevention plan; 
6.  An air quality plan addressing monitoring, clearance, temperature and humidity control, Co2, ozone, fumigation, and odor mitigation; 
7.  A pesticide and chemical safety plan which shall include a detailed description of all toxic, hazardous, or flammable materials, chemicals and pesticides, that will be kept or used at the marihuana facility, and a detailed plan describing where and how such materials, chemicals and pesticides will be stored in the marihuana facility, and the means of disposing of unused toxic or flammable materials, chemicals, and pesticides. 
j.  For a provisioning center, the operational plan shall also include: 
1.  A detailed description of the products and services to be provided; 
2.  A plant waste disposal plan that at a minimum: 
i.  Details how marihuana product waste will be destroyed, or rendered into an unusable and unrecognizable form and recorded in the statewide monitoring system. Disposal by on-site burning or via the sewer system is prohibited; 
ii.  Provides that all waste that is hazardous waste shall be disposed of pursuant to MCL 324.11101 to 324.90106; 
iii.  Provides that marihuana product waste shall be disposed of in a secured waste receptacle using one or more of the following: 
1)  A manned and permitted solid waste landfill; 
2)  A manned compostable materials operation or facility; 
3)  An in-vessel digester; and 
4)  Provides disposal will be in a manner in compliance with applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
k.  For a processor, the operational plan shall also include: 
1.  A detailed description of the products to be produced; 
2.  A waste water plan that details how wastewater generated during the processing of marihuana products shall be disposed of in compliance with applicable state and local laws and regulation; 
3.  A plant waste disposal plan that at a minimum: 
i.  Details how marihuana product waste will be destroyed, or rendered into an unusable and unrecognizable form and recorded in the statewide monitoring system. Disposal by on-site burning or via the sewer system is prohibited; 
ii.  Provides that all waste that is hazardous waste shall be disposed of pursuant to MCL 324.11101 to 324.90106; 
iii.  Provides that marihuana product waste shall be disposed of in a secured waste receptacle using one or more of the following: 
1)  A manned and permitted solid waste landfill; 
2)  A manned compostable materials operation or facility; 
3)  An in-vessel digester; and 
4)  Provides disposal will be in a manner in compliance with applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
(9)  The address of the proposed marihuana facility to be operated by the applicant. 
(10)  Proof that the applicant has or will have lawful possession of the premises proposed for the marihuana facility for the period during which the permit will be issued, which proof may consist of: a deed, a lease, a real estate contract contingent upon successful licensing, or letter of intent by the owner of the premises indicating an intent to lease the premises to the applicant contingent upon the applicant successfully obtaining a state operating license and local permit. 
(11)  Whether the applicant holds an elective office of a governmental unit of this state, another state, or the federal government; is a member of or employed by a regulatory body of a governmental unit in this state, another state or the federal government; or is employed by a governmental unit of this state. 
(12)  The mailing address and electronic address at which the applicant desires to receive notification under this chapter, and phone numbers at which the applicant desires to be contacted. 
(13)  Whether the applicant has ever applied for or has been granted any commercial license or certificate issued by LARA or any other jurisdiction concerning medical marihuana or marihuana that has been denied, restricted, suspended, revoked or not renewed, and a statement describing the facts and circumstances concerning the application, denial, restriction, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal, including the licensing authority, the date each action was taken, and the reason for each action. 
(14)  Whether the applicant has an interest in any other application for a permit or approved permit under this chapter at the time of application. 
(15)  Whether the applicant has an interest in any other marihuana facility under the Act, and if so the type of facility, name, and location of the facility the applicant has an interest in. 
(16)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State of Michigan or the chapters of the City of Traverse City in conducting the business in which the permit will be used, and that a violation on the premises may be cause for nonrenewal of a permit issued under this section, or for revocation of the permit. 
(17)  A statement that the applicant understands that the issuance of a permit under this section is not intended to grant, nor shall be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution for growing, sale, consumption, use, distribution, or possession of marihuana in any form or manner that is not in compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq., and all other applicable rules promulgated by the state of Michigan, or from criminal prosecution or the seizure of property by federal authorities under the Federal Controlled Substances Act. 
(18)  A statement that the applicant understands and agrees to be bound by the indemnification provision of this chapter. 
(19)  A statement by the applicant indicating acceptance of a permit from the City under this chapter constitutes consent by the permittee, owners, managers and employees to permit the City Manager or designee to conduct inspections of the facility to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(20)  A statement by the applicant indicating that all identified under the definition of applicant consent to criminal history investigations performed by the City Police Department. 
(21)  All marihuana facilities licensed and permitted to operate in the City shall at all times maintain in full force and effect insurance in amounts and coverage type required by the City Clerk. Applicants shall provide evidence of such insurance in the form of a certificate of insurance evidencing the existence of a valid and effective policy, or, evidence that the applicant is able to obtain such insurance and state the limits of each policy, the name of the insurer, the effective date and expiration date of each policy, policy number if known, and the names of additional insured which shall include the City of Traverse City, its officials, and employees. 
(22)  Whether the applicant has filed, or been served with a complaint or other notice filed with any public body regarding the delinquency in the payment of or dispute over the filings concerning the payment of any tax required under federal, state, or local law, including the amount of any tax, taxing agency and time periods involved. 
(23)  Applicants have a continuing duty to provide the City with up-to-date information and shall notify the City Clerk in writing of any changes to its mailing address, phone numbers, electronic mail address or other contact information and changes to any other information the applicant has provided to the City as a part of the permit application within ten days of any such change occurring. 
(24)  The City Clerk may from time to time establish other qualifications for the application and permit which shall be provided in writing to prospective applicants with the application form. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.08. - Acceptance or denial of application. 
(a)  Applications received may be denied by the City Clerk if the applicant, upon written notice, fails to provide missing or incomplete information within the time specified in this section. The City Clerk may deny an application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant has not been prequalified for a marihuana facility state license by LARA. 
(2)  The applicant did not pay the required application fee at the time of submission of the application. 
(3)  The applicant has not provided satisfactory proof that the applicant has or will have lawful possession of the premises proposed for the location of the marihuana facility for the period during which the permit will be issued. 
(4)  The applicant's proposed location does not comply with the zoning of this code. 
(5)  The applicant has not satisfactorily complied with all of the permit requirements in this chapter. 
(6)  The applicant is subject to a commercial license or certificate issued by a licensing authority in Michigan or any other jurisdiction concerning medical marihuana or marihuana that has been suspended or revoked. 
(7)  The City determines that the applicant has submitted an application containing false, misleading, or fraudulent information, or who has intentionally omitted pertinent information on the application for a medical marihuana facilities permit. 
(8)  The applicant is delinquent in the payment of any taxes, fees or other charges owed to or collected by the City. 
(9)  The comprehensive operating plan submitted by the applicant with the application does not comply with the requirements for a marihuana facilities plan as required by the rules, the requirements of this chapter, or the Act. 
(10)  It is a duplicative application. 
(11)  Notice of denial of an application shall be sent to the applicant in writing by mail or electronic mail to the last known address of the applicant on file with the City. If a permit is denied by the City Clerk, the applicant may appeal to the City Manager and provide any additional evidence to rebut the basis of the denial within 21 days from the date of the denial. The City Manager shall determine within 21 days whether or not the grounds for denial are true. If the City Manager determines that such grounds are supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the action of the City Clerk shall be sustained. The City Manager's decision may be reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  All applications for provisioning centers that are not denied as provided in subsection (a) above, and comply with all of the requirements for an application in this chapter and the zoning provisions of this code shall be accepted by the City Clerk and shall be known as "Qualified Applicants." All Qualified Applicants will be entered in a lottery as provided in this chapter to determine which of those applications will be accepted and issued a provisional permit. The first lottery held pursuant to this chapter shall take place on a date determined by the City Commission by resolution. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.09. - Provisional permit. 
(a)  Provisional permits will be issued by the City Clerk to qualified applicants whose applications are accepted as provided in this section. 
(b)  The City Clerk, in connection with the initial permit application period, shall issue provisional permits to qualified applicants whose application has been accepted as follows: 
(1)  All qualified applicants shall be entered in a lottery to determine which applicants will receive a provisional permit. 
(2)  The name of each qualified applicant shall be drawn individually by the City Clerk in sequence, with each qualified applicant being assigned a number corresponding to the order in which their name was drawn. 
(3)  The lottery will continue until the names of all qualified applicants are drawn and assigned a number, which shall create an eligibility list to be maintained by the City Clerk. 
(4)  Provisional permits will be issued in order of the eligibility list starting with the first qualified applicant on the list. 
(5)  All lottery drawings shall be conducted publicly with all entrants in the lottery advised in advance of the date, time and location of the lottery. 
(6)  The eligibility list shall remain valid until a new lottery. In the event a provisional permit becomes available, it shall be approved by offering it to the next qualified applicant in order of the eligibility list. If a qualified applicant declines a provisional permit when one becomes available or if their provisional permit lapses they shall be removed from the eligibility list. 
(c)  A provisional permit does not authorize the applicant to operate a medical marihuana facility without first obtaining a state operating license for the facility, and obtaining all other permits, inspections, and approvals required by this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this code. Upon issuance of a provisional permit the City Clerk is authorized to execute an affirmation to accompany an application for a facilities license that discloses that the City has adopted a chapter under section 205 of the act, the limitations on the number and type of each facility if any imposed by the chapter, a description of the City zoning regulations that apply, and any other information that may be required by the act or the rules for such an attestation. 
(d)  A provisional permit will lapse and be void 6 months from the date it has been issued if a state operating license, or all inspections and other permits and approvals required by City chapter are not obtained, or if an applicant is denied a state operating license. The City Clerk shall notify LARA of all persons whose provisional permit has lapsed or become void. A provisional permit may be extended upon a showing of good cause, such as a delay in obtaining a state license, or other good cause that is not the fault of the applicant, for an additional period not to exceed six months. 
(e)  A provisional permittee has a continuing duty to provide the City with up-to-date information including contact information or changes to any other information it has submitted with its permit application and shall notify the City Clerk in writing of any changes to its mailing address, phone numbers, electronic mail address or other information the provisional permittee provides to the City. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.10. - Termination, revocation, suspension, or restriction of provisional permit. 
(a)  A provisional permit may be terminated, revoked, suspended or restricted by the City Clerk in writing for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The provisional permittee is denied a state operating license; 
(2)  The marihuana facility is substantially different from the comprehensive operating plan, marihuana facility plan, conceptual plan or other representations contained in the application; 
(3)  Officers of the city are unable to access the proposed facility for permit inspections or are denied access by the provisional permittee; 
(4)  The provisional permittee fails, refuses, or becomes unable to obtain site plan approval and certificate of occupancy. 
(5)  Noncompliance with the Act, rules, or this chapter. 
(b)  If a provisional permit is terminated, revoked, suspended or restricted, the City Clerk or his or her designee will notify in writing by mail or electronic mail both the permit holder, at the last known address on file with the city for notification of the applicant, and the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs of the termination, revocation, suspension, or restriction of the permit and the reasons therefore in writing. 
(c)  The holder of a provisional permit under this article that is terminated, revoked, suspended or restricted may appeal the termination, revocation, suspension or restriction to the City Manager as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.11. - Medical marihuana facilities permit. 
(a)  Medical marihuana facilities permits will be issued by the City Clerk. In order to be issued a marihuana facilities permit an applicant who holds a valid provisional permit shall: 
(1)  Submit proof to the City Clerk it has been issued a State Operating License; 
(2)  Successfully complete the inspection required by subsection (c) of this section; 
(3)  Submit proof to the City Clerk of obtaining all permits and approvals required by all applicable chapters of the City including but not limited to an approved site plan; and 
(4)  Proof of insurance required by this section in the form of a certificate of insurance evidencing the existence of a valid and effective policy, stating the limits of each policy, the name of the insurer, the effective date and expiration date of each policy, policy number, and the names of additional insureds which shall include the city of Traverse City, its officials, and employees. An applicant who holds a provisional permit for a secure transporter permit shall additionally show proof of auto insurance, vehicle registration and registration as a commercial motor vehicle as applicable for any transporting vehicles used to transport marihuana product in order to be issued a marihuana facilities permit by the City Clerk. 
(b)  The site plan required for issuance of a marihuana facilities permit shall be consistent with the requirements the Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Before issuance of a marihuana facilities permit the City shall conduct an inspection of the proposed marihuana facility to verify that the premises of facility are constructed and can be operated in accordance with the application submitted, the approved site plan, the requirements of this code and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. No marihuana facilities permit may be issued and no marihuana facility may conduct any business or operations until the inspection is completed and it is determined that the premises of facility are constructed and can be operated in accordance with the application, marihuana facilities plan, and comprehensive operating plan submitted with the application as well as the approved site plan, and the facility is in compliance with the requirements of this code and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. 
(d)  The marihuana facilities permit shall be issued only in the name of the applicant. 
(e)  A marihuana facilities permit issued under this section is a revocable privilege granted by the City and is not a property right. Granting the permit does not create or vest any right, title, franchise or other property interest. 
(f)  Each permit is exclusive to the person who is issued the permit and that person must apply for and receive approval of the City Clerk pursuant to this chapter before a permit is transferred, sold, or purchased or otherwise amended. 
(g)  The marihuana facilities permit and state operating license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the business establishment. 
(h)  Acceptance of a marihuana facilities permit under this section shall constitute permission to the City Manager or his or her designee, within the authority granted him or her by this code under which such permit was granted, to enter upon and inspect the premises of the marihuana facility at all reasonable times. 
(i)  A permittee has a continuing duty to provide the City with up-to-date information including contact information or changes to any other information it has submitted with its permit application and shall notify the City Clerk in writing of any changes to its mailing address, phone numbers, electronic mail address or other information the permittee provides to the City. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.12. - Renewals and amendments of existing permits. 
(a)  Renewal or amendment of existing permits. 
(1)  Applications of renewal or amendment of existing permits shall be reviewed and granted or denied before applications for new permits are considered. 
(2)  The same application procedures, including the non-refundable fee, that apply to the submittal of a new permit application shall apply to renewal or amendment of existing permits. 
(3)  An application for renewal of an existing permit shall be submitted no sooner than 90 days before the existing permit expires and no later than 30 days before the existing permit expires. 
(b)  Amended applications. 
(1)  An amended application shall be submitted under either or both of the following circumstances: 
a.  When there is a change in any information the permit applicant was required to provide in the most recent application on file with the City, including but not limited to change in location or any change of ownership; and/or 
b.  When there is a change in any information the permit applicant was required to provide in the most recent application for a state operating license on file with the state of Michigan, including but not limited to change in location or any change of ownership. 
(2)  An application to amend an existing permit to change any information on the most recent application on file with the City shall follow the procedure listed in this chapter. 
(3)  Applications of renewal or amendment of existing permits shall be reviewed and granted or denied before applications for new permits are considered. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make changes or allow any changes to be made in the operation of the medical marihuana facility as represented in the permit application without first obtaining an amended permit from the City Clerk. 
(d)  A marihuana facilities permit shall run concurrent with the state operating license issued for the facility and shall be renewed annually unless revoked as provided by law. 
(e)  Renewal of permits issued in connection with class C grower stacked licenses will require only a single application form for the original class C grower permit and all stacked license permits issued to the applicant. The renewal application shall indicate that the application is for the renewal of permits issued in connection with class C grower stacked licenses and the permit or permits the applicant is seeking to renew. 
(f)  Notice of denial of a renewal application shall be sent to the applicant in writing by mail or electronic mail to the last known address of the applicant on file with the city for notification of the applicant. An applicant whose renewal application is denied may appeal denial to the City Manager as provided in this chapter. 
(g)  The City Clerk shall inform in writing by mail or electronic mail the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs of all permittees whose permit is renewed and if a permittee fails to renew a permit or the permittee's renewal application is denied. 
(h)  A medical marihuana facility shall not be in violation of the spacing requirements in the zoning code in the event a school was located less than the minimum spacing distance from the medical marihuana facility at any time after a permit under this article and a state license to operate the facility were issued. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.13. - Revocation, termination or suspension of permit. 
(a)  Any marihuana facilities permit shall automatically terminate and become void if the state license for the permitted use is revoked, terminates or becomes void. 
(b)  Any marihuana facilities permit may be revoked or suspended by the City Clerk upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  Operation of the permitted use is not commenced within 1 year of the date of issuance of the marihuana facilities permit. 
(2)  If the permitted use ceases or is discontinued for 90 days or more including during a change of ownership of the marihuana facility. 
(3)  Any change has occurred for which an amendment to the permit is required, without the permittee having obtained an amendment to the permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  Any noncompliance with any of the provisions of this code of chapters, the Act, the Tracking Act, and the rules. A medical marihuana facility shall not be in violation of the spacing requirements of the zoning code to a school at any time after a permit under this article and a state license to operate the facility were issued. 
(5)  The conduct of business in an unlawful manner or in such a way as to constitute a public nuisance or negatively impacts the health, safety, or general welfare of surrounding property or city residents. Evidence to support such a finding may include, but is not limited to, a continuing pattern of disorderly conduct or drug related criminal conduct upon or in the immediate vicinity of the premises, continuing pattern of criminal conduct directly related to or arising from the operation of the medical marihuana facility, or an ongoing nuisance condition emanating from or caused by the medical marihuana facility. 
(c)  A medical marihuana facilities permit shall be suspended for the transfer or attempted transfer of the permit or any interest in such permit without first obtaining an amendment to the permit. 
(d)  Any marihuana facilities permit shall automatically be suspended if the state operating license for the permitted use is suspended. The terms and conditions of suspension shall correspond to the suspension of the state operating license. 
(e)  Any medical marihuana facilities permit shall automatically be restricted if the state license for the permitted use is restricted. The terms and conditions of the restriction shall correspond to the restriction of the state license. 
(f)  If a medical marihuana facilities permit is terminated, revoked, suspended or restricted, the City Clerk will notify the permittee, at the permittee's last known address on file with the city for notification of the permittee, and the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs of the termination, revocation, suspension, or restriction of the permit and the reasons therefore in writing by mail or electronic mail. In the event the permit is terminated, revoked, suspended or restricted as a result of the permittee's state license being terminated, revoked, suspended or restricted, the notification requirement of this subsection does not apply. 
(g)  The holder of a marihuana facilities permit under this article that is terminated, revoked, suspended or restricted may appeal the termination, revocation, suspension or restriction to the City Manager as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.14. - Fees. 
    A nonrefundable permit fee set by resolution of City Commission, but not to exceed $5,000.00, shall be submitted with the application for a permit. This fee shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fees for licensing or permitting requirements including but not limited to site plan review, zoning, or building permits. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.15. - Minimum operational standards for all marihuana facilities. 
    All marihuana facilities shall at a minimum comply with the following operational standards: 
(1)  Marihuana facilities shall be open for inspection upon request by the building official, the fire division, or law enforcement officials for determination of compliance with all applicable laws and rules, and regulations during the stated hours of operation/use and at such other times as anyone is present on the premises. Inspections may include inspection of the facility premises, surveillance records, camera recordings, reports, records or other materials required as a condition of a permit under this article or a state operating license. Acceptance of a marihuana facilities permit or leasing property to a marihuana facility constitutes consent to such inspections and the seizure of any surveillance records, camera recordings, reports record or other materials required as a condition of the permit under this article or a state operating license without a search warrant. The person issued a permit, or an employee or agent of the thereof shall not hinder or obstruct a law enforcement officer or employee of the city from conducting inspections pursuant to this chapter, and shall not refuse, fail, or neglect to cooperate with a law enforcement officer or city employee in the performance of his or her duties in enforcing this chapter, the Act, or applicable state administrative rules. 
(2)  Marihuana facilities shall conduct the activities of the marihuana facility, including, without limitation, the cultivating, growing, processing, displaying, manufacturing, selling, storage of marihuana and marihuana-infused products, and storage of all materials used in connection with the cultivating, growing, processing, displaying, manufacturing, and selling of marihuana and marihuana-infused products indoors in a building and out of public view. 
(3)  Marihuana facilities shall install a fire alarm and a burglar alarm system. The fire alarm system shall meet the requirements of this code for a newly installed system and be monitored by a listed central station. All burglar alarm systems shall be monitored by a company that is staffed 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(4)  Marihuana facilities shall have a video surveillance system that complies with the rules at a minimum, and that makes, retains, and stores surveillance recordings as provided in the rules. 
(5)  Surveillance recordings of marihuana facilities shall be subject to inspection and review by the city upon request. All surveillance recordings shall be kept in a manner that allows the city to view and obtain copies of the recordings immediately upon request. 
(6)  Marihuana facilities shall utilize sufficient measures and means to prevent smoke, odor, debris, dust, fluids and other substances from exiting the premises of the facility at any time. In the event that any smoke, odor, debris, dust, fluids or other substances exit the marihuana facility in a detectable amount sufficient to interfere with the reasonable and comfortable use and enjoyment of adjacent property, or that causes damage to property, the permittee for the facility and the owner of the premises shall be jointly and severally liable for such conditions and shall be responsible for immediate, full cleanup and correction of such condition. The permittee shall properly dispose of all such materials, items and other substances in a safe, sanitary, and secure manner in compliance with all federal and state laws and regulations, and this chapter. 
(7)  Marihuana facilities shall install and maintain in operable condition a system to preclude marihuana odors from emanating from the property of the marihuana facility in a detectable amount sufficient to interfere with the reasonable and comfortable use and enjoyment of adjacent property as determined by the objective standards of a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(8)  Subject to the laws of this state, before hiring a prospective employee, a permittee shall conduct a background check of the prospective employee. If the background check indicates a pending charge or conviction within the past ten years for a controlled substance-related felony, the permittee shall not hire the prospective employee without written permission of the board. 
(9)  Access to the marihuana facility is restricted to the permittee, employees of the permittee, and registered qualifying patients and registered primary caregivers with valid registry cards, if applicable, LARA through its investigators, agents, auditors or the state police, and, local law and code enforcement officers and any other designees of the City Manager. 
(10)  All marihuana facilities must be at a fixed location. Mobile marihuana facilities and drive through operations are prohibited. Sale or transfer of marihuana products by internet or mail order, consignment, or at wholesale is prohibited. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit sale or transfer of marihuana products by marihuana facilities as otherwise expressly authorized by the Act. 
(11)  All marihuana facilities shall comply with all provisions of this chapter, state law and administrative rules regulating signs and advertising. 
(12)  The business, operations, marketing and advertising of all marihuana facilities and marihuana products shall comply at all times with applicable state law and regulations, and this chapter. 
(13)  Marihuana products not identified and recorded in the statewide monitoring system pursuant to the Act, the Tracking Act, and the rules are prohibited from being on the premises of any marihuana facility, and shall not be sold or transferred by any permittee. 
(14)  Any marihuana product without a batch number or identification tag pursuant to the rules is prohibited from being at or on the premises of any medical marihuana facility. 
(15)  Marihuana facilities shall comply with the building and fire safety provisions of the rules as are applicable to the particular type of facility at all times. 
(16)  Marihuana product waste will be destroyed, or rendered into an unusable and unrecognizable form in a manner that prevents its acquisition by any person who may not lawfully possess it, and recorded in the statewide monitoring system. Marihuana product waste shall be disposed of in a secured waste receptacle using one or more of the following: 
a.  A manned and permitted solid waste landfill; 
b.  A manned compostable materials operation or facility; 
c.  An in-vessel digester. 
(16)  All marihuana product waste that is hazardous waste shall be disposed of pursuant to MCL 324.11101 to 324.90106. 
(17)  All marihuana product waste or marihuana products that are to be destroyed, or that LARA orders to be destroyed, shall not be sold. 
(18)  All inventory of marihuana products must be stored in a secured, limited-access area or restricted-access area, and identified and tracked consistent with the statewide monitoring system under the Act, the Tracking Act, and the rules. 
(19)  All containers used to store marihuana products for transfer or sale between marihuana facilities shall meet the requirements of the rules for such containers. 
(20)  All chemicals or solvents must be stored separately from marihuana products and kept in locked storage areas. 
(21)  Marihuana-infused products or materials used in direct contact with such products must have separate storage areas from toxic or flammable materials. 
(22)  Each permittee shall post and keep at all times visible to the public, in a conspicuous place on the premises, a sign to be furnished by the City Clerk's office, which sign shall be in the following form: "WARNING: THE TRAVERSE CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT MUST BE NOTIFIED IMMEDIATELY OF ALL UNLAWFUL ACTS AND DISTURBANCES IN THIS ESTABLISHMENT." Permittees shall immediately report to the police department any unlawful act, conduct, or disturbance committed upon the premises. (Corresponds to Rule 15) 
(23)  Respond to inquiry. The Permittee is required to respond by phone or email within 24 hours of contact by the City concerning its medical marihuana establishment at the phone number or email address provided to the City as the contact for the business. Each 24 hour period during which an owner or manager does not respond to the City shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.16. - Minimum operational standards applicable to provisioning centers. 
    All provisioning centers shall, in addition to the minimum operational standards for all marihuana facilities, comply with the following operational standards at a minimum: 
(1)  Provisioning centers shall open no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and close no later than 8:00 p.m. 
(2)  No alcohol or tobacco products may be sold, used, or consumed on the premises. No marihuana or marihuana-infused products may be used or consumed on the premises. 
(3)  No marihuana plants shall be allowed on the premises. 
(4)  During times when the provisioning center is not open to the public, processed marihuana, marihuana products, cash and currency shall be stored in a safe or security vault that is incorporated into the building structure or securely attached to the building structure or a safe room with a security vault or other secure door. 
(5)  A provisioning center shall purchase marihuana only from a grower or processor. 
(6)  All transfers of marihuana to a provisioning center from a separate marihuana facility shall be by means of a secure transporter. 
(7)  A provisioning center shall sell or transfer marihuana only to a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver. 
(8)  A provisioning center shall transfer marihuana to or from a safety compliance facility for testing only by means of a secure transporter. 
(9)  The sale or transfer marihuana to a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver shall only occur after it has been tested and bears the label required for retail sale by the act and the rules. 
(10)  Before selling or transferring marihuana to a registered qualifying patient or to a registered primary caregiver on behalf of a registered qualifying patient, a provisioning center shall inquire of the statewide monitoring system to determine whether the patient and, if applicable, the caregiver hold a valid, current, unexpired, and unrevoked registry identification card and that the sale or transfer will not exceed the daily purchasing limit established by the board under the Act. 
(11)  All transactions, current inventory, and other information of the provisioning center shall be entered into the statewide monitoring system as required by the Act, rules, and the marihuana tracking act. 
(12)  A provisioning center shall not allow a physician to conduct a medical examination or issue a medical certification document on the premises for the purpose of obtaining a registry identification card. 
(13)  Marihuana and marihuana paraphernalia shall not be sold, given away, or dispensed from any outdoor location. 
(14)  A provisioning center shall have a separate room that is dedicated as the point of sale area for the transfer or sale of marihuana products. 
(15)  All marihuana products shall be kept behind a counter or other barrier to ensure a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver does not have direct access to the marihuana products. 
(16)  A provisioning center shall comply with all packaging and labeling requirements of the rules before selling or transferring marihuana products. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.17. - Minimum operational standards applicable to grow facilities. 
    All grow facilities shall, in addition to the minimum operational standards for all marihuana facilities, comply with the following operational standards at a minimum: 
(1)  Until December 31, 2021, the permittee or an active employee shall have a minimum of two years' experience as a registered primary caregiver. 
(2)  While holding a permit for grower facility, no permittee shall be a registered primary caregiver and shall not employ an individual who is simultaneously a registered primary caregiver. 
(3)  All transactions, current inventory, and other information of the grow facility shall be entered into the statewide monitoring system as required by the Act, rules, and the tracking act. 
(4)  All activities and operations of the grow facility, including cultivation, shall take place indoors within a building. 
(5)  The use of compressed gases such as carbon dioxide in multiple processes in the cultivation of marihuana shall meet the requirements of the rules for such processes. 
(6)  A grow facility shall not use any pesticides in the cultivation of marihuana that has not been approved by LARA for such purpose. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.18. - Minimum operational standards applicable to processor facilities. 
    All processor facilities shall, in addition to the minimum operational standards for all marihuana facilities, comply with the following operational standards at a minimum: 
(1)  A processor shall purchase marihuana only from a grower and shall sell marihuana-infused products or marihuana only to a provisioning center. 
(2)  A processor shall transfer marihuana only by means of a secure transporter. 
(3)  Until December 31, 2021, the permittee or an active employee shall have, a minimum of two years' experience as a registered primary caregiver. 
(4)  While holding a permit for processor facility, no permittee shall be a registered primary caregiver and shall not employ an individual who is simultaneously a registered primary caregiver. 
(5)  All transactions, current inventory, and other information of the processor facility shall be entered into the statewide monitoring system as required by the Act, rules, and the Tracking Act. 
(6)  Processes that extract oil from marihuana plants and marihuana products using flammable gas, flammable liquid, or compressed gases of varying materials including, but not limited to, butane, propane, and carbon dioxide shall meet the requirements of the rules for such processes. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.18.1. - Minimum standards applicable to secure transporters. 
    All secure transporter facilities shall, in addition to the minimum operational standards for all marihuana facilities, comply with the following operational standards at a minimum: 
(1)  May take physical custody of marihuana or money but legal custody belongs to the transferor or transferee. 
(2)  May not sell or purchase marihuana products. 
(3)  May store and transport marihuana and money associated with the purchase or sale of marihuana between marihuana facilities for a fee. 
(4)  Marihuana may not be transported to a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver. 
(5)  Marihuana product may only be transported in a locked, secured, sealed container that is not accessible while in transit. Money associated with the purchase or sale of marihuana product between facilities shall be locked in a sealed container kept separate from the marihuana product and only accessible to the secure transporter licensee/permittee and its employees. 
(6)  Each driver transporting marihuana must have a chauffeur's license issued by the State of Michigan. 
(7)  Each employee who has custody of marihuana or money that is related to a marihuana transaction shall not have been convicted of or released from incarceration for a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States within the past five years or have been convicted of a misdemeanor involving a controlled substance within the past 5 years. 
(8)  Each vehicle shall be operated with a two-person crew with at least 1 individual remaining with the vehicle at all times during the transportation of marihuana. 
(9)  A route plan and manifest shall be entered into the statewide monitoring system, and a copy shall be carried in the transporting vehicle and presented to a law enforcement officer upon request. 
(10)  A secure transporting vehicle shall not bear markings or other indication that it is carrying marihuana or a marihuana-infused product. 
(11)  A secure transporter is subject to administrative inspection by a law enforcement officer at any point during the transportation of marihuana to determine compliance with the Act and this chapter. 
(l)  All transactions, current inventory, and other information of the secure transporter shall be entered into the statewide monitoring system as required by the Act, rules, and the Tracking Act. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.19. - Minimum standards applicable to safety compliance facilities. 
    All safety compliance facilities shall, in addition to the minimum operational standards for all marihuana facilities, comply with the following operational standards at a minimum: 
(1)  A safety compliance facility is authorized to only receive marihuana from, test marihuana for, and return marihuana to a marihuana facility. 
(2)  A safety compliance facility must be accredited by an entity approved by the board by 1 year after the date the license is issued or have previously provided drug testing services to the State of Michigan or Michigan's court system and be a vendor in good standing in regard to those services unless a variance from this requirement is granted by the board as provided by the act. 
(3)  A safety compliance facility shall: 
a.  Perform tests to certify that marihuana is reasonably free of chemical residues such as fungicides and insecticides. 
b.  Use validated test methods to determine tetrahydrocannabinol, tetrahydrocannabinol acid, cannabidiol, and cannabidiol acid levels. 
c.  Perform tests that determine whether marihuana complies with the standards the board establishes for microbial and mycotoxin contents. 
d.  Perform other tests necessary to determine compliance with any other good manufacturing practices as prescribed in rules. 
e.  Enter all transactions, current inventory, and other information into the statewide monitoring system as required in the Act, rules, and the Tracking Act. 
f.  Have a secured laboratory space that cannot be accessed by the general public. 
g.  Retain and employ at least 1 staff member with a relevant advanced degree in a medical or laboratory science. 
h.  Comply with all provisions of the rules regarding the testing, retesting, and sampling of marihuana and marihuana products. 
i.  Establish an adequate chain of custody and instructions for sample and storage requirements. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.20. - Conflicts, future laws and regulations. 
    Should the State of Michigan in the future adopt additional or stricter laws or regulations governing the production, processing, transporting, testing, sale and distribution of marihuana, the additional or stricter laws and regulations shall control the establishment or operation of any marihuana facility in the city, as well as the issuance, denial, suspension, or revocation of any permit under this article. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.21. - Penalty and remedies. 
(a)  Any violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction subject to penalties imposed on municipal civil infractions by section 202.99 of this Code and state law. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter, shall be deemed a new and separate offense for each day that such condition continues to exist. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties in this chapter, any violation of this chapter, the Act, or the rules may result in the denial of a permit, or the revocation, suspension, or non-renewal of a permit issued under this chapter. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from pursuing any other remedy provided by law and equity, including an injunction, in conjunction with or in lieu of prosecuting persons under this section for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
845.22. - Effect tie-barred. 
    This amendment to chapter 845 shall only take effect if the Zoning Code is amended as needed to zone for the activities contemplated in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1086 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1090 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
Chapter 846 - Pawnbrokers[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Usury, M.C.L.A.  438.31 
State Law reference- Secondhand and junk dealers, M.C.L.A.  445.401 et seq.; Pawnbrokers generally, MCL  446.201-446.219 
Cross reference- Licenses in general, Ch. 802; Secondhand stores, Ch. 856 

846.01 - License required; nonissuance to felons. 
    No person shall engage in the business of a pawnbroker without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be issued to any person who has been previously convicted of a felony. 
(1976 Code Sec. 23.181) 
846.02 - Records. 
    All pawnbrokers shall keep accurate and comprehensive records of all goods purchased and sold, including the names of the persons from whom such goods are purchased and to whom such goods are sold. 
(1976 Code Sec. 23.182) 
846.03 - Display of name. 
    Every licensed pawnbroker shall place his or her name or the name of his or her firm with the words "Licensed Pawnbroker" in large, legible characters over the outside of the door of his or her place of business. 
(1976 Code Sec. 23.183) 
846.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 848 - Pet Shops[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 856, passed January 18, 2010, repealed ch. 848. Nothing in this ordinance of the repeal of any inconsistent ordinances shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action required or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any charter be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance. 
State Law reference- Animal diseases generally, M.C.L.A.  287.707 et seq.; Animals generally, M.C.L.A.  287.701 et seq., 750.49 et seq., 752.21 et seq.; 
Cross reference- Animals generally, Ch. 610; Injuring animals,  1064.03; Animals in parks,  1064.11; Animals in cemeteries,  1066.03 

Chapter 851 - Recreational Marihuana Establishments 

Sec. 851.01. - Definitions. 
    Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, as may be amended. 
( 1085 , Passed 12-17-18.) 
Sec. 851.02. - Marihuana establishments prohibited. 
    The City of Traverse City ordains that pursuant to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Section 6.1, the City elects to prohibit marihuana establishments within its boundaries. 
( 1085 , Passed 12-17-18.) 
Sec. 851.03. - Violations and penalty. 
    See Section 202.99 for general Code penalty. 
( 1085 , Passed 12-17-18.) 
Sec. 851.04. - Sunset provision. 
    The provisions of Chapter 851 shall expire on December 6, 2019 unless Chapter 851 is repealed or amended sooner by the City Commission. 
( 1085 , Passed 12-17-18.) 
Chapter 852 - Roller Skating Rinks and Other Amusement Businesses[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 857, passed January 18, 2010 repealed ch. 852. Nothing in this ordinance of the repeal of any inconsistent ordinances shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action required or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any charter be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance. 
State Law reference- Carnival rides; inspection, licensing, regulation and safety devices, M.C.L.A.  408.651 et seq.; Masks and disguises, M.C.L.A.  750.396 
Cross reference- Mechanical amusement device arcades, Ch. 840; Shooting galleries, Ch. 860 

Chapter 856 - Secondhand Stores[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand dealers, M.C.L.A.  445.401 et seq.; Pawnbrokers, MCL  446.201-446.219, M.C.L.A.  446.201 et seq.; Ch. 846 
Cross reference- Licenses in general, Ch. 802; Pawnbrokers, Ch. 846; Solicitors, Ch. 862; Transient traders, Ch. 870 

856.01 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Materials means articles incidental to the operation of a secondhand store, including, but not limited to, crates, boxes, bags, discarded goods or refuse. 
(2)  Secondhand goods means household articles that have been sold before and used one or more times. Secondhand goods are goods that have been previously owned by someone other than the manufacturer or dealer. Household articles shall not include vehicles, farm machinery, boats or business machinery. 
(3)  Secondhand store means any permanent place in which a substantial portion of the business is devoted to the sale of secondhand goods for profit or fundraising for charitable purposes. 
(Ord. 195. Passed 3-17-86.) 
856.02 - License required. 
    No person shall have and operate a secondhand store without first obtaining a license therefor. Such license is required in addition to any other required state or Municipal license. 
(Ord. 195. Passed 3-17-86.) 
856.03 - Conditions for issuance. 
(a)  Goods or materials on the premises of a secondhand store shall not be stored, allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, alley, walkway or curb, or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(b)  The area on the premises where goods or materials are kept shall be indoors or enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid wood or masonry vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of six feet measured from ground level. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business. 
(c)  Deposits or donations of goods and materials are not permitted during periods when the secondhand store is not open for business. Receiving areas shall be posted with a single notice, not less than one square foot nor greater than two square feet in total area, stating that goods are to be left during business hours only. 
(Ord. 195. Passed 3-17-86.) 
856.04 - License fee. 
    Each application for a license or renewal of a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by payment of a license fee per calendar year or any portion of a year if the license is in effect for only part of a year. Such license fee shall be nonrefundable. The City Commission shall, by resolution, establish the amount of the license fee. 
(Ord. 195. Passed 3-17-86.) 
856.05 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A.  764.9c(2); M.S.A.  28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 360. Passed 5-17-93.) 
856.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 858 - Self-Service Laundry and Dry Cleaning Facilities[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 858, passed January 18, 2010 repealed Ch. 858. Nothing in this ordinance of the repeal of any inconsistent ordinances shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action required or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any charter be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance. 
State Constitution reference- Dry cleaners and launderers generally, Mich. Adm. Code  R325.17101 et seq. 
State Law reference- Opening or attempting to open coin-operated devices, M.C.L.A.  750.113, 752.811, 752.812; Slugs, M.C.L.A.  752.801 et seq. 
Cross reference- Licenses in general, Ch. 802 

Chapter 860 - Shooting Galleries[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- Weapons and explosives, General Offenses. Ch. 690; Licenses in general, Ch. 802; Mechanical amusement device arcades, Ch. 840; Roller skating rinks and other amusement businesses, Ch. 852 

860.01 - License required. 
    No Person shall conduct, maintain, or operate any shooting gallery which is open to the public without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(1976 Code Sec. 23.221) 
860.02 - Certifications. 
    No shooting gallery license shall be granted except upon certification by the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, and the Health Department that the public peace, health and safety will not be jeopardized thereby. 
(1976 Code Sec. 23.222) 
860.03 - Hours of operation. 
    Shooting galleries shall not operate and shall be closed to the public between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day on weekdays and between 11:30 p.m. Saturday and 7:00 a.m. Monday. 
(1976 Code Sec. 23.223) 
860.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 862 - Solicitors[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Law reference- Power to license, MCL  91.1; Hawkers and transient merchants generally, MCL  445.371 
Cross reference- Solicitors in parks,  1064.17 

862.01 - Intent. 
    Regulation of all types of solicitation are sufficiently connected to the City's interest in preventing crime, preventing fraud, and protecting citizens' quiet enjoyment and peace, especially in residential areas where there exists a significant connection among evening solicitation, evidence of nighttime crime and disruption of citizens' quiet enjoyment and peace to limit hours of solicitation in residential neighborhoods, while leaving ample alternative channels of communication open to solicitors. The City has no other less restrictive means available to achieve these objectives. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94. Ord. 585. Passed 11-4-02.) 
862.02 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Solicitor shall mean any person who requests money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value, by personal interview or otherwise, on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value, or the net proceeds over reasonable expenses thereof, will be used for a charitable, religious, patriotic, civic, educational or philanthropic purposes. 
(2)  Person shall mean any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, or joint stock association, church, religious sect or denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
(3)  Structure shall mean tents, push carts, trailers, stands, wagons, vehicles, booths or any other material or thing that occupies space whether portable or fixed. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94, Ord 920. Passed 7-15-11) 
862.03 - Permit required; exception. 
(a)  Required. No person shall solicit without a permit from the City Clerk authorizing such solicitation. Permits shall bear the name and address of the person soliciting, type of permit, type and location of soliciting and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the City of the purpose of the solicitation or of the person or group conducting the solicitation. Such permit, or a copy thereof, shall be carried by a solicitor. Such solicitation shall comply with this Code, state laws and regulations and the conditions of the permit. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following activities are exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  Solicitations made to a congregation or group in attendance at one location and made by the person or organization inviting the individuals composing the congregation or group; 
(2)  Solicitations made in books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and other similar publications or through the mail; 
(3)  Solicitations made over the radio, television or telephone; 
(4)  The distribution of handbills or leaflets where the individual distributing them does not accept payments, orders or contributions; 
(5)  Any person qualifying as a "transient merchant" shall be excluded from the definition of a solicitor and the regulations contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.04 - Filing false application. 
    No person shall knowingly file or cause to be filed an application and a document supporting an application containing one or more false statements. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.05 - Duration; transferability. 
    A permit may be issued for up to one calendar year. The permit issued under this chapter is non-transferable; provided, however, that this shall not prevent any solicitor from using any number of representatives and provided, further, that the City Clerk shall require that each representative shall wear a facsimile copy of such permit while engaged in solicitation or a standard identifiable uniform. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.06 - Solicitation permit application. 
    Every person desiring to solicit is required to make written application for a permit from the City Clerk. An application shall be made upon a form provided by the City Clerk. The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, the information requested on the application, such as: 
(1)  Type of organization (e.g., religious, charitable, educational, citizen group, civic, patriotic or philanthropic); 
(2)  Name, address, telephone number and headquarters of the person applying for the permit; 
(3)  The names, addresses and phone number of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitations; 
(4)  The purposes for which such solicitation is to be made and the approximate number of representatives who will be soliciting; 
(5)  An outline of the method or methods to be used on conducting the solicitations; 
(6)  Location of areas in which soliciting will be conducted; 
(7)  The time when such solicitation shall be made, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations and the hours of the day thereof; 
(8)  Such other information as may be required by the City Clerk to determine the kind or character of the proposed solicitation and whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not adverse to, the public welfare; 
(9)  If applicable, a copy of a state permit to solicit funds or an exemption certificate; 
(10)  The date or approximate date of the last permit issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.07 - Investigation of residential area solicitor. 
    Upon receipt of an application for license to solicit in a residential area, the City Clerk shall conduct an investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public good. No license shall be issued without approval of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 769. Passed 8-20-07. Ord. 1027. Passed 9-8-15) 
862.08 - Solicitation permit fees. 
    An application for a solicitor's permit shall be accompanied by a fee. Such fee shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. No fee shall be charged to citizen groups and religious groups. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.09 - Solicitors distributing food. 
    No permit shall be issued to a solicitor distributing food until the applicant and any vehicle and equipment used by such applicant are approved by the Health Department. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.10 - Permit issuance or denial. 
    No permit may be issued to, nor may any soliciting be conducted by: 
(1)  Any person who has made a false material statement in the application for the permit. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of this chapter or whose solicitation permit has previously been revoked by the City. 
(3)  Any person who has been convicted of a felony or a dangerous misdemeanor. 
(4)  Any person soliciting in the C-4 District on private property utilizing a tent or other structure or shelter made from soft fabric like material without first demonstrating that the tent or other structure will be properly secured and stable, is flame retardant, and capable of withstanding strong winds. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94, Ord. 920. Passed 7-15-11. Ord. 1027. Passed 9-8-15) 
862.11 - Hours in residential areas. 
    No person shall engage in soliciting in residential areas prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier, on any weekday or Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday, New Year's Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Martin Luther King Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.12 - Revocation. 
    A permit shall be revoked by the City Clerk if, upon receipt of written information or upon the Clerk's own investigation, the Clerk has reason to believe a permitted solicitor: 
(1)  Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the Traverse City Code, or any statute of the State of Michigan. 
(2)  Has made a false material statement in the application or has otherwise become disqualified for the issuance of such a permit. 
(3)  Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, which violation has been documented by a written complaint certified by the City Clerk, pursuant to Section 812.12. 
(4)  Has conducted solicitation that is in any manner adverse to the protection of the public health, safety or welfare of the City. 
    Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the City Clerk to the registered solicitor in person or by certified mail addressed to his or her place of business or residence address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the permit shall become null and void. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.13 - Manner of soliciting; duties of solicitors. 
    No solicitor shall: 
(1)  Solicit upon a premises in defiance of a posted notice stating "No Solicitors or Transient Merchants" or "No Solicitors." 
(2)  Fail to immediately and peacefully depart from premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(3)  Fail to accurately reveal all information contained in the application for a solicitation permit and all information required to be revealed by state law to any person requesting such information. Failure of a solicitor to reveal such information shall be grounds for the revocation of the permit pursuant to Section 862.11 or the denial of future solicitation permits pursuant to Section 862.09. 
(4)  Fail to identify himself or herself and the name of the organization represented. 
(5)  Fail to prominently wear the identification badge issued by the City Clerk. 
(6)  Solicit in a park as defined by Chapter 1064. 
(7)  Occupy a stationary location on a public street, sidewalk, parkway, park, parking lot or any other public property which is used by pedestrians or persons operating motor vehicles. A solicitor shall be presumed to have occupied a stationary location if he or she has conducted business in any such public place for a period in excess of ten minutes. 
(8)  If issued a license after the effective date of this amendment, leave a structure on private property in the C-4 District between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., or leave such unattended for more than two hours. 
(9)  Solicit in a public area less than one block away from where a City-authorized street fair, public festival, farmer's market or event is being conducted, except with the permission of the sponsor. 
(10)  Use or employ any flashing lights on any vehicle, or any other device for the purpose of attracting attention. 
(11)  Represent that the granting of a permit under this chapter is an endorsement by the City. 
(12)  Fail to follow all provisions of state laws and regulations, City ordinances and conditions of the solicitation permit. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94, Ord. 920. Passed 7-15-11) 
862.14 - Complaints; appeals. 
    If a written complaint is filed alleging that a solicitor has violated any provision of this chapter, the City Clerk shall promptly send a copy of the written complaint to the solicitor, together with a notice that an investigation will be made as to the truth of the complaint. The solicitor shall be invited to respond to the complaint and present evidence and respond to evidence produced by the investigation. If the City Clerk, after reviewing all relevant material, finds the complaint to be supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the complaint shall be certified. 
    If a permit is denied or revoked by the City Clerk, or if a written complaint is certified pursuant to this section, the applicant or holder of a permit may appeal to and have a hearing before the City Manager. The City Manager shall make a written determination, after presentation by the applicant and investigation by the City Clerk, as to whether or not the grounds for denial, revocation or complaint are true. If the City Manager determines that such grounds are supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the action of the City Clerk or the filing of the complaint shall be sustained and the applicant may appeal the City Manager's decision to the City Commission. Review by the City Commission shall be under the same standards of review as the determination by the City Manager and shall be in accordance with rules of procedure established by the City Commission. The City Commission's decision may be reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.15 - Other permits or licenses. 
    A permit obtained under this chapter shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for obtaining any other license, permit or authorization required by any other ordinance, statute or administrative rule. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.16 - Pushcarts or pedal carts. 
    Pushcarts are restricted to sidewalks in the residential districts unless otherwise prohibited by local ordinance. Pedal carts are restricted to sidewalks in the residential districts and are permitted on all City streets in accordance with the Michigan Vehicle Code. Motor vehicles are permitted on all streets in accordance with the Michigan Vehicle Code. Any solicitor using a motor vehicle or pedal cart in a street, when stopped, shall place the vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the curb and shall depart from such place as soon as the sale has been completed. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.17 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCLA 764.9c(2); MSA 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
862.18 - Civil infraction. 
    A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Ord. 387. Passed 6-20-94.) 
Chapter 863 - Transient Merchant[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
State Law reference- Power to license, M.C.L.A.  91.1; Hawkers and peddlers generally M.C.L.A.  445.371, et. seq. (Transient Merchants Act 51 of 1925); M.C.L.A.  91.2 
Cross reference- Secondhand stores, Ch. 856; Solicitors, Ch. 862; Street performers, Ch. 864; Transient Merchants in parks, Ch. 1064 

863.01 - Intent. 
    Regulation of all types of transient merchants is sufficiently connected to the City's interest in preventing crime, preventing fraud, and protecting citizens' quiet enjoyment and peace, especially in residential areas where there exists a significant connection among evening vending in residential areas, evidence of nighttime crime and disruption of citizens' quiet enjoyment and peace to limit hours of vending in residential neighborhoods, while leaving ample alternative channels of communication open to transient merchants. The City has no other less restrictive means available to achieve these objectives. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94. Ord. 612. Passed 10-20-03. Ord. 949. Passed 7-16-12) 
863.02 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Transient merchant shall mean any person offering, exposing for sale or making available for a price, or donation, making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, foodstuffs, or services of any kind, for immediate or future delivery or performance, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether or not he or she is collecting advance payments on such sale, by any of the following means: 
a.  Traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or other conveyance, from place to place, house to house, or street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting such goods, wares, merchandise or foodstuffs; 
b.  Hiring, leasing or occupying any building or structure for the exhibit or sale of such goods, foodstuffs, or services, while not on the City tax rolls, including a person who associates temporarily with a local merchant or dealer, which building or structure is not otherwise used for that purpose; 
c.  Offering out of doors such goods, foodstuffs or services from a stationary cart, stand, wagon, automotive vehicle or from one's person. 
(2)  Person shall mean any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, or joint stock association, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, subcontractor, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
(3)  Structure shall mean tents, push carts, trailers, stands, wagons, vehicles, booths or any other material or thing that occupies space whether portable or fixed. 
(4)  Vending shall operate as a verb for the activities attributed to transient merchant in the definition of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94, Ord. 919. Passed 7-15-11. Ord. 949. Passed 7-16-12) 
863.03 - License required; exceptions. 
(a)  Required. No person shall be a transient merchant without a license from the City Clerk authorizing such vending. Licenses shall bear the name and address of the person vending, term of license, type and location of vending, a picture, and a statement that the license does not constitute an endorsement by the City of the purpose of the vending or of the person or group conducting the vending. Such license shall be carried by a transient merchant. Such vending shall comply with this Code, state laws and regulations and the conditions of the license. No transient merchant license in the residential districts shall be granted except upon approval of the Chief of Police. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following activities are exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  Vending made in books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and other similar publications or through the mail; 
(2)  Vending made over the radio, television or telephone; 
(3)  Vending by persons under 12 years of age where all proceeds are retained by such transient merchant. No adult or business shall hire or subcontract such transient merchant in an attempt to evade the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Distributing handbills or leaflets where the distributor of them does not accept payments, orders or contributions; 
(5)  Vending between merchants where neither merchant is the ultimate consumer of goods or services involved or the ultimate donor of the gifts involved; 
(6)  Any person qualifying as a "solicitor" shall be excluded from the definition of a transient merchant and the regulations contained in this chapter; 
(7)  Persons who have express City Commission approval. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94. Ord. 949. Passed 7-16-12) 
863.04 - Filing false application. 
    No person shall knowingly file or cause to be filed an application or a document supporting an application containing one or more false statements. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94.) 
863.05 - Duration; transferability. 
    Licenses may be issued for up to one calendar year. The license issued under this chapter is non-transferable. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94.) 
863.06 - Transient merchant license application. 
    Every person desiring to be a transient merchant is required to make written application for a license from the City Clerk. An application shall be made upon a form provided by the City Clerk. 
    The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, the information requested on the application, such as: 
(1)  The applicant's name, telephone number, address of present place of residence, length of residence at such address and business address if other than the residence address; 
(2)  Birthdate of applicant; 
(3)  The name, telephone number and address of the person by whom the applicant is employed or whom the applicant represents and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(4)  A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter and method of the vending in which the applicant will engage; 
(5)  The period of time for which the license is applied; 
(6)  The locations of all areas in which vending will be conducted; and 
(7)  The date, or approximate date, of the last license issued under this Chapter; 
(8)  A statement as to whether or not a license issued to the applicant (or organization) represented under this chapter has ever been revoked, and if so, the reason for the revocation; 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law; 
(10)  Driver's license or personal identification number; 
(11)  Copy of Michigan sales tax license or Michigan Department of Treasury written approval; 
(12)  A two-inch by two-inch color photograph of the head and shoulders of the applicant; 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94. Ord 949. Passed 7-16-12. Ord. 997. Passed 6-16-15) 
863.07 - Transient merchant license fees. 
    An application for a transient merchant's license shall be accompanied by a fee. Such fee shall be established by resolution of the City Commission and is non-refundable unless canceled in person with the City Clerk in advance of the day for which cancellation is sought. No fee shall be charged to: 
(1)  City of Traverse City merchants and representatives engaging in year-around business in the City and who are listed on the City's tax rolls or who are exempt from property taxes, or those new businesses who do not qualify for the City tax roll but have a year lease for a permanent location. 
(2)  Any honorably discharged veteran who is a resident of this state and who has obtained a Veteran's License from a County Clerk within the State of Michigan. 
(3)  Persons 12 years of age to and including 17 years of age where all proceeds are retained by the person. No adult or business shall hire or subcontract such persons in an attempt to evade the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94. Ord. 806. Passed 7-21-08. Ord. 949. Passed 7-16-12) 
863.08 - Investigation of residential area transient merchant; waiting period. 
    Upon receipt of an application for license to be a transient merchant in a residential area, the Police Chief shall conduct an investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public good. No license shall be issued without the approval of the Police Chief. No license shall be issued under this chapter until a period of 72 hours has elapsed from the time of application, such period of time to be used by the Traverse City Police Chief for proper investigation of each application. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94. Ord. 949. Passed 7-16-12) 
863.09 - Hours in residential areas. 
    No person shall engage in vending in residential areas prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier, on any weekday or Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday, New Year's Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Martin Luther King Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94. Ord. 949. Passed 7-16-12) 
863.10 - License issuance or denial. 
    No license shall be issued to, nor shall any vending be conducted by: 
(1)  Any person who has made a false material statement in the application for the license. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of this chapter or whose solicitation permit or transient merchant license has previously been revoked by the City. 
(3)  Any person who has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, breach of the peace or is a menace to health, safety or the general welfare of the public. 
(4)  Any person vending in the C-4 District on private property utilizing a tent or other structure or shelter made from soft fabric like material without first demonstrating that the tent or other structure will be properly secured and stable, is flame retardant, and capable of withstanding strong winds. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94, Ord. 919. Passed 7-15-11. Ord. 494. Passed 7-16-12) 
863.11 - Revocation. 
    A license shall be revoked by the City Clerk if, upon receipt of written information or upon the Clerk's own investigation, the Clerk has reason to believe a licensed transient merchant: 
(1)  Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the Traverse City Code, or any statute of the State of Michigan. 
(2)  Has made a false material statement in the application or has otherwise become disqualified for the issuance of such a license. 
(3)  Has violated any provision of this chapter, which violation has been documented by a written complaint certified by the City Clerk pursuant to Section 863.14. 
(4)  Has conducted vending that is in any manner adverse to the protection of the public health, safety or welfare of the City of Traverse City. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the City Clerk to the licensed transient merchant in person or by certified mail addressed to his or her place of business or residence address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the license shall become null and void. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94. Ord. 494. Passed 7-16-12) 
863.12 - Manner of vending; duties of transient merchant. 
    No transient merchant shall: 
(1)  Conduct as a transient merchant upon a premises in defiance of a posted notice stating "No Solicitors or Peddlers," "No Peddlers" or "No Solicitors" or "No Transient Merchants." 
(2)  Fail to immediately and peacefully depart from premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(3)  Fail to accurately reveal all information contained in the application for a transient merchant license and all information required to be revealed by state law to any person requesting such information. Failure of a transient merchant to reveal such information shall be grounds for the revocation of the license pursuant to Section 863.12 or the denial of future solicitation permits or transient merchant licenses pursuant to Section 863.11. 
(4)  Fail to identify himself or herself and the name of the organization represented. 
(5)  Fail to prominently wear the picture identification badge issued by the City Clerk. 
(6)  Conduct business in a park as defined by Traverse City Code, Chapter 1064. 
(7)  Occupy a stationary location on a public street, sidewalk, parkway, park, parking lot or any other public property which is used by pedestrians or persons operating motor vehicles. A transient merchant shall be presumed to have occupied a stationary location if he or she has conducted business in any such public place for a period in excess of ten (10) minutes. 
(8)  If issued a license after July 25, 2011, leave a structure on private property in the C-4 District between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m, or leave such unattended for more than two hours. 
(9)  Vend in a public area less than one block away from where a City-authorized street fair, public festival, farmer's market or event is being conducted, except with the permission of the sponsor. 
(10)  Use or employ any flashing lights on any vehicle, or any other device for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which the transient merchant proposes to sell. 
(11)  Represent that the granting of a license under this chapter is an endorsement by the City. 
(12)  Fail to follow all provisions of State laws and regulations, City ordinances and conditions of the transient merchant license. 
(13)  Sell food other than pre-packaged food. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94, Ord. 919. Passed 7-15-11. Ord. 949. Passed 7-16-12. Ord. 1028. Passed 9-8-15) 
863.13 - Complaints; appeals. 
    If a written complaint is filed alleging that a transient merchant has violated any provisions of this chapter, the City Clerk shall promptly send a copy of the written complaint to the transient merchant together with a notice that an investigation will be made as to the truth of the complaint. The transient merchant shall be invited to respond to the complaint and present evidence and respond to evidence produced by the investigation. If the City Clerk, after reviewing all relevant material, finds the complaint to be supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the complaint shall be certified. If a license is denied or revoked by the City Clerk, or if a written complaint is certified pursuant to this section, the applicant or holder of a license may appeal to and have a hearing before the City Manager. The City Manager shall make a written determination, after presentation by the applicant and investigation by the City Clerk, as to whether or not the grounds for denial, revocation or complaint are true. If the City Manager determines that such grounds are supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the action of the City Clerk or the filing of the complaint shall be sustained and the applicant may appeal the City Manager's decision to the City Commission. Review by the City Commission shall be under the same standards of review as the determination by the City Manager and shall be in accordance with rules of procedure established by the City Commission. The City Commission's decision may be reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94. Ord. 949. Passed 7-16-12) 
863.14 - Other licenses or permits. 
    A license obtained under this chapter shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for obtaining any other permit, license or authorization required by any other ordinance, statute or administrative rule. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94.) 
863.15 - Pushcarts or pedal carts. 
    Pushcarts are restricted to sidewalks in the residential districts unless otherwise prohibited by local ordinance. Pedal carts are restricted to sidewalks in the residential districts and are permitted on all City streets in accordance with the Michigan Vehicle Code. Motor vehicles are permitted on all streets in accordance with the Michigan Vehicle Code. Any transient merchant using a motor vehicle or pedal cart in a street, when stopped, shall place the vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the curb and shall depart from such place as soon as the sale has been completed. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94. Ord. 949. Passed 7-16-12) 
863.16 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCLA 764.9c(2); MSA 28.868(3)(2).Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94.) 
863.17 - Civil infraction. 
    A vendor who violates this Chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a fine of $500.00 per day. 
(Ord. 386. Passed 6-20-94. Ord. 1030. Passed 1-19-16.) 
Chapter 864 - Street Performers[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
State Law reference- Power to license, MSA  5.1740; Hawkers and transient merchants generally, MSA  19.691, et seq. 
Cross reference- Secondhand stores, Ch. 856; Solicitors, Ch. 862; Transient Merchants, Ch. 863; Transient Merchants in parks, Ch. 1064 

864.01 - Intent. 
    Street performers provide a public amenity that enhances the character of the City. The City seeks to encourage such performances in a manner consistent with the overall public interest. The City also recognizes that street performers seek to and do draw crowds to their performances. This can create serious safety problems by impacting the ability of pedestrians to move safely on sidewalks and through crosswalks by impeding the response time of safety personnel. It can also impact access to and egress from businesses. Cognizant that street performers are engaged in First Amendment activities, this chapter imposes reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on street performers to the extent necessary to ensure the safety of performers, their audiences and the general public and to prevent unreasonable interference with residents' enjoyment of peace and quiet in their homes or the ability of businesses to conduct business. 
(Ord. 603. Passed 6-16-03.) 
864.02 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Festival means a City-authorized street fair or other public event. 
(2)  Perform/performance means a live, public presentation or exhibition which includes, but is not limited to, the following activities: acting, singing, playing musical instruments, pantomime, juggling, magic, dancing, reading aloud, puppetry, sidewalk art, reciting, and performing of any sort. 
(3)  Performer means a person conducting activities defined as a Performance under this chapter. 
(4)  Public areas means public sidewalks, parks, playgrounds and other pedestrian areas. 
(Ord. 603. Passed 6-16-03, Ord. 1015. Passed 3-16-15) 
864.05 - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Locations. Performances may take place in the following locations: 
(1)  In public areas, except within 100 feet of an elementary and/or secondary school, library, or church while in session, a hospital at any time, and except public areas excluded by the City Manager or his or her designee in the case of an emergency. 
(2)  In public areas where a City-authorized street fair, public festival, farmer's market or event is being conducted, with the permission of the sponsor. Otherwise, at least one block away from such street fair or public festival, farmer's market or event. 
(b)  Times. Performances may take place at the following times: 
(1)  Monday through Saturday between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Sunday, between 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. 
(c)  Contributions. A performer may request contributions or money or property at a performance. Contributions may be received in any receptacle, such as an open musical instrument case, box or hat. 
(d)  Prohibitions. No performer shall: 
(1)  Perform within ten feet of: 
a.  Any bus stop or street corner or a marked pedestrian crosswalk or 
b.  The outer edge of any entrance of any business, including, but not limited to doors, vestibules, driveways, outdoor dining area entries and emergency exits during the hours that any business on the premises is open to the public or to persons having or conducting lawful business within those premises. 
(2)  Perform less than 50 feet from another performer or group of performers. 
(3)  Perform in any area excluded by the City Commission in Section 864.06. 
(4)  Perform in any area prohibited by the City Manager or his or her designee in the case of an emergency. 
(5)  Use: 
a.  Any knife, sword, torch, flame, axe, saw, animal or other object, thing or being that can cause serious bodily injury to any person, or engage in any activity, such as, acrobatics, tumbling or cycling that can cause serious bodily injury to any person. 
b.  Any amplification device. 
c.  Any generator, wet cell battery with removable fill caps, or any other power source that poses a fire or public safety hazard. 
d.  Any connection to or maintenance of an electrical cord to an adjacent building or to a City power source. 
(6)  Litter his or her performance site. The performer shall be responsible for clean-up of all litter at the performance site. 
(7)  Prevent the public from utilizing any public benches, waste receptacles, or other street furniture during the performance. 
(8)  Cause less than a five foot contiguous sidewalk width being kept clear for pedestrian passage. 
(9)  Perform with more instruments, props, equipment, merchandise or other items than the performer can reasonably transport or remove at one time. 
(10)  Leave his or her instruments, props, equipment, merchandise or other items unattended. 
(11)  Offer for sale or make available for a price or donation any items. Performers who wish to offer items for sale must obtain a transient merchant's license according to Traverse City Code Chapter 863. 
(12)  Perform in contravention of the allowable noise levels established by Chapter 652 of this Code. 
(13)  Block or obstruct a curb cut. 
(14)  Block or obstruct the free and safe movement of pedestrians. If a sufficient crowd gathers to observe a performer such that the passage of the public through a public area is blocked or obstructed, a police officer or fire official may disperse that portion of the crowd that is blocking or obstructing the passage of the public. If a performer cannot conduct a performance in a location without blocking or obstructing the passage of the public, a police officer or fire official may cause the performer to leave the location, but shall not prevent the performer from occupying another location in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 603. Passed 6-16-03. Ord. 770. Passed 8-20-07, Ord. 1015. Passed 3-16-15) 
864.06 - Exclusion of public areas. 
(a)  Specific areas. The following specific public areas are excluded from performances by decision of the City Commission based upon evidence presented to the City Commission during its deliberations on the adoption of this chapter: 
(1)  Due to pedestrian and traffic congestion and other safety issues, sidewalks along Front Street on both sides in the 100, 200 and 300 blocks, except for performances in conjunction with a festival. 
(2)  Due to pedestrian and traffic congestion and other safety issues, bridges and riverwalks, parking areas and parking facilities. 
(b)  Other areas. The City Commission may by resolution exclude other specific areas from performances upon a determination that exclusion is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(c)  Emergency designation. A public area may be temporarily excluded from performances by the City Manager or his or her designee in the case of an emergency. The area shall be excluded from performance for the duration of the emergency. 
864.09 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCLA 764.9c(2)); (MSA 28.868(3)(2)). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 603. Passed 6-16-03.) 
864.10 - Civil infraction. 
    A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Ord. 603. Passed 6-16-03.) 
Chapter 865 - Mobile Food Vending 

865.01 - Intent. 
    In the interest of encouraging mobile food vendors who add to the vibrancy and desirability of Traverse City, while providing a framework under which such businesses operate, this ordinance is established. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.02 - Definitions. 
(a)  Mobile food vending shall mean vending, serving, or offering for sale food and/or beverages from a mobile food vending unit which meets the definition of a food service establishment under Public Act 92 of 2000, which may include the ancillary sales of branded items consistent with the food, such as a tee shirt that bears the name of the organization engaged in mobile food vending. 
(b)  Mobile food vending unit shall mean any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, or other device designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food is vended, served, or offered for sale. 
(c)  Vendor shall mean any individual engaged in the business of mobile food vending; if more than one individual is operating a single stand, cart or other means of conveyance, then vendor shall mean all individuals operating such single stand, cart or other means of conveyance. 
(d)  Operate shall mean all activities associated with the conduct of business, including set up and take down and/or actual hours where the mobile food vending unit is open for business. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.03 - Permit required. 
    No vendor shall engage in mobile food vending without a permit from the City Clerk authorizing such vending. The City Clerk shall prescribe the form of such permits and application for such permit. All permits shall be prominently displayed on the mobile food vending unit. No vending through a mobile food vending unit of food and/or other human consumables shall be permitted unless it meets the definition of mobile food vending as defined by this ordinance. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.04 - Duration; non-transferability. 
    Permits may be issued by the City Clerk for a calendar year from the date of issuance. Any permit issued under this chapter is non-transferable. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.05 - Application. 
    Every vendor desiring to engage in mobile food vending shall make a written application to the City Clerk for a permit under this chapter. The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, all information requested by the City Clerk and be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Commission. Additionally, the applicant shall provide all documentation, such as insurance, as required by the city. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.06 - Fees. 
    An application for a permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Commission. There shall be no proration of fees. Fees are non-refundable once a permit has been issued by the City Clerk. No fee shall be charged to any honorably discharged veteran of the United States Military who is a resident of the State of Michigan and submits official documentation evidencing such to the City Clerk. If operating on non-city property, no fee shall be charged to a business which is on the city's tax rolls whose normal business includes the sale of food and/or beverages. No one shall hire or subcontract such vendors in an attempt to evade the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.07 - Investigation by the city clerk. 
    For mobile food vending within residential areas, approval must be given by the City Clerk prior to issuance of a permit by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13. Ord. 1026. Passed 9-8-15) 
865.08 - Requirements. 
    Any vendor engaging in mobile food vending shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Provide appropriate waste receptacles at the site of the unit and remove all litter, debris and other waste attributable to the vendor on a daily basis. 
(2)  If operating on city-owned or controlled property, may only locate on such property as established in a resolution adopted by the City Commission. If parked on public streets, vendors shall conform to all applicable parking regulations. 
(3)  Not operate on public property within one block of a City-authorized street fair, public festival, farmers market or event being conducted without authorization from the event sponsor. 
(4)  Not use any flashing or blinking lights or strobe lights; all exterior lights over 60 watts shall contain opaque, hood shields to direct the illumination downward. 
(5)  Not use loud music, amplification devices or "crying out" or any other audible methods to gain attention which causes a disruption or safety hazard as determined by the City. 
(6)  Comply with the city's Noise Ordinance, Sign Ordinance and all other City ordinances. 
(7)  Comply with all applicable federal, state and county regulations. 
(8)  May have one portable sign that is six square feet, with no dimension greater than three feet and no height (with legs) greater than four feet, located within five feet of the unit; and under no circumstances shall such sign be placed upon the sidewalk or impede pedestrian and/or vehicle safety. 
(9)  Within residential areas, a mobile food vendor may only operate between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; and in commercial areas, a mobile food vendor may only operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. On private property within commercial area, a mobile food vendor may only operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3 a.m. Other restrictions regarding hours of operation may be established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(10)  No mobile food vending unit may be left unattended for more than two hours; and any mobile food vending unit not in operation shall be removed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in commercial areas and 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. in residential areas. This subsection applies to mobile food vending units operating on city-controlled property only. 
(11)  Not represent the granting of a permit under this chapter as an endorsement by the City. 
(12)  Shall not utilize any electricity or power without the prior written authorization of the power customer; no power cable or similar device shall be extended at or across any city street, alley, or sidewalk except in a safe manner. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13, Ord. 988. Passed 1-21-14) 
865.09 - Parking beyond limits allowed by city ordinance and order. 
    Any mobile food vending unit with a valid mobile food vending license may park in a city-controlled parking space for durations as authorized by the permit; and such mobile food vending unit shall not be restricted to the hours where parking would otherwise be allowed in the particular parking space. Provided, however, that no mobile food vending unit shall park in a City-controlled parking space if parking is prohibited altogether. Any mobile food vending unit parked in a metered parking space with a valid mobile food vending license shall activate the meter at all times while parked by depositing the appropriate sum of money into the parking meter. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.10 - Impoundment. 
    Any equipment associated with food vending that are not in compliance with this chapter and left on public property may be impounded at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.11 - Other permits. 
    A permit obtained under this chapter shall not relieve any vendor of the responsibility for obtaining any other permit, or authorization required by any other ordinance, statute or administrative rule. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.12 - Revocation. 
    The City Clerk shall revoke the permit of any vendor engaged in mobile food vending who ceases to meet any requirement of this chapter or violates any other federal, state or local regulation, makes a false statement on their application, or conducts activity in a manner that is adverse to the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
    Immediately upon such revocation, the City Clerk shall provide written notice to the permit holder by certified mail to their place of business or residence as indicated on the application. Immediately upon such revocation, the permit shall become null and void. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.13 - Complaints; appeals. 
    If a written complaint is filed with the City Clerk alleging a food vendor has violated the provisions of this chapter, the City Clerk shall promptly send a copy of the written complaint to the vendor together with a notice that an investigation will be made as to the truth of the complaint. The vendor shall be invited to respond to the complaint and present evidence and respond to evidence produced by the investigation. If the City Clerk, after reviewing all relevant material, finds the complaint to be supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the complaint shall be certified. If a permit is denied or revoked by the City Clerk, or if a written complaint is certified pursuant to this Chapter, the applicant or holder of a permit may appeal to and have a hearing before the City Manager. The City Manager shall make a written determination, after presentation by the applicant and investigation by the City Clerk, as to whether or not the grounds for denial, revocation or complaint are true. If the City Manager determines that such grounds are supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the action of City Clerk or filing of the complaint shall be sustained and the applicant may appeal the City Manager's decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.14 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and sworn officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as designated by the City Manager are authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Michigan law. Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13) 
865.15 - Civil infraction. 
    A vendor who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a fine of $500.00 per day. Provided, however, that the fine for parking violations shall be those as outlined in Chapter 488 of these codified ordinances. 
(Ord. 963. Passed 5-6-13. Ord. 970. Passed 6-3-13) 
Chapter 867 - Pedicab Public Transportation[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Cross reference- Bicycles, Ch. 420 

867.01 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the development of alternative public transportation, such as pedicabs, and to provide uniform regulation thereof for the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
867.02 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
    Class 1 electric bicycle means an electric bicycle that is equipped with an electric motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and that disengages or ceases to function when the electric bicycle reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour. 
    City means the City of Traverse City. 
    City Manager means the City Manager or his designee. 
    Pedicab means a chauffeured, vehicle which is propelled by pedals, including a class 1 electric bicycle, operating for hire. 
(Ord. 1075 , Passed 6-4-18) 
867.03 - License required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall operate a pedicab for public transportation without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this chapter. 
867.04 - Procedure for application. 
    Any person, firm or corporation desiring to operate a pedicab for public transportation business shall file an application for a license with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall provide forms for applications. 
867.05 - Investigation by city officials. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a license or an application for renewal, the City Clerk shall request an investigation by City officials to determine conditions related to the health, safety and welfare of the City. 
867.06 - Approval by the police chief. 
    No license or renewal thereof shall be granted without approval of the routes and the vehicle by the Police Chief as to the following: 
(1)  The route shall not encompass any area prohibited by Executive Order of the City Manager. 
(2)  Each vehicle shall be equipped with headlights, taillights, reflectors and a slow moving vehicle sign. 
867.07 - City commission approval. 
    Upon completion of investigation, the City Clerk shall either issue the license or to deny the license. If the license is denied, the reasons for denial shall be given to the applicant in writing. 
(Ord. 941, Passed 5-21-12) 
867.08 - Information on application for license. 
    Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the person, corporation or other entity applying. 
(2)  The name and address of each of the principal officers of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation. If the applicant is not a corporation, the names and addresses of the partners, trustees, owners or other persons controlling the entity shall be given. 
(3)  A description of the methods, procedures and equipment proposed to be used. 
(4)  A map of the City showing locations of proposed routes or methods of operation and showing locations of any proposed stations, places to keep vehicles, stands or pick up points. 
(5)  Identification and photograph of the pedicab or pedicabs. 
(6)  Names, addresses and ages of all drivers. 
867.09 - Fee. 
    A non-refundable application fee shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. Licensing fees and related fees will be established by resolution of the City Commission. 
867.10 - Standards to be met. 
    A license shall be issued to an applicant that meets the following standards, and no licensee shall remain in business unless it continues to meet these standards: 
(1)  No hazards to traffic or public safety will be created by the proposed operation. The addition of more traffic to a busy street or highway will not by itself be deemed to create a traffic hazard. 
(2)  The operation will not appear to be designed to defraud any person. 
(3)  There will be notices in each vehicle and in each waiting room or station owned or operated by the business, stating the charges and routes or methods of operation. 
(4)  There are no conditions for denial. 
867.11 - Conditions for denial. 
    An application shall not be approved, renewed or may be revoked if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant is in violation of any City ordinance or state law. 
(2)  The applicant is in default to the City, including being delinquent in the payment of any taxes, fees or other City charges. 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a violation of any federal, state or City law concerning public transportation. 
(4)  The applicant has made a false statement in the application procedure or has submitted an incomplete application or has not fulfilled a promise made with or in the application. 
(5)  A standard listed in this chapter cannot or is not being met. 
867.12 - Transfers. 
    No license or interest therein shall be transferred directly or indirectly without the consent of the City Clerk. Transfers shall be construed and processed as a new application for license. 
(Ord. 941, Passed 5-21-12) 
867.13 - Renewals. 
    All pedicab licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. The license holder, at the expiration of any license year, shall be entitled to a renewal of the license for the ensuing year by the City Clerk upon compliance with this chapter. The license holder shall submit an application for renewal, and such information as shall be required by the City. 
867.14 - Display of license. 
    The operator of each pedicab shall immediately possess and display, upon request, the license or a legible copy thereof to any law enforcement officer, City official or citizen. Failure to possess or immediately display such license shall be grounds for suspension. A person who does not possess a license and who is unable to immediately display such license shall not be allowed to operate a pedicab. 
867.15 - Insurance. 
    Before issuing the license, the licensee shall submit proof and shall maintain comprehensive general liability insurance listing the City as an additional insured. The amount of such insurance shall be determined by the City Clerk. 
867.16 - Other licenses and permits. 
    A license obtained under this chapter shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for obtaining any other permit, license or authorization required by another ordinance, statute of administrative rule. 
867.17 - Revocation. 
    The City Clerk or Police Chief may immediately suspend the license for cause or noncompliance with this chapter. Suspensions may be appealed to the City Manager. The City Manager may revoke any license for cause or noncompliance with this chapter following a hearing before the City Manager. 
867.18 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended. MCL 764.9c(2); MSA 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
867.19 - Civil infraction. 
    A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. 
Chapter 868 - Tourist Homes[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1087 , adopted Jan. 22, 2019, amended Ch. 868 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Historical notations have been retained for reference purposes. 
State Law reference- Lodging houses, hotels, motels, tourist cabins and temporary camps, M.C.L.A.  427.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Lodging houses, Ch. 836; Application of rental housing regulations to tourist homes,  1482.16; Smoke detectors in lodging houses,  1610.14(b) 

868.01 - Definitions. 
    Refer to Zoning Code of the Traverse City Code of Ordinances for the definitions used in this chapter which are: 
(1)  Guest night; 
(2)  Host, tourist home; 
(3)  Owner; 
(4)  Primary residence; 
(5)  Tourist home, high intensity; 
(6)  Tourist home, low intensity. 
(Ord. No. 245, Passed 2-1-88; Ord. No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19.) 
868.02 - License required. 
    No person shall operate a tourist home without first obtaining a license therefor as required by this chapter. Only an owner shall be allowed to hold a license under this chapter. 
    An owner desiring a tourist home on their property is required to make written application for a license from the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall provide forms for applications. 
    The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, the information requested on the application, such as: 
(1)  The applicant's name, telephone number, email address and address of primary residence; 
(2)  Affidavit verifying applicant applies consent and understands that tourist homes are subject to the conditions contained in this section, in addition to conditions contained elsewhere in this Code. 
(3)  Applications for renewal of a tourist home license shall provide a copy of the guest list as required pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  A self-inspection checklist is required as part of the tourist home license application. 
(5)  Applications shall include documentation showing conformance to provisions identified in sections of the Traverse City Code of Ordinances pertaining to tourist homes. 
(Ord. No. 245, Passed 2-1-88; Ord. No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19.) 
868.03 - Existing licenses; renewal. 
(a)  Licenses in effect at the time this section is enacted shall continue to be valid and shall be categorized high intensity tourist home or low intensity tourist home as applicable. 
(b)  Applications for renewal of existing licenses, including licenses in effect at the time this section is enacted, shall be reviewed and granted or denied before applications for new licenses are considered. 
(c)  The same application procedures, including the non-refundable fee, that apply to the submittal of a new license application shall apply to renewal of existing licenses. 
(d)  An application for renewal of an existing license shall be submitted no sooner than 90 days before the existing license expires and no later than 30 days before the existing license expires. 
(Ord. No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19.) 
868.04 - Conditions for issuance. 
    A tourist home license shall be issued subject to the following conditions, which conditions, are in addition to conditions contained elsewhere in this Code: 
(1)  The home is occupied and operated by the owner and is a single-family residential dwelling. 
(2)  A guest room shall not be located in the basement. 
(3)  A person who does not reside at the home shall not be employed to assist in the conduct of a tourist home, except as usual for a single-family residence. 
(4)  The home shall not be used by the public or paying guests for the hosting of receptions, private parties or the like. 
(5)  A guest list shall be maintained of all guest names, guest contact information, number of guest nights, and dates of stay and make it available to the City upon request. 
(6)  A fire escape plan shall be developed and graphically displayed in each guest room. 
(7)  Proof of insurance as required by the City Clerk. 
(8)  Tourist home operators must post the noise ordinance hours and consumer fireworks ordinance in a conspicuous location. 
(Ord. No. 245, Passed 2-1-88; Ord. No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19.) 
868.05 - Notice of license. 
    Upon issuance of a tourist home license, the City Clerk shall post the address and contact information of the licensed tourist homes on the City's website and a printed copy will be available upon request from the City Clerk's office. 
    The tourist home licensee must post the City-issued tourist home license in the home in a conspicuous location. 
    If advertising the tourist home, the City-issued tourist home license number must be included on advertisements. 
    Upon receipt of a completed tourist home license application, the City Clerk shall notify all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the proposed tourist home location. 
(Ord. No. 245, Passed 2-1-88; Ord. No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19.) 
868.06 - License fee. 
    The annual license fee shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 245, Passed 2-1-88; Ord. No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19.) 
868.07 - Inspections. 
    A tourist home shall meet all conditions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and laws. There shall be an inspection of the premises by the City prior to issuing a new tourist home license and subsequently inspected every three years for continuously operated tourist homes. A self-inspection checklist is required as part of the annual license application process pursuant to 868.02 (4). 
(Ord. No. 245, Passed 2-1-88; Ord. No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19.) 
868.08 - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. The fine for any violation of this chapter shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. Each day on which any violation of the chapter continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 245, Passed 2-1-88; Ord. No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19.) 
868.09 - Revocation. 
    The City Clerk may immediately suspend the license for cause or noncompliance with this chapter. Suspensions may be appealed to the City Manager. The City Manager may revoke any license for cause or noncompliance with this chapter following a hearing before the City Manager. 
    A license shall be revoked by the City Clerk if, upon receipt of written information or upon the Clerk's own investigation, the Clerk has reason to believe a tourist home: 
(1)  Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the Traverse City Code, or any statute of the State of Michigan. Specifically, failure to comply with the conditions for issuance pursuant to these Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Has made a false material statement in the application or affidavit or has otherwise become disqualified for the issuance of such a license. 
(3)  Has violated any provision of this chapter, which violation has been documented by a written complaint certified by the City Clerk pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  If two complaints pursuant to this chapter are validated in a 12-month period, then the tourist home license shall be revoked. Revocation results in the suspension of the tourist home license for the remainder of the license year. The revoked licensee would be ineligible to reapply for a tourist home license the following licensing year. Fines associated with a municipal civil infraction may also apply. 
(Ord. No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19.) 
868.10 - Complaint; appeals. 
(a)  If a written complaint is filed alleging that a tourist home licensee has violated any provisions of this chapter, the City Clerk shall promptly send a copy of the written complaint to the tourist home owner together with a notice that an investigation will be made as to the truth of the complaint. 
(b)  The tourist home owner shall be invited to respond to the complaint and present evidence and respond to evidence produced by the investigation. 
(c)  If the City Clerk, after reviewing all relevant material, finds the complaint to be supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the complaint shall be certified. 
(d)  If a license is denied or revoked by the City Clerk, or if a written complaint is certified pursuant to this section, the applicant or holder of a license may appeal to and have a hearing before the City Manager. 
(e)  The City Manager shall make a written determination, after presentation by the applicant and investigation by the City Clerk, as to whether or not the grounds for denial, revocation or complaint are true. 
(f)  If the City Manager determines that such grounds are supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the action of the City Clerk or the filing of the complaint shall be sustained and the applicant may appeal the City Manager's decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19.) 
Chapter 870 - Vacation Home Rental License[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Cross reference- General Provisions and Definitions,  1320.07; Rental Housing Regulations,  1482 

870.01 - License required. 
    Effective July 1, 2019, no person shall operate a vacation home rental without first obtaining a license therefor as required by this chapter. Only an owner shall be allowed to hold a license under this chapter. 
    An owner desiring to operate a vacation home rental is required to make written application for a license from the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall provide forms for applications. The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, the information requested on the application, such as: 
(1)  The applicant's name, telephone number, email address and address of primary residence; 
(2)  A signed statement verifying the applicant consents and understands that vacation home rentals are subject to the conditions contained in this chapter, in addition to conditions contained elsewhere in this Code. 
(3)  A self-inspection checklist is required as part of the vacation home rental license application. 
(4)  Other information required by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1088 , Passed 2-4-19) 
870.02 - Conditions for issuance. 
    A vacation home rental license shall be issued subject to the following conditions, which conditions, are in addition to conditions contained elsewhere in this Code: 
(1)  The vacation home rental is occupied and operated in zoning districts as authorized by the Zoning Code of the City of Traverse City. 
(2)  A fire escape plan shall be developed and graphically displayed in each guest room. 
(3)  Proof of insurance as required by the City Clerk. 
(4)  Vacation home rental operators must post the noise ordinance hours and consumer fireworks ordinance in a conspicuous location. 
(Ord. No. 1088 , Passed 2-4-19) 
870.03 - Notice of license. 
    Upon issuance of a vacation home rental license, the City Clerk shall post the address and contact information of the licensed vacation home rental on the city's website, and a printed copy will be available upon request from the City Clerk's office. 
    The vacation home rental licensee must post the city-issued vacation home rental license in the home in a conspicuous location. 
    If advertising the vacation home rental, the city-issued vacation home rental license number must be included on advertisements. 
(Ord. No. 1088 , Passed 2-4-19) 
870.04 - License fee. 
    The annual license fee shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1088 , Passed 2-4-19) 
870.05 - Inspections. 
    A vacation home rental shall meet all conditions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and laws. There shall be an inspection of the premises by the City prior to issuing a new vacation home rental license and subsequently inspected every three years for continuously operated vacation home rentals; the Fire Chief is authorized by this ordinance to extend the deadline for inspections for good cause and to establish other rules and procedures regarding inspections. A self-inspection checklist is required as part of the annual license application process pursuant to these ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1088 , Passed 2-4-19) 
870.06 - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. The fine for any violation of this chapter shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. Each day on which any violation of the chapter continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
870.07 - Suspension; revocation; appeals. 
    The City Clerk may immediately suspend the license for cause or noncompliance with this chapter. Suspensions may be appealed to the City Manager, who may overrule or uphold the decision of the City Clerk. A license may be revoked by the City Clerk if, upon the City Clerk's own investigation, the City Clerk has reason to believe a vacation home rental: 
(1)  Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the Traverse City Code, or any statute of the State of Michigan. 
(2)  Has made a false material statement in the application or has otherwise become disqualified for the issuance of such a license. 
    A decision by the City Clerk to revoke a license may be appealed to the City Manager who may overrule or uphold the decision of the City Clerk. Any decision of the City Manager under this chapter may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction. If a license is revoked by the City Clerk, and the decision of the City Clerk is not overruled by the City Manager, the licensee shall be ineligible for a vacation home rental license for one full calendar year. A penalty under this section may be in addition to any other available remedy under the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1088 , Passed 2-4-19) 
Chapter 876 - Yard Sales[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand dealers, M.C.L.A.  445.401 et seq.; Junk yards, M.C.L.A.  445.451 et seq. 
Cross reference- Secondhand dealers, Ch. 856; Solicitors, Ch. 862; Transient traders, Ch. 870 

876.01 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Goods means any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this chapter. 
    Yard sale means all sales entitled "yard sale," "lawn sale," "garage sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale" or "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale. 
(Ord. 62. Passed 7-17-78; Ord. 140. Passed 8-2-82.) 
876.02 - Duration and frequency. 
    No person shall conduct a yard sale in the City more than twice within a 12 month period, and no such sale shall be conducted for a period exceeding three consecutive calendar days. 
(Ord. 62. Passed 7-17-78; Ord. 140. Passed 8-2-82.) 
876.03 - Signs. 
    The following rules will apply to the display of any sign displayed for the purpose of advertising a yard sale: 
    Yard sale signs are permitted in all zoning districts. 
(1)  Any sign displayed for the purpose of advertising a yard sale must conform with the regulations of Traverse City Code Chapter 1476. 
(2)  Yard sale signs may be displayed during the sale period only. 
(Ord. 62. Passed 7-17-78; Ord. 140. Passed 8-2-82; Ord. 714. Passed 10-16-06) 
876.04 - Publication of requirements. 
    Not less than annually, the City Clerk shall publish an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, which advertisement will clearly define the rules and regulations contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 62. Passed 7-17-78; Ord. 140. Passed 8-2-82.) 
876.05 - Exceptions to chapter. 
    This chapter shall not apply to or affect: 
    Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
    Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; or 
    Persons selling or advertising for sale items of personal property which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number. 
(Ord. 62. Passed 7-17-78; Ord. 140. Passed 8-2-82.) 
876.06 - Appearance tickets. 
    The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A. 764.9c(2); M.S.A. 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 358. Passed 5-17-93.) 
876.07 - Civil infraction. 
    A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 421. Passed 5-15-95.) 
876.99 - Penalty. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 62. Passed 7-17-78; Ord. 140. Passed 8-2-82. Ord. 422. Passed 5-15-95.) 
TITLE FOUR - TAXATION 
Chapter 880 - Tax Exemptions[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Charter reference- Tax limit,  80 
State Law reference- Exemptions, MCL  141.632, 141.642, 141.652, 141.654, 141.655 
Cross reference- Assessment of taxes,  230.05; Low Income Housing Tax Exemption, Ch. 881 

880.01 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Special Needs Housing Tax Exemption Ordinance." 
(Ord. 22. Passed 6-20-77. Ord. 615. Passed 12-01-03.) 
880.02 - Findings; purpose. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended; MCL 125.1401 et seq.; MSA 116.114(1) et seq.). The City is authorized by such Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the City will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemptions therefor is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this chapter for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the periods hereinafter contemplated are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance thereon. 
(Ord. 22. Passed 6-20-77. Ord. 615. Passed 12-01-03.) 
880.03 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Act 346 of the Public Acts of 1966, as amended. 
(2)  Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
(3)  Contract rents are as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, and as further amended. 
(4)  Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the Authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
(5)  Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the Authority to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of the housing development. 
(6)  Persons of low income means households in which the total income of the occupants, as determined by rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, does not exceed 60 percent of the median income of Grand Traverse County. 
(7)  Persons with special needs means persons of low income with a mental illness, disability as defined by the Persons with Disabilities Civil Rights Act, MCL 37.252 et seq., being 2000 PA 1 & 2, HIV/AIDS, substance abuse dependence, long term health disorders, and victims of domestic violence and sexual abuse and such other similar special needs as the City Commission may determine. 
(8)  Sponsor means persons or entities which have applied to the Authority for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development. 
(9)  Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service. 
(Ord. 22. Passed 6-20-77. Ord. 615. Passed 12-01-03.) 
880.04 - Class of housing developments to which chapter is applicable. 
    It is hereby determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be non-profit housing corporations that exclusively provide housing for persons with special needs of the Grand Traverse Area constructed after the effective date of this chapter, which developments are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. 22. Passed 6-20-77. Ord. 513. Passed 10-16-00. Ord. 615. Passed 12-01-03.) 
880.05 - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    Housing developments for persons with special needs and the property on which they shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes commencing on the 31st day of December in the year in which the notice required under  15a(1) of the Act is filed with the City Assessor. The City, acknowledging that the sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of the Housing Development, in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this ordinance and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes will accept payment of an annual service charge in lieu of all property taxes in an amount equal to four percent of the difference between contract rents actually collected and utilities. 
(Ord. 22. Passed 6-20-77. Ord. 615. Passed 12-01-03.) 
880.06 - Resolution; contractual effect. 
    A Resolution of the City Commission granting tax exempt status, as herein provided, (hereafter called the "Resolution") shall be adopted for each housing development qualified under the terms and provisions of this chapter, except the housing developments identified in Section 880.11 of this chapter. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act to the contrary, a contract to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes as previously described will be effectuated by and between the City and the sponsor, with the Authority as third party beneficiary thereunder, by adoption of such a Resolution by the City Commission and the filing of notice required under 15a(1) of the Act with the City Assessor. 
(Ord. 22. Passed 6-20-77. Ord. 615. Passed 12-01-03.) 
880.07 - Payment of service charge. 
    The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined in this chapter and the Resolution described in Section 880.06, shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the City. The service charge shall be delinquent if not paid by the date after which property taxes incur interest and penalty. If delinquent, the service charge shall be subject to the same collection proceedings, liens, and remedies by the City, County, and State Treasurers as are delinquent real property taxes. 
(Ord. 22. Passed 6-20-77. Ord. 615. Passed 12-01-03.) 
880.08 - Duration. 
    Unless terminated as herein provided, or as may be provided in the Resolution, the tax exempt status of a housing development approved for such status by Resolution of the City Commission and by this chapter shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the Authority has any interest in the property, provided that construction of the housing development commences within one year from the effective date of the contract effectuated by this chapter or the effective date of the Resolution of the City Commission approving the housing development for tax exempt status, or the Resolution shall be void and of no effect. 
(Ord. 22. Passed 6-20-77. Ord. 615. Passed 12-01-03) 
880.09 - Termination. 
    Repealed. 
(Ord. 615. Passed 12-01-03. Repealed Ord. 617. Passed 1-5-04.) 
880.10 - Severability. 
    The various sections and provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any section or provision of this ordinance other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 615. Passed 12-01-03.) 
880.11 - Retention of tax exempt status of certain housing developments previously granted such status. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following housing developments are of the class of housing developments to which this chapter applies: 
(1)  Fern Street Living Center. The housing development identified as the Fern Street Living Center Non-Profit Housing Corporation, as sponsor, in connection with said sponsor's mortgage loan from the Authority to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as the "Fern Street Living Center" on certain property located at 803, 805, 809 and 811 Fern Street (property tax code identification number 28-51-111-111-10 and 28-51-111-111-20). To serve persons of low income, it is determined that the Fern Street Living Center is of the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes pursuant to this chapter. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to the Fern Street Living Center and its sponsor. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 880.06 to the contrary, the provisions of this chapter constitute a contract between the City and the sponsor, with the Authority as third party beneficiary thereunder, and the effective date of the contract is March 21, 1994. 
(2)  Kelley Street Living Center. The housing development identified as the Kelley Street Living Center Non-Profit Housing Corporation, as sponsor, in connection with said sponsor's mortgage loan from the Authority to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as the "Kelley Street Living Center" on certain property located at 924 Kelley Street (property tax code identification number 28-51-474-023-00). To serve persons of low income, it is determined that the Kelley Street Living Center is of the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply, and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes pursuant to this chapter. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to the Kelley Street Living Center and its sponsor. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 880.06 to the contrary, the provisions of this chapter constitute a contract between the City and the sponsor, with the Authority as third party beneficiary thereunder, and the effective date of the contract is December 21, 1998. 
(3)  Foundation for Mental Health. The housing development identified as the Foundation for Mental Health Grand Traverse/Leelanau, as sponsor, in connection with said sponsor's mortgage loan from the Authority to erect, own, and operate a housing development identified as the Twelfth Street Non-Profit Housing Corporation on certain property located at 318/320 West Twelfth Street (property tax code identification number 28-51-830-010-00). To serve persons of low income, it is determined that the Twelfth Street Non-Profit Housing Corporation is of the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply, and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of taxes pursuant to this chapter. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to the Twelfth Street Non-Profit Housing Corporation and its sponsor. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 880.06 to the contrary, the provisions of this chapter constitute a contract between the City and the Sponsor, with the Authority as third party beneficiary thereunder, and the effective date of the contract is October 16, 2000. 
(Ord. 381. Passed 3-21-94. Ord. 470. Passed 12-21-98. Ord. 514. Passed 10-16-00. Ord. 615. Passed 12-1-03. Ord. 616. Passed 1-5-04.) 
Chapter 881 - Low Income Housing Tax Exemption[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Charter reference- Tax limit,  80; Taxation generally, Ch. IX; Continuation of taxes,  173 
Cross reference- Assessment of taxes,  230.05; Tax exemptions generally, Ch. 880 
State Law reference- State Housing Development Authority Act, M.C.L.A.  125.1401; Exemptions, M.C.L.A.  141.632, 141.642, 141.652, 141.654, 141.655; Municipal tax rates, M.C.L.A.  211.107a, 211.203 

881.01 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Low Income Housing Tax Exemption." 
(Ord. 431. Passed 12-4-95.) 
881.02 - Purpose. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended; MCL 125.1401 et seq.; MSA 16.114(1) et seq.). The City is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act, at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity and as the City will be benefitted and improved by such housing, that the exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose and that the continuance of the provisions of this Ordinance for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the periods contemplated in this Ordinance are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such Ordinance and service charge. The tax exemption established in 15a of the Act shall not apply to any class of housing projects unless designated by ordinance. This ordinance shall not affect the tax exemption currently enjoyed by any housing development within the City. (Ord. 431. Passed 12-4-95.) 
881.03 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of 1966 of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
(2)  Annual shelter rents means the total collections during an agreed annual period from persons of low income who occupy a housing development representing rents or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, water and sanitary sewage service or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
(3)  Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
(4)  Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the Authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
(5)  Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the Authority to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of the housing development. 
(6)  Persons of low income means households in which the total income of the occupants, as determined by rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, does not exceed 60 percent of the median income of Grand Traverse County. 
(7)  Sponsor means persons or entities which have applied to the Authority for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development and their successors and assigns in relation to the housing development. 
(Ord. 431. Passed 12-4-95.) 
881.04 - Class of housing developments. 
    It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption under this Ordinance shall apply shall be housing developments constructed after the effective date of this chapter which receive financing from a federally-aided or Authority-aided mortgage or advance or grant from the authority; which contain a mixture of at least 30 percent dwelling units for occupancy by persons of low income and not more than 70 percent of other dwelling units for households in which the total income exceeds 60 percent of the median income for Grand Traverse County for the duration of the tax exemption. 
(Ord. 564. Passed 6-3-02. Ord. 566. Passed 6-17-02.) 
881.05 - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    Housing developments for persons of low income and the property on which they shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes commencing on the 31st day of December in the year in which the notice required under  15a(1) of the Act is filed with the local assessor. The City, acknowledging that the sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development, in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this ordinance and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes will accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. 
(Ord. 431. Passed 12-4-95.) 
881.06 - Limitation on service charge. 
    Notwithstanding Section 881.05, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for that part of the housing development which is exempt and which is occupied by other than persons of low income shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
(Ord. 431. Passed 12-4-95.) 
881.07 - Resolution; contractual effect. 
    A Resolution of the City Commission granting tax exempt status, as herein provided, (hereafter called the "Resolution") shall be adopted for each housing development qualified under the terms and provisions of this ordinance. The amount of the annual service charge for that part of the housing development which is occupied by persons of low income shall be established in the Resolution. Notwithstanding the provisions of  15a(5) of the Act to the contrary, a contract to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes as previously described will be effectuated by and between the City and the sponsor, with the Authority as third-party beneficiary under the contract, by adoption of such a Resolution by the City Commission and the filing of the notice required under  15a(l) of the Act with the local assessor. 
(Ord. 431. Passed 12-4-95.) 
881.08 - Payment of annual service charge. 
    The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this ordinance and the Resolution described in Section 881.07, shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the City. The service charge shall be delinquent if not paid by the date after which property taxes incur interest and penalty. If delinquent, the service charge shall be subject to the same interest and penalty as delinquent real property taxes and shall be subject to the same collection proceedings, liens, and remedies by the City, County and State Treasurers as are delinquent real property taxes. 
881.09 - Duration. 
    Unless terminated as herein provided, or as may be provided in the Resolution, the tax exempt status of a housing development approved for such status by Resolution of the City Commission shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan for such housing development remains outstanding and unpaid, or for such period as the Authority or other governmental entity has any interest in the property. However, the construction of such housing development must commence within one year from the effective date of the Resolution of the City Commission approving the Housing Development for tax exempt status, as provided in this ordinance or the Resolution shall be void and of no effect. 
(Ord. 431. Passed 12-4-95.) 
881.10 - Termination. 
    A tax exempt status pursuant to this chapter and the Resolution shall automatically be void and of no effect if any monies due as a service charge required by the Resolution or thereunder, are delinquent for more than ten days after written notice of such delinquency is given to the sponsor by mail unless a greater time to cure is established in the Resolution. 
(Ord. 431. Passed 12-4-95.) 
881.11 - Severability. 
    The various sections and provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any section or provision of this ordinance other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 431. Passed 12-4-95.) 
881.12 - Inconsistent ordinances. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are superseded by this ordinance to the extent necessary. 
(Ord. 431. Passed 12-4-95.) 
Chapter 882 - Housing Commission Annual Service Fee 

882.01 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Housing Commission Annual Service Fee Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1071 . Passed 5-7-18) 
882.02 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Act means the Housing Facilities Act, being Act 18 of 1933, MCL 125.651 et seq, as amended. 
    Annual shelter rents means the total collections from January 1 through December 31 from projects or facilities owned or operated by the Housing Commission, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, water and sanitary sewage service or other utilities furnished to the occupants of the project or facility. 
    Housing Commission means the Traverse City Housing Commission as established by Chapter 274 of the City of Traverse City's Codified Ordinances pursuant to the Act or a qualified entity as defined in this Chapter. 
    Qualified entity means either of the following: 
(1)  A Michigan nonprofit corporation or a Michigan limited partnership having a Michigan nonprofit corporation as its sole general partner, if one of the following applies: 
a.  The nonprofit corporation is owned by the commission. 
b.  A majority of the members of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation are elected and removable by the commission. 
c.  The commission is the sole member of the nonprofit corporation. 
(2)  A for-profit corporation, partnership, or company formed or incorporated by the commission for the sole purpose of syndicating low income housing tax credits in connection with the redevelopment of a housing project that has been owned by the commission, if the commission maintains oversight responsibility for the management and operation of the project for which low income housing tax credits were syndicated and the for-profit entity does not engage in any other business activity unrelated to the housing project. 
(Ord. No. 1071 . Passed 5-7-18) 
882.03 - Annual service fee. 
    If a project or facility owned or operated by the Housing Commission is exempt from general property taxes under the Act, the Housing Commission shall pay an annual service fee in lieu of all taxes with respect to projects or facilities owned or operated by the Housing Commission in the amount of up to ten percent of the annual shelter rent obtained from projects or facilities owned or operated by the Housing Commission in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the City. The amount of annual service fee for each facility or property owned or operated by the Housing Commission shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(1)  The annual service charge shall be delinquent if not paid by the date which general property taxes incur interest and penalty and shall be subject to the same interest and penalty as delinquent real property taxes and the same collection proceedings, liens, and remedies available to the City, County, and State Treasurer as are delinquent real property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1071 . Passed 5-7-18) 
882.04 - Severability. 
    The various sections and provisions of this chapter shall be deemed severable, and should any section or provision be declared by an court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any section or provision of this chapter other than the section or provision declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 1071 . Passed 5-7-18) 
PART TEN - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE 
TITLE TWO - STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS 
Chapter 1020 - Streets[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Use of streets by utilities,  117; Authority of City re streets, Ch. XIII; Use of streets by Light and Power Board,  179(f) 
State Law reference- Curbs and gutters,  91.1, 102.8; Streets and alleys in home rule cities,  117.4d, 117.4e, 117.4h; Excavations generally,  554.251 et seq. 
Cross reference- Special assessments for pavement,  232.08; Excavations generally, Ch. 1024; Curbs and gutters, Ch. 1026; Use of streets by utilities,  1040.02; Streets in subdivisions,  1246.01, 1248.09; Zoning of vacated streets,  1256.04; Street numbers, Ch. 1470 

1020.01 - Street map. 
(a)  Adoption. All streets shall be known and designated by the names applied thereto, respectively, on the map of the City filed with the City Clerk, which map is hereby adopted and made a part of this section by reference. The naming of any new street or the changing of the name of any street shall be done by resolution, which resolution shall amend the map. 
(b)  Vacated streets. Vacated portions of streets and alleys shall be shown on the map. The vacating of any street or alley shall be done by resolution, which resolution shall amend the map. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.01) 
1020.02 - Vacating. 
(a)  Resolution. When the City Commission deems it advisable to vacate, discontinue or abolish any street, alley, public ground or part thereof, it shall by resolution so declare, and in the same resolution shall appoint a time, not less than four weeks thereafter, when it will meet and hear objections to such action. 
(b)  Notice. Notice of such meeting shall be published in the official newspaper three times, at least one week apart, before the time appointed for such meeting. Notice of such meeting shall also be mailed to all abutting property owners, based on current assessment records, at least seven days prior to such meeting. 
(c)  Objections. Objections to such proposed action of the Commission may be filed with the City Clerk, in writing, and if any objection is filed, the street, alley, public ground or any part thereof shall not be vacated or discontinued, except by a concurring vote of five members of the Commission. 
(d)  Fee. Before any action is taken as provided in this section, the party proposing, recommending or petitioning for the vacation, discontinuance or abolishment of any street, alley, public ground or part thereof shall pay to the City Treasurer a fee as fixed from time to time by resolution of the City Commission. Under no condition shall such fee or any part thereof be refunded for failure of such vacation, discontinuance or abolishment to be approved by the City Commission. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.02; Ord. 12, Passed 2-21-77; Ord. 39, Passed 11-7-77; Ord. 322, Passed 12-16-91; Ord. 1036 , Passed 7-5-16) 
1020.03 - Obstructions. 
(a)  Prohibitions. No person shall encumber, obstruct or endanger the proper use of any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(b)  Liability. Any person having the care, either as owner or occupant, of any premises bordered by a public street or alley shall be liable to the City for any legal liability that may be adjudged against the City as a result of the placing of obstructions of any nature in the public street or alley by such person. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.04) 
1020.04 - Playing in streets and alleys; toy vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall play ball or any other game upon any public street or alley. 
(b)  No person upon roller skates or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. (1976 Code Sec. 9.06) 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 410. Passed 12-19-94). 
1020.05 - Closing streets; permit required. 
    No person other than a police officer or firefighter shall close any street without a permit. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.18. Ord. 411. Passed 12-19-94.) 
1020.06 - Materials overhanging streets. 
(a)  In general. No person shall suspend or support any article which will overhang any portion of a public street or alley, except as provided in these Codified Ordinances or except as authorized by written permission in the sound discretion of the City Commission. 
(b)  Ropes and pulleys. No person shall raise anything from or lower anything to any street, alley or public place by means of a rope, chain, pulley or similar device without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Engineer. Protection for pedestrians using the street or alley shall be provided. A bond in an amount determined by resolution of the City Commission shall be posted with the City Engineer. 
(c)  Awnings. No person shall install any awning overhanging any public street or alley unless such awning is of a type that will permit rolling up, elevating or otherwise withdrawing at will or unless authorized by written permission in the sound discretion of the City Commission. No awning shall have less than seven feet of clearance between its lowest projection and the surface of the public street or alley, nor shall it project into the street or alley more than nine feet from the lot line of the premises adjacent thereto. 
(d)  Poles and wires. No person, other than a recognized public utility company, shall place or remove any pole or string or remove any wire in the public streets or alleys without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Engineer. The issuance of such permit shall be contingent upon the requirement that the placement of such pole or wire shall not be detrimental to the public safety and that the amount of tree trimming required shall be held to a minimum. A bond in an amount determined by resolution of the City Commission shall be posted with the City Engineer to protect the City and the public from damages from such operation. 
(e)  Violation. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(1976 Code; Adopting Ordinance; Ord. 412. Passed 12-19-94.Ord. No. 434. Passed 2-5-96.) 
1020.07 - Sidewalk cafe permits. 
(a)  Permit conditions. The City Clerk may issue to an adjacent food service establishment a revocable sidewalk cafe permit to occupy a portion of adjacent City right-of-way to place tables and chairs, planters and windscreens adjacent to the tables and chairs in conjunction with selling and consuming food and beverages under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Prohibitions. The occupancy must not: 
a.  Interfere with the use of the right-of-way for pedestrian or vehicular travel. 
b.  Unreasonably interfere with the view, access to, or use of property adjacent to said street. 
c.  Reduce the pedestrian travel area of any sidewalk to less than four feet in width; a clear linear path at least four feet in width must be maintained at all times; and effective April 1, 2015, not reduce the pedestrian travel area of any sidewalk to less than five feet in width; a clear linear path at least five feet in width shall be maintained at all times. The pedestrian travel area shall not include trees, bushes, walls, parking meters, fire hydrants, tree grates or any other fixtures permanently located in the right-of-way. 
d.  Cause damage to the street or sidewalk or to trees, benches, landscaping, or other objects lawfully located in the right-of-way. The sidewalk anchoring system to secure an item in the sidewalk shall be approved by the City Engineer in writing prior to installation. Anchoring systems secured to adjacent buildings and approved by the building owner, do not require approval by the City Engineer. 
e.  Cause a violation of any state or local laws. 
f.  Be used for off-premises advertising. All signs must conform to the sign ordinance. 
g.  Conceal or detract from the appearance of landscaping features in or adjacent to the street. 
h.  Be in or adjacent to property zoned exclusively for residential purposes. 
i.  Be attached to or reduce the effectiveness of or access to any utility pole, sign or other traffic control device. 
j.  Cause increased risk of theft or vandalism. 
k.  Violate regulations adopted by the City Manager pursuant to this Code. 
l.  Serve alcohol unless the business holds a sidewalk caf with alcohol permit issued by the City Clerk. 
m.  Leave any furniture or equipment associated with the sidewalk caf on public property when the caf is not in operation. This subsection shall be effective April 1, 2015. 
n.  May not operate beyond 11:00 p.m. 
(2)  Notice. Notice to the adjacent property owners or occupants on both sides of the applicant's property shall be required before issuing a permit to occupy any right-of-way area between the edge of the vehicle use area of the right-of-way and the right-of-way property line. Said notice should include an enumeration of the conditions or rights provided under section 1020.07(1) of this Code. 
(3)  Fee. Prior to the issuance of a permit, a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Commission shall be paid to the City Clerk. This fee shall be tripled if any such occupancy occurred prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(4)  Insurance. The permittee shall show proof of and maintain comprehensive general liability insurance and have the City as an additional named insured. The amount of such insurance shall be determined by the City Clerk. 
(5)  Waste. Any holder of a sidewalk caf permit shall be responsible for the proper disposal of all waste associated with their sidewalk caf occupancy and shall ensure that the waste is removed on a daily basis. 
(6)  Food service establishment. Food service establishment shall be defined in accordance with its meaning in the Food Law of 2000, as amended, M.C.L.A.  289.1101. 
(7)  Regulations. The City Manager may adopt an executive order controlling the occupancy pursuant to a sidewalk cafe permit. 
(8)  Site plan and barrier requirement. A site plan shall be submitted with the application showing where a barrier will be placed to maintain an unobstructed foot path five feet wide for pedestrians at all times, to ensure compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. A barrier shall delineate the sidewalk caf and generally be 36 feet in height and be approved by the City Planning Director. Barriers shall be anchored to the sidewalk upon approval by the City Engineer; alternatively, barriers can be anchored to the adjacent building with the building owner's approval. The placement of any required barriers shall be marked on the sidewalk by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include an anchoring system; the barrier shall be such that it is sufficient to ensure compliance with the approved site plan. The barrier shall be removed when the business closes each day. If the city's ADA Coordinator determines that existing conditions are such that a barrier is not required to maintain an unobstructed foot access path at least five feet wide for pedestrians, the requirement for the barrier may be waived by the city's ADA Coordinator. This subsection shall be effective April 1, 2015. 
(9)  Compliance with approved site plan. The caf shall, at all times, comply with the approved site plan. 
(b)  Duration. Permits shall be for the period of April 1 to November 1 for the year in which granted. 
(c)  Display. A permit shall only be valid if displayed in a manner visible to the public. 
(d)  Permit revocation. Any permit may be revoked by the City Clerk upon a finding that the occupancy does not meet the standards of this Code, any other provisions of this Code, or other applicable law or regulation, or that the right-of-way is needed for other street or utility purposes. Upon such revocation, the fee paid for any period after termination of the street occupancy shall be refunded. 
(e)  Appeal. Persons who are refused a permit or have had their permit revoked may request in writing a hearing on that determination before the City Manager. The decision of the Manager may be appealed to the City Commission. Requests for a hearing or an appeal must be made within five days of the questioned decision. 
(f)  Non-renewal of permit. If a permit holder has two or more violations in a permit year, the City Clerk shall not renew the permit the following permit year. 
(g)  Appearance tickets. The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCLA 764.9c(2); MSA 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(h)  Violations. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 368. Passed 8-16-93. Ord. 539. Passed 7-16-01. Ord. 570. Passed 7-1-02. Ord. 658. Passed 12-6-04 Ord. 700. Passed 4-3-06. Ord. 1009. Passed 8-4-14. Ord. 1013. Passed 2-17-15) 
1020.08 - Sidewalk caf with alcohol permit. 
(a)  Permit conditions. The City Clerk may issue to a food service establishment a revocable sidewalk caf with alcohol permit to occupy a portion of adjacent City right-of-way to place tables and chairs, planters and windscreens in conjunction with selling and consuming food and alcoholic beverages, provided the following terms and conditions are met: 
(1)  May not operate beyond 11:00 p.m. 
(2)  Service of alcohol at the sidewalk caf does not violate any state, federal or local laws, promulgated rules, or policies or executive orders of the city. 
(3)  A barrier shall surround the sidewalk caf; it shall be approved by the City Planning Director, generally be 36 feet in height, and shall be removed when the establishment closes each day. 
(4)  A site plan shall be submitted with the application showing where a barrier will be placed to maintain an unobstructed foot path five feet wide for pedestrians at all times, to ensure compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Barriers shall be anchored to the sidewalk upon approval by the City Engineer; alternatively, barriers can be anchored to the adjacent building with the building owner's approval. The placement of any required barriers shall be marked on the sidewalk by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include an anchoring system; the barrier shall be such that it is sufficient to ensure compliance with the approved site plan. The barrier shall be removed when the business closes each day. If the city's ADA Coordinator determines that existing conditions are such that a barrier is not required to maintain an unobstructed foot access path at least five feet wide for pedestrians, the requirement for the barrier may be waived by the city's ADA Coordinator. This subsection shall be effective April 1, 2015. 
(5)  The business must post a sign in a prominent location that is one square foot that indicates, "No beverages beyond the barrier of this Sidewalk Caf." Specifically, the sign shall be posted within the perimeter of the sidewalk cafe. 
(6)  Prohibitions. The occupancy must not: 
a.  Interfere with the use of the right-of-way for pedestrian or vehicular travel. 
b.  Unreasonably interfere with the view, access to, or use of property adjacent to said street. 
c.  Reduce the pedestrian travel area of any sidewalk to less than four feet in width; a clear linear path at least four feet in width must be maintained at all times. Effective April 1, 2015, the occupancy must not reduce the pedestrian travel area of any sidewalk to less than five feet in width; a clear linear path at least five feet in width must be maintained at all times. The pedestrian travel area shall not include trees, bushes, walls, parking meters, fire hydrants, tree grates or any other fixtures permanently located in the right-of-way. 
d.  Cause damage to the street or sidewalk or to trees, benches, landscaping, or other objects lawfully located in the right-of-way. The sidewalk anchoring system to secure an item in the sidewalk shall be approved by the City Engineer in writing prior to installation. Anchoring systems secured to adjacent buildings and approved by the building owner, do not require approval by the City Engineer. 
e.  Cause a violation of any state or local laws. 
f.  Be used for off-premises advertising. All signs must conform to the sign ordinance. 
g.  Conceal or detract from the appearance of landscaping features in or adjacent to the street. 
h.  Be in or adjacent to property zoned exclusively for residential purposes. 
i.  Be attached to or reduce the effectiveness of or access to any utility pole, sign or other traffic control device. 
j.  Cause increased risk of theft or vandalism. 
k.  Leave any furniture or equipment associated with the sidewalk caf on public property when the caf is not in operation. This subsection shall be effective April 1, 2015. 
l.  Violate regulations adopted by the City Manager pursuant to this Code. 
(7)  Notice. Notice to the adjacent property owners or occupants on both sides of the applicant's property shall be required before issuing a permit to occupy any right-of-way area between the edge of the vehicle use area of the right-of-way and the right-of-way property line. Said notice should include an enumeration of the conditions or rights provided under section 1020.08(1) of this Code. 
(8)  Fee. Prior to the issuance of a permit, a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Commission shall be paid to the City Clerk. This fee shall be tripled if any such occupancy occurred prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(9)  Insurance. The Permittee shall show proof of and maintain comprehensive general liability insurance and liquor liability insurance and have the City as an additional named insured. The amount of such insurance shall be determined by the City Clerk. 
(10)  Waste. Any holder of a sidewalk caf with alcohol permit shall be responsible for the proper disposal of all waste with their sidewalk caf occupancy and shall ensure that the waste is removed on a daily basis. 
(11)  Compliance with approved site plan. The caf shall, at all times, comply with the approved site plan. 
(12)  Food service establishment. Food service establishment shall be defined in accordance with its meaning in the Food Law of 2000, as amended. M.C.L.A.  289.1101. 
(13)  Regulations. The City Manager may adopt an executive order controlling the occupancy pursuant to a sidewalk caf with alcohol permit. 
(14)  Agreement for cafes not directly adjacent to building required. For sidewalk cafes where the caf area is on sidewalk that is adjacent to the building but configured so that the pedestrian walkway is between the building and the caf area, the owner of the sidewalk caf shall enter into a sidewalk caf license agreement with the city further specifying the terms and conditions of the permit. The City Clerk is authorized to execute such agreements on behalf of the city. 
(15)  Duration. Permits shall be for the period of April 1 to November 1 for the year in which granted. 
(16)  Display. A permit shall only be valid if displayed in a manner visible to the public. 
(17)  Permit revocation. Any permit may be revoked by the City Clerk upon a finding that the occupancy does not meet the standards of this Code, any other provisions of this Code, or other applicable law or regulation, or that the right-of-way is needed for other street or utility purposes. Upon such revocation, the fee paid for any period after termination of the street occupancy shall be refunded. 
(18)  Appeal. Persons who are refused a permit or have had their permit revoked may request in writing a hearing on that determination before the City Manager. The decision of the Manager may be appealed to the City Commission. Requests for a hearing or an appeal must be made within five days of the questioned decision. 
(19)  Non-renewal of permit. If a permit holder has two or more violations in a permit year, the City Clerk shall not renew the permit the following permit year. 
(20)  Appearance tickets. The Police Chief and the appointed officers of the Police Department, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCLA 764.9c(2); MSA 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(21)  Violations. A person who violates this section is responsible for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 700. Passed 4-3-06. Ord. 1009. Passed 8-4-14. Ord. 1013. Passed 2-17-15) 
1020.09. - Newsrack permits. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of this section to place reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions on the location of newsracks or newspaper vending machines to further the City's objective in preserving the public health, safety and welfare by providing for the proper and efficient maintenance and intended use of the public rights-of-way and aesthetics while also leaving open adequate means of distribution of newspapers and other publications in public places in a manner that treats all equally regardless of their size, content, circulation, or frequency of publication. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection. 
    Newsrack means any self-servicing or coin-operated box, container, vending machine, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale, or dissemination of any newspaper, news periodicals, or magazines, including the dissemination of any real estate or other publications. "Owner" means the person who is responsible for installing or maintaining a newsrack. 
    Right-of-way means lands, by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, grant, dedication, usage or process of law, dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, pedestrian walkway, storm drainage, bicycle path or other purposes. 
    Sidewalk means any surface primarily intended for the use of pedestrians on any right-of-way. 
(c)  Newsracks prohibited. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack or other structure that projects onto, into or over any part of the right-of-way except the sidewalk. 
(d)  Permit required. No owner shall place or install, use or maintain any newsrack on a sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the City Clerk therefore. The City Clerk may issue a revocable newsrack permit under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all times. 
(2)  No newsrack shall exceed a maximum height of 48 inches, 22 inches in depth, and 26 inches in width. 
(3)  Newsracks shall not be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
a.  Within ten feet of any crosswalk. 
b.  Within ten feet of any fire hydrant or other fire department connection. 
c.  Within ten feet of any driveway. 
d.  Within ten feet of any designated bus stop. 
e.  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet. 
f.  On or within four feet of any street sign, parking meter, streetlight, water valve, manhole, utility pole or other similar structure. 
g.  Within four feet from outside edges of designated emergency exit or Knox Box. 
h.  Within the clear vision triangle. 
i.  Over utility covers. 
(4)  All newsracks placed where on-street parking is permitted shall be placed parallel to and not less than 18 inches or more than 42 inches from the face of the curb. 

(5)  All newsracks shall be stable and made of durable material. 
(6)  Newsracks shall not be secured to any public property. 
(7)  Newsracks shall not be secured to any private property without the permission of the owner or person in possession of the property. 
(8)  Newsracks shall contain a clearly legible, weather resistant identification plate, not less than ten square inches in area, stating the name of the owner along with the installation date and permit number. 
(e)  Expiration. Once issued a permit shall be valid provided that all terms and conditions of the permit are met and the newsrack is not otherwise deemed abandoned pursuant to this section. 
(f)  Fee. The permit fee shall be as established, and as may be changed from time to time, by resolution of the City Commission and shall be paid at the time of the application. 
(g)  Insurance. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the owner shall provide the City with proof of general liability insurance naming the City as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be maintained and the owner shall provide the City with proof thereof for the term of the Permit. The amount of insurance shall be determined by the City Clerk. 
(h)  Permit revocation. Any permit may be revoked by the City for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The occupancy does not meet the terms and conditions of this section. 
(2)  The newsrack has been abandoned. A newsrack shall be deemed abandoned when no publication is in the newsrack for a period of more than 30 consecutive days. 
(3)  If the newsrack constitutes a threat to public health or safety. 
If the City determines that any of the above conditions exist, the City shall notify the owner in writing of the determination. The notice shall specify a reasonable time, not to exceed ten days, in which the owner may cure the condition. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be affixed on the newsrack. In the event that the owner fails to take corrective action and does not appeal the determination as provided in subsection (i), the permit shall be deemed revoked and the City may remove the newsrack pursuant to subsection (j)(2). 
(i)  Appeal. An owner, who receives notification as provided in subsection (h), may request in writing a hearing on that determination before the City Manager. The City Manager's determination is final. Requests for a hearing or an appeal must be made within ten days of the date of the notice. 
(j)  Removal of newsrack. 
(1)  By owner. In the event that an owner desires or is required to remove a newsrack, the owner shall notify the City Clerk, completely remove the machine, and restore the right-of-way to a safe condition. 
(2)  By city. If the permit is revoked pursuant to subsection (h), and the owner fails to remove the newsrack within ten days from receipt of notice of such revocation or appeal the determination, the City shall remove the newsrack. Upon removal, the City shall deliver a notice of removal to the owner describing the location from which the newsrack was removed and the address of the location where the newsrack is being stored. 
(k)  Release of newsrack. After removal by the City, a newsrack shall be released to its owner, upon proof of ownership and payment of a pick-up and collection charge. If any newsrack is not claimed within 30 days, the newsrack shall be deemed abandoned and shall become the property of the City for disposal; and a disposal charge plus the pick-up and collection charge shall be assessed to the owner. The fees shall be as established, and as may be changed from time to time, by resolution of the City Commission. 
(l)  Emergency removal. Should any newsrack constitute a threat to the public health or safety, the newsrack shall be subject to immediate removal by the City. In the event that the newsrack is so removed the City shall provide the owner with notice of the removal as soon as practical thereafter. 
(m)  Severability. The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this section or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or application of this section that can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application. 
(n)  Penalty. Any person in violation of this section shall be responsible for a Municipal Civil Infraction, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 823. Passed 1-19-09.) 
1020.10 - Outdoor cafs in designated on-street parking areas. 
(a)  Permit conditions. The City Clerk may issue to a food service establishment a revocable Outdoor Caf Permit authorizing the placement of the outdoor caf in on-street parking areas on streets where the posted speed is 25 miles per hour or less, pursuant to Section 1020.07 or 1020.08 of this Code. For Outdoor Caf Permits where alcohol is not served, the provisions of Section 1020.07 of this Code shall apply in all respects; provided, however, if there is a conflict between this section and Section 1020.07, the provisions of this section shall survive. For Outdoor Caf Permits where alcohol is served, the provisions of Section 1020.08 of this Code shall apply in all respects; provided, however, if there is a conflict between this section and Section 1020.08, the provisions of this section shall survive. Such permits shall be subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  General conditions. 
a.  The Caf shall be located within designated street parking areas where 50 percent or more of the parking space is in front of the food service establishment applicant. A maximum of two parking spaces will be permitted. Use of the "brick ribbon" on sidewalk is permitted when applicable. 
b.  Cafs will not be permitted on the 100 and 200 block of East front Street. 
c.  A maximum of 10 permits will be issued for Cafs within the Downtown Development Authority district. 
d.  A fee in the amount determined by resolution of the City Commission shall be paid prior to issuance of a permit by the City Clerk such fee may be prorated based on the number of days used as agreed to in an Outdoor Caf License Agreement. A Right-of-Way permit will also be required. 
e.  The Caf shall be established upon a removable platform approved by the City Planning Director, City Engineer, City Department of Public Services, City Fire, and Grand Traverse County Construction Code before being placed in the designated on-street parking area; the platform shall be placed in such a manner to not create trip hazards. Drawings must be submitted by a registered design professional. 
f.  The Caf shall be separated from vehicular traffic with a 1' perimeter and surrounded by a barrier generally 36 inches in height and be approved by the City Planning Director, City Engineer, City Department of Public Services, City Fire, and Grand Traverse County Construction Code, which will remain in place at all times when the caf is in operation, and shall include markings or other devices or decorations to make the barrier clearly visible at all times. Planters are required. 
g.  The platform shall not be placed in the designated on-street parking spaces sooner than May 1 each year and shall be removed no later than October 1 each year, At the discretion of the City Clerk, the time frame when the platform may be placed in the designated on-street parking spaces may be extended. 
h.  The Caf shall conform to the site plan which shall be incorporated as part of the permit. Such site plan shall show the following: the design, relevant details and location of all temporary structures, including the dimensions of the removable platform, planters, landscaping, railings, tables, chairs and lighting. Permitted materials include, wood, metal, cast iron, steel, and high quality recycled plastic. 
i.  If the use of a musical instrument and/or sound reproduction system is planned, such use shall be governed by this Code and there shall be no amplification of live music. 
j.  The City Manager may adopt rules and regulations regarding the construction, use and removal of outdoor cafes within designated street parking areas. Outdoor Cafs within designated street parking areas shall be operated in accordance with the rules and regulations as they may be adopted or amended. An Outdoor Caf within a designated on-street parking area which is operated in violation of the rules and regulations shall be removed within 24 hours of written notice. 
k.  The owner of the Outdoor Caf shall enter into an Outdoor Caf License Agreement with the City further specifying the terms and conditions of the permit which allows a Caf to be placed within designated street parking areas. The City Clerk is authorized to execute such agreements on behalf of the City. 
l.  The Outdoor Caf will be open to patrons of the licensee and not the general public. 
m.  Smoking shall be prohibited; and a sign shall be posted within the platform indicating smoking is prohibited. 
n.  Other conditions established by the City Clerk in the permit. 
(2)  Prohibitions. The occupancy must not: 
a.  Violate any provisions of Section 1020.07 or 1020.08 of this Code of Ordinances; provided, however, that if there is a conflict between this section and Section 1020.07 or 1020.08 of this Code, the provisions of this section shall survive. 
b.  Extend more than seven feet from the curb line. 
(Ord. 1040 . Passed 12-19-16; Ord. 1047 . Passed 4-17-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. 1040 , adopted December 19, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as  1020.09. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 1020.10. 
1020.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1022 - Sidewalks[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of City re public property, Ch. XIII 
State Law reference- Failure of property owner to keep sidewalks free of obstruction, MCL  103.4; Liability of City, M.C.L.A.  691.1401 et seq. 
Cross reference- Special assessments for sidewalks,  232.06; Streets, Ch. 1020; Sidewalks in subdivisions,  1246.01, 1248.11 

1022.01 - Construction and repair of sidewalks, curbs and gutters; permit required. 
(a)  Structures in right-of-way. No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair or remove any sidewalk or any structure of any nature lying within the limits of any street or alley right-of-way or any curb, gutter or structure for regulating, governing or facilitating the flow of water, except in accordance with the line, grade and specifications established by the City Engineer, or without a permit. 
(b)  Sidewalk requirements for new development. On curbed streets, public concrete sidewalks built or repaired to the City Engineer's specifications and requirements shall be constructed in public rights-of-way for all new development, including substantial additions or improvements (of a construction cost of $20,000.00 or more within a 12-month period), with no cost of the sidewalk construction to be borne by the City. Single- and two-family development, exterior cosmetic alterations which do not increase the usable area, capacity or exterior limits (footprint) of the building, interior alteration work, or change in use projects that do not require a site plan, shall be exempt from this requirement. The City Engineer may waive the requirement for a new sidewalk if, in his or her opinion, unfavorable physical conditions exist. Responsibility for this requirement is limited to 20 percent of the project cost. 
(Ord. 295. Passed 4-1-91. Ord. 365. Passed 7-6-93.) 
1022.02 - Widths. 
(a)  Elmwood Avenue. All sidewalks on the west side of Elmwood Avenue from Bay Street south to the corporate limits shall be laid in such a manner as to leave a space of nine feet between the inner line of the walk and the boundary line of the abutting property on the west side of Elmwood Avenue. 
(b)  Residential areas. In all residential sections of the City the sidewalk shall be not less than five feet wide and the inside line shall be placed 18 inches distant from the abutting property line unless the City Manager determines that this requirement is impractical by reason of physical conditions. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.13) 
1022.03 - Repairs of unsafe sidewalks. 
(a)  Required. No person shall permit any sidewalk adjoining property owned by him or her to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe. 
(b)  Notice to repair. Whenever the City Manager determines that a sidewalk is unsafe for use, notice to repair such sidewalk shall be given to the adjoining property owner. 
(c)  Time limit. The owner shall repair the sidewalk within 60 days after delivery or posting of the notice. 
(d)  Repairs by city. If the sidewalk remains out of repair for longer than five days after the notice has been given, the City Manager may cause the same to be repaired and the cost of the repairs may be collected from the owner in an action at law. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.14) 
1022.04 - Openings. 
    No person shall open or use any opening in a sidewalk unless such opening is provided with suitable protection and a guard approved by the Police Chief. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.15) 
1022.05 - Merchandise displays in C-4 districts. 
(a)  Prohibitions. No person shall exhibit, display or offer for sale any goods, merchandise, food, drink or services on any public sidewalk in a C-4 zoning district except in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Permit required. The City Manager may issue a permit to allow the temporary exhibition, display or offering of goods, merchandise, food, drink or services upon written application, to which application is attached a petition subscribed to by the owners or occupiers of at least 60 percent of the entire footage fronting on the public sidewalk on both sides of any street which extends between two other streets intersecting that street. Permits shall be issued only in conformity with section 802.02 of the Business Regulation and Taxation Code, except as modified by this section. 
(c)  Conditions for issuance of permits. No permit shall be issued unless the City Manager determines that accommodation has been made for pedestrian traffic and safety, that the public health, welfare and safety will not be disserved and that a majority of those businesses, or others dependent upon the public sidewalk, will not be injured by the issuance of the permit. 
(d)  Contents of permits. A separate permit may be issued to each applicant complying with this section or a block permit may be issued to a civic, charitable or public service group, based in the metropolitan area, complying with this section. Permits shall be issued for not more than seven days. Such restrictions may be placed in the permit as will best protect the public and neighboring businesses as described in subsection (c) hereof. The permit shall indicate who may conduct exhibitions, displays or sales and the location thereof. 
(e)  Insurance. Insurance in the amounts and form as required by the City Clerk shall be provided. 
(f)  Exemptions. The following are exempt from this section: 
(1)  Persons or organizations engaged in public solicitation in possession of a valid permit and in compliance with City ordinances. The sale of goods, merchandise, food, drink or services in connection with a valid public solicitation permit is not prohibited unless there is a fixed base for such activity on the public sidewalk, in which case a permit under subsection (b) hereof must be obtained. 
(2).  Coin-operated newsstands. 
(g)  Transfers of permits. Permits may not be transferred or assigned. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.08; Ord. 25. Passed 7-11-77. Ord. 961. Passed 5-6-13) 
1022.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1024 - Excavations[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of City re streets and public property, Ch. XIII 
State Law reference- Streets and alleys in home rule cities, MCL  117.4d, 117.4e, 117.4h; Excavations generally, MCL  554.251 et seq. 
Cross reference- Streets, Ch. 1020; Excavations in sidewalks,  1022.04; Excavations for C.A.T.V. installations,  1048.17; Excavation permits,  1252.03(e) 

1024.01 - Permit required. 
    No person, public utility company, franchisee, or licensee other than a duly authorized City official or employee in the course of his or her employment, shall make any excavation or opening in or under any public right-of-way, street or alley or upon any public property without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Engineer. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.161. Ord. 622. Passed 2-9-04.) 
1024.02 - Railroads. 
    No railroad company shall be required to obtain a permit for the purpose of repairing the roadbed of its railway or replacing or repairing the pavement or surface between its tracks and two feet outside thereof. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.162) 
1024.03 - Emergencies; authority of police department. 
    In case of an emergency arising outside of office hours, when an immediate excavation may be necessary for the protection of public or private property, the same shall be reported to the Police Department. The Department shall grant permission to make the necessary excavation upon the express condition that an application be made before 12:00 noon of the next business day. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.163) 
1024.04 - Restoration of surface. 
(a)  Restoration required. Upon completion of the work done pursuant to a permit under this chapter, the public right-of-way, street, alley, or public property shall be restored by the owner or owners of the property for which the work is being done to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(b)  To ensure restoration of the public right-of-way, street, alley, or public property to its former condition, the owner or owners of the property for which the work is being done or the owners' representative shall: 
(1)  Post a bond with the City in an amount established by the City Manager by executive order. 
(2)  In lieu of posting a bond, the owner or owners of the property for which the work is being done may agree to a special assessment against the benefitted property for the labor, material or services incurred by the City in restoring the public right-of-way, street, alley, or public property to its former condition in the event that the applicant fails to restore the public right-of-way, street, alley, or public property to its former condition as required by this section. Such assessment shall be imposed pursuant to the City's procedure for assessing single parcels as set forth in Chapter 232 of this Code. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner(s) or the owner's representative of the property for which the work is being done shall post a bond in an amount established by the City Manager by executive order, for all work to restore the public right-of-way, street, alley, or public property to its former condition not subject to special assessment. For purposes of this subsection, such improvements are defined as those improvements to public right-of-way, street, alley, or public property that do not abut or specially benefit the property for which the work authorized by the permit is being done. 
(d)  Any bond posted under this section shall be returned to the applicant within 30 days from the date that the work authorized by the permit is completed and the public right-of-way, street, alley, or public property has been restored. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.164. Ord. 851. Passed 12-21-09.) 
1024.05 - Barricades and warning lights. 
    An applicant shall keep the excavation operations carefully barricaded, lighted at night and otherwise protected as required by the City Manager for the protection of the public. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.165) 
1024.06 - Time limit for completion of work. 
    The applicant shall work as continuously as practical and shall complete operations within the time specified in the permit. If, in the judgment of the City Manager, the work is not prosecuted in such a manner as to ensure completion within the time specified, the City may undertake the work and collect the cost therefor from the applicant in an action at law or from the applicant's bond. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.166) 
1024.07 - Obstructions. 
    No person shall render more than one-half of the traveled width of any street or alley unavailable for travel in connection with any opening or excavation. If any sidewalk is blocked, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.167) 
1024.08 - Backfilling. 
    Backfilling shall be subject to the approval of the Engineering Department. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.168) 
1024.99 - Penalty. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or a permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to the civil infraction sanctions, injunctive relief, nuisance abatement, surcharges and equitable remedies as provided in the City Code of Ordinances or as otherwise available under the law, as well as any damages resulting from such violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 851. Passed. 12-21-09.) 
Chapter 1026 - Curb Cuts[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of City re streets and public property, Ch. XIII 
State Law reference- Curbs and gutters, MCL  91.1, 102.8; Streets and alleys in home rule cities, MCL  117.4d, 117.4e, 117.4h; Excavations generally, MCL  554.251 et seq.; Ch. 1024 
Cross reference- Special assessments for curbs,  232.07; Streets, Ch. 1020 

1026.01 - Permit required; specifications. 
    No person shall make any opening in or through any curb of any street or alley without first obtaining a permit therefor. Such curb cut shall be made in accordance with plans and specifications established by the City Engineer. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.171) 
1026.02 - Conditions for issuance. 
    No curb cut permit will be issued: 
(1)  When the curb cut is to be made permanent and is within 20 feet of any other permanent cut on the same premises; 
(2)  When such cut is to be made permanent and is intended to be more than 32 feet in its total throat width; 
(3)  When such cut is on corner property and is within the quadrant of an intersection or the sidewalk area; 
(4)  When, in the opinion of the City Manager, such cut will interfere with the safety of the public; or 
(5)  Unless the sidewalk above the area of the curb opening is constructed of an approved grade of monolithic concrete, not less than six inches in thickness for residential drives. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.172) 
1026.99 - Penalty. 
Charter reference- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1028 - Trees and Shrubs[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Box elder trees, female, as nuisance, M.C.L.A.  124.151; Cutting or destroying trees, MCL  324.9115a (Natural Resources and Enviromental Protection Act 451 of 1994), MCL  600.2919 (Act 236 of 1961); Damage or waste to land; damages; injunctions; contempt); Malicious destruction of trees, M.C.L.A.  750.382 
Cross reference- Noxious weeds,  668.05; Disposal of trimmings,  1060.07(b), (c); Injuring vegetation,  1064.03 

1028.01 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Public area means publicly owned parks, tree lawns and other grounds owned or used by federal, state or local government. 
(2)  Treelawn means that part of a street right-of-way not covered by a sidewalk or other paving, lying between the right-of-way boundary line and that portion of the street usually used for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 200. Passed 5-19-86.) 
1028.02 - Authority of city manager. 
    The City Manager shall have full authority over all trees and shrubs planted in public areas of the City, including the authority to adopt procedural regulations as may be required. The City Manager shall set reasonable conditions for the granting of a permit in accordance with this chapter. The City Manager may designate a person with the duty of enforcing this chapter, granting permits and other related duties for the proper management of the trees in public areas. 
(Ord. 200. Passed 5-19-86.) 
1028.03 - Planting, removing, trimming; permit required; application. 
(a)  Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, no person, firm or corporation shall shall plant, remove or trim any tree or shrub in a public area without first obtaining a permit therefor. The granting of such permit shall be contingent upon the requirement that the activity not interfere with the public health or safety, that it not constitute a public nuisance and that it complies with the Urban Forest Plan and arborcultural standards. Permits shall be granted only with the consent of the owner of the public area. 
(b)  The application for a permit required under this section shall contain: 
(1)  Evidence of sufficient interest in the property; 
(2)  The location and species of each tree or shrub to be planted, trimmed or removed; 
(3)  A description of the action to be taken; and 
(4)  A fee as determined by resolution of the City Commission. 
    If the action includes removal, the permit shall specify replacement as required under this chapter or give reason why replacement is not necessary. 
(Ord. 200. Passed 5-19-86.) 
1028.04 - Trimming of trees by utility companies. 
(a)  Utility corporations may trim trees in order to facilitate installation and maintenance of existing facilities of electric power lines, telephone lines and other utility installations, provided such public utilities shall provide written notice to Department of Public Services Director of their intended operations and the locality thereof. Said notice shall provide the location of the proposed trimming. Any such trimming shall be in accordance with instructions of the Department of Public Services Director or his or her designee and in accordance with this ordinance. Acts of God, the loss of utilities services due to weather and like emergencies constitute an exception to this subsection. 
(b)  Line clearance: The following standards represent tree trimming guidelines that are in accordance with industry standards for maintaining safe distances between utility lines and trees: 
Secondary Primary Transmission Top Trimming 1' to 3' 5' to 7' 15' Side Trimming 1' to 3' 4' to 6' 15' Over Trimming 1' to 3' 6' No overhang 
permitted  
(c)  Utility companies shall provide written notice to the house addresses of residents prior to treelawn tree pruning activities for non-emergency trimming. 
1028.05 - Streets, utilities and public services code. 
(a)  All maintenance of City trees shall be in accordance with the National Arborist Association's Pruning Standards. 
(b)  The removal of trees requires authorization from the Department of Public Services Director. 
(Ord. 519. Passed 11-20-00.) 
1028.05 - Urban forest plan; arborcultural standards. 
    The City Commission shall adopt, by resolution: 
(1)  An Urban Forest Plan which shall include the species of trees and shrubs allowed on public areas; and 
(2)  Arborcultural standards which shall specify proper procedures for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs. 
(Ord. 200. Passed 5-19-86.) 
1028.06 - Planting prohibitions. 
    No person shall plant any tree or shrub contrary to the following: 
(1)  Plantings between the sidewalk and curb shall be not closer than 30 inches to the sidewalk or curb. Where there is adequate space on private property, plantings shall be at least four feet in back of the inside edge of the sidewalk. 
(2)  Plantings on corners or intersections shall be set back at least 25 feet from the corner or intersection to provide unobstructed vision for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 200. Passed 5-19-86.) 
1028.07 - Responsibility for maintenance. 
    Any person owning or occupying real property bordering on any street, upon which property are trees or shrubs, shall maintain such trees and shrubs so that they will not obstruct or shade street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct safe vision of traffic signs or obstruct the safe view of any street intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet over sidewalks and 14 feet over all improved portions of streets. 
(Ord. 200. Passed 5-19-86.) 
1028.08 - Removal and replacement. 
    When it is necessary to remove a tree or shrub from a treelawn in connection with the paving of a sidewalk or the paving or widening of a street, the City shall, if possible, replant or replace such tree or shrub, as provided for in the Urban Forest Plan and arborcultural standards. No person shall remove or cause to have removed any tree or shrub from the treelawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason, without replacing the removed tree or shrub, if possible, in accordance with the Urban Forest Plan and arborcultural standards. 
(Ord. 200. Passed 05-19-86.) 
1028.09 - Protection of trees. 
(a)  Defacing, abuse or mutilation. Except by written permission of the City Manager, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or shrub in any public area; attach any fence, wall, rope, wire, nails, advertising poster or other contrivance to any tree or shrub; allow a gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such tree or shrub to come into contact with such tree or shrub; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat therefrom will injure any portion of any tree or shrub. No person shall tap such public area tree for sap. 
(b)  Construction. All trees and shrubs on public areas near any excavation, street work or construction of any building or structure shall be guarded with a substantial fence, frame or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches D.B.H., whichever is greater. All building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. 
(c)  Depositing materials. A person shall not deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public area of the City any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree or shrub growing therein, except by written permission from the City Manager. 
(Ord. 200. Passed 5-19-86. Ord. 601. Passed 5-5-03.) 
1028.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
TITLE FOUR - UTILITIES 
Chapter 1040 - Utilities Generally[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Utilities generally, Ch. XI; Municipally owned utilities, Ch. XII 
Cross reference- Department of Public Utilities, Ch. 258; Shutting off of service,  266.01(b); Utilities in subdivisions,  1248.05, 1248.06, 1248.08, 1248.12; Utility equipment in floodways,  1458.08; Aerial wires,  1610.13 

1040.01 - Rules and regulations. 
    Public utilities operating in the City shall be subject to such rules and regulations as the City Commission may from time to time adopt in the manner provided by law. 
(1976 Code Sec. 13.01) 
1040.02 - Operations in streets. 
(a)  Regulations. Except as provided in this chapter, public utilities operating in the City shall be subject to these Codified Ordinances with regard to operations carried on in public streets. 
(b)  Permits. 
(1)  For operations involving routine maintenance and minor extensions an annual permit may be issued. 
(2)  No major construction job or extension shall be undertaken until a job permit has been secured from the City Engineer. 
(c)  Reimbursement of costs. The utility shall reimburse the City for necessary inspection costs, if any, are incurred, and for the cost of replacing road surfaces or drainage structures if such replacement is necessary and any and all damage to public infrastructure that occurred as a result of the utility's work. 
(d)  Bond. Public utilities shall be required to furnish a bond or insurance policy as required by the City Engineer. 
(1976 Code Sec.13.02. Ord. 635. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1040.03 - Plans of underground structures; general layout maps. 
    All public utilities operating in the City shall, upon request, file details of their underground structures within the public streets or alleys with the City Manager. All public utilities shall likewise file copies of their general layout maps insofar as public streets, alleys and other public properties are affected. 
(1976 Code Sec. 13.03.) 
1040.04 - Obstructions to utility meters; accessibility. 
(a)  No person shall place or allow any obstruction within three feet of any operating gas, water or electric utility meter. 
(b)  All heating, plumbing and electrical appliances shall be installed in any building in an accessible location, and shall remain accessible at all times for inspection or repair. 
(c)  A five-foot horizontal separation shall be maintained from all City water and sewer utilities unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
(d)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 13.04. Ord. 636. Passed 4-19-04. Ord. 662. Passed 02-22-05.) 
1040.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1042 - Sewer Construction and Maintenance[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 1042, previously titled "Sewers" was re-titled and re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 336, passed September 8, 1992. 
State Constitution reference- Sewers and sewer systems generally, Mich. Const. Art. 7,  24 
State Law reference- Sewers and sewer systems generally, M.C.L.A.  46.171 et seq., 67.34, 123.241 et seq., 323.151 et seq., 325.201 et seq.; Sewers and sewer systems in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4f, 117.35 
Cross reference- Special assessments for sewers,  232.04, 232.05; Sewers in lodging houses and hotels,  836.03; Wastewater discharge regulations, Ch. 1043; Ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control, Ch. 1068; Sewers in subdivisions,  1248.05, 1248.08; Sewers for mobile homes,  1480.01; Sewers in rental dwellings,  1482.11(h) 

1042.01 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to require and regulate the construction, alteration and maintenance of sewers in order to best protect the public health, safety and general welfare; to comply with state and federal laws; and to protect the environment and natural resources of the City and the state. 
(Ord. 336. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1042.02 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, as used in this chapter: 
(1)  Building drain means, in plumbing, the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer (house sewer). Such sewer begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
(2)  City engineer means the City Engineer of the City or his or her designee. 
(3)  City manager means the City Manager of the City or his or her designee. 
(4)  Footing drain means a pipe or conduit which is placed around the perimeter of a building foundation and which intentionally admits ground water. 
(5)  Infiltration means that portion of ground water which is unintentionally admitted to a sewer. 
(6)  Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
(7)  Owner means the last recorded titleholder of any lot or parcel of land, or the person whose name is last listed upon the tax roll as the owner of a certain lot or parcel of land. 
(8)  Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group, City, township, village, county, municipality or public corporation; or any single, multiple, commercial or industrial establishment. 
(9)  Plumbing inspector means the Plumbing Inspector of the City. 
(10)  Pumping system means a mechanical device for lifting or pressurizing wastewater flows. Specifically: 
a.  Booster station means a pumping station designed primarily to move wastewater horizontally. 
b.  Lift station means a pumping station designed primarily to move wastewater vertically. 
(11)  Sewage means wastewater. 
(12)  Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water, including the following: 
a.  Building sewer means, in plumbing, the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, and is also called the house connection. 
b.  City sewer means a public sewer controlled by the City. 
c.  Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stream or surface water. 
d.  Common sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights. 
e.  Intercepting sewer means a sewer that receives dry weather flow from a number of transverse sewers or outlets and frequently additional undetermined quantities of storm water, and conducts such waters to a point for treatment or disposal. 
f.  Lateral sewer means a sewer which is designed to receive a building sewer. 
g.  Outfall sewer means a sewer that receives wastewater from a collection system or from a treatment plant and carries it to a point of final discharge. 
h.  Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by the City or other governmental agency. 
i.  Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
j.  Separate sewer means a sewer intended to receive only wastewater and not storm or surface water, and is also called a sanitary sewer. 
k.  Storm sewer means a sewer that carries storm water, surface water, street wash and other wash waters or drainage, but excludes domestic wastewater and industrial wastewater, and is also called a storm drain. 
l.  Trunk sewer means a sewer which connects the lateral sewer to the interception sewer and to which building sewers may be connected. 
(13)  Sewer facilities means sewers, wastewater facilities and all appurtenant equipment, including the real property on which they are located. 
(14)  Sewerage means wastewater facilities. 
(15)  Storm water means the excess water running off from the surface of a drainage area during and immediately after a period of rain. It is that portion of the rainfall and resulting surface flow that is in excess of that which can be absorbed through the infiltration capacity of the surface of the basin. 
(16)  Wastewater means all or any part of the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present. In recent years, "wastewater" has taken precedence over the word "sewage." 
(17)  Wastewater collection system means all facilities for collecting, transporting, regulating, pumping and storing wastewater. 
(18)  Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. 336. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1042.03 - Construction permits. 
(a)  Required. No person shall construct a sewer or uncover, make any connection with or opening into, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the City. There are two types of construction sewer permits, one for a building sewer and another for a public sewer. 
(b)  Conditions. The following general conditions shall apply to all sewer construction permits: 
(1)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation of, connection to or reconstruction of any sewer for which a permit is issued shall be paid by the applicant. The applicant and all contractors acting on behalf of the applicant shall indemnify the City and its agents from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of any sewer, unless otherwise authorized by the City Commission for a public sewer. 
(2)  The violation of any terms or conditions of the permit by the applicant shall constitute an automatic revocation and shall remove all rights acquired by the applicant or anyone acting on behalf of the applicant. 
(3)  The applicant for a sewer construction permit shall notify the Engineering Department prior to excavating for construction, alteration or connection of a sewer. The installation shall be made under the inspection of a representative of the City. 
(4)  The City may inspect the construction, alteration or connection and may inspect the building and property to be serviced by the sewer. City personnel shall be given suitable access and opportunity to conduct inspections. 
(5)  Permit may not be assigned. 
(6)  A permit shall expire one year from the date of its issuance unless a different duration is granted by the City Engineer for good cause and is stated in writing on the permit. 
(Ord. 336. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1042.04 - Building sewers. 
(a)  Permits. 
(1)  The Plumbing Inspector may issue permits for installations, alterations and connections of building sewers. Permits may be issued only as follows: 
a.  To any bona fide residential owner to personally install the building sewer in the property of his or her own residence, if the owner does the work himself or herself in accordance with this chapter; and 
b.  To applicants through sewer contractors. Those sewer contractors who are not currently licensed by the state as a Master Plumber shall register with the City annually as provided in Section 1446.01(b). (Ord. 327. Passed 2-18-92.) 
(2)  A permit may only be issued to an applicant who owns the property on which a building sewer is or will be located. 
(3)  A separate building sewer and connection shall be provided for each building. The building sewer shall serve only property owned by the owner of the building sewer. If any other property is connected to the tributary sewer system, the permit shall automatically expire and the owner of the building sewer and the persons responsible for the connection shall be deemed to have violated this chapter. 
(4)  Nondomestic users may be issued a sewer construction permit, and connections for them shall be authorized, only if the wastes discharged will conform to the requirements of Chapter 1043 and other applicable City ordinances. 
(5)  The property owner and occupier shall be jointly and severally responsible for the construction and maintenance of the building sewer. 
(6)  The applicant, at the time of filing the application, shall pay such permit fees and other charges for connections to a City sewer or related inspection work as required and established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(7)  In addition to the normal fees, and any other ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, connection to or discharge of any wastewater in the Eighth Street sanitary sewer pumping station (which is more fully described on engineering plans on file with the City Engineer) shall have a connection fee at the rate of $0.2156 per square foot of land area. Parcels of land for which this section shall apply are currently designated by tax numbers 682-001 (estimated 10,625 square feet), 682-002 (estimated 29,250 square feet) and 103-003 (estimated 60,975 square feet) and 682-005 (estimated 12,560 square feet). This connection fee shall be in lieu of a special assessment and related procedures for the construction and installation of the Eighth Street sanitary sewer pumping station which has occurred prior to December 31, 1983. A connection or discharge shall not be permitted until the City Engineer determines that the volume of wastewater to be received does not impede the proper operation of the facility. 
(b)  Materials and designs. 
(1)  Building sewers shall comply with the following: 
a.  A building sewer shall be constructed of vitrified clay, concrete, asbestos cement, cast iron or approved (PVC Schedule 40, ABS extra strength, or approved equal) sewer pipe, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
b.  A commercial or industrial building sewer shall not be less than six inches in diameter unless approved otherwise by the Plumbing Inspector. The following minimum diameters (in inches) shall be used for all building sewers in the City unless otherwise permitted by the City Engineer: 
Building Sewer Commercial ROW and Public 
Easements Residential House Leads Private 
Property Forced Leads Vitrified Clay 6 6 6 Plastic 6 6 4 Cast Iron 6 6 4 Concrete 6 6 6 Asbestos Cement (Transit Pipe) 6 6 6  
c.  The Plumbing Inspector, based on foundation and building design or construction methods, reserves the right to specify and require, for public protection, that any building sewer be encased or placed in a concrete cradle. 
d.  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade. The line shall be straight or laid with properly curved pipe and fittings. Changes in direction greater than 45 degrees shall be provided with clean-outs accessible for cleaning. The slope of a building sewer shall be not less than one-fourth inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted by the Plumbing Inspector. 
e.  Clean-out connections shall be made in the building sewer or the building drain outside of the walls of the building as required by the Plumbing Inspector. 
f.  All connections with the public sewer main shall be made with Y branches or other approved devices so that the angle of entrance shall be not greater than 45 degrees. 
(2)  Building drains shall comply with the following: 
a.  Building drain inlets shall be sealed by an approved method during construction until such time as the plumbing is carried to the first floor, the basement is backfilled, the first floor is constructed and the footing drain system is operative, thereby providing that no water from the excavated basement will enter the sanitary sewer. 
b.  The building drain shall be laid to a depth of not less than three and one-half feet at its highest point if there is no basement. In special cases it may be laid to such a grade and depth as is approved by the Plumbing Inspector. As used in this paragraph, "depth" means the distance from the building grade to the top of the pipe. 
c.  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, the sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lighted by artificial means approved by the Plumbing Inspector. The discharge of the building sewer of such a system shall only be permitted to enter the public sewer by gravity at a manhole, as required by the Engineering Department. All costs involved shall be the owner's. 
d.  All connections to the public sewerage system shall be made in accordance with City ordinances. Connections of building drains shall only be permitted for plumbing systems within or on any building, structure or premises conforming to the State Construction Code. 
(3)  Interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Plumbing Inspector or the City Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease or oil in excessive amounts, flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients. However, such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. Interceptors shall comply with the following: 
a.  Interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Plumbing Inspector and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
b.  Interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. 
c.  Interceptors shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
d.  Interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(c)  Pre-existing sewers. 
(1)  Pre-existing sewers may be used to serve new buildings only when such sewers are found to meet all requirements of this chapter. Tests, as directed by the Plumbing Inspector, may be required at the owner's expense. 
(2)  Abandoned or discontinued building sewers shall be properly bulkheaded, capped or sealed, as directed by the Plumbing Inspector, at the owner's expense. If the Plumbing Inspector determines that an old building sewer has not been properly abandoned, he or she shall inform the City Manager, who may cause such work to be properly completed. All costs incurred by the City in causing such work or regarding the same shall be a lien against the premises, and the City Commission shall direct that the costs be assessed against the property in question on the next succeeding City tax roll. 
(Ord. 336. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1042.05 - Public sewers. 
(a)  Permits. 
(1)  Generally. Construction on a public sewer shall not begin except pursuant to a public sewer permit issued according to this section. 
(2)  Standards. All construction for any sewer that is proposed to be accepted as part of a public system or any common sewer shall be in accordance with standards and specifications of the Engineering Department. The extension of a public system that requires a permit from the State Department of Public Health shall first be approved by the City Engineer. 
(3)  As-built plans. A new or reconstructed public sewer shall not be placed in service until it is approved by the City Engineer. Approval shall be contingent upon receipt of satisfactory test results and shall be subject to receipt of as-built plans within 90 days. Building and drain connections shall not be permitted until the public sewer is accepted by the City Engineer. 
(4)  Common sewers. Any sewer which services two or more separate building sewers shall be a public sewer, unless the buildings are part of a singly owned complex or a public complex where future division of ownership is not anticipated, or where the rights and obligations of the sewer are held in common by all owners, pursuant to the Condominium Act. 
(5)  Municipal connections. Connections by another municipal sewerage system to a City sewer will be permitted only for wastewater connection systems and extensions thereto constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards and specifications of the Engineering Department. The proposed connection must have received prior approval of the municipality for which it serves. The municipality must adopt an ordinance having requirements as restrictive as or more restrictive than this chapter. 
(6)  Revocation. Any permit to locate a sewer in a City right-of-way or a public easement which is not to be accepted by the City as part of the City sewerage system is revocable at the will of the City Commission, subject to the conditions of various applicable contracts. The owner, as a condition of the permit, must waive any rights to damages or compensation if the permit or right to occupy the right-of-way or easement is revoked. 
(7)  Plans for public sewers. Five sets of plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer for all proposed public sewers. Complete plans shall be transmitted by the City to the Michigan Department of Natural Resources for a construction permit. The following data shall be incorporated in the plans: 
a.  A location map indicating the quarter section in which the project is located shall be shown. 
b.  When more than one sheet is required for the plan, a small scale overall plan shall be shown. 
c.  Each set of plans shall bear the embossed seal of the engineer who is responsible for the plans. 
d.  Two bench marks shall be shown on each plan sheet. 
e.  Existing utilities shall be shown on the plan and profile. 
f.  In instances where the Engineering Department has no record of the outfall sewer or where the outfall sewer is not shown in accordance with previously approved plans, as-built plans of the outfall sewer and evidence of acceptable leakage tests shall also be submitted for approval. 
g.  All existing sewer inverts must be field measured and shall be so designated on the plan. 
h.  A profile, including inverts, top of casting grades, gradient, length and drop connections, shall be shown for each run of sewer or force main. 
i.  The proposed and existing elevation of the curb, road or ground above the sewer shall be shown on the profile. Where the difference in elevation between the road grade and sewer invert is less than seven feet, basement elevations should be indicated on the plan. 
j.  The locations of stoppers and bulkheads shall be indicated on the plan. 
k.  Manholes shall be numbered on plans and profiles. 
l.  The allowable types of pipe, joints and stoppers for public and building sewers shall be indicated on the plan. 
m.  An easement shall be designated on the plan for each run of public sewer not in a public right-of-way. The minimum easement shall be twelve feet wide, or as required by the City Engineer. 
n.  The following notes shall appear on the plan: 
1.  All construction and materials shall conform to the City's current standards, specifications and details. 
2.  No connection receiving storm water shall be made to sanitary sewers. 
3.  Infiltration for any section of sewers between manholes shall not exceed 200 gallons per inch of pipe diameter, per mile, per day, as required by the City Engineer. 
4.  All elevations are based on City datum pursuant to the United States Geodetic Survey. 
o.  Details of pipe bedding, building sewers, drop connections, bulkheads, manholes, manhole covers and other appurtenances shall be submitted with the plan. 
p.  Extension of the City sewerage system outside the City limits shall be required when deemed necessary by the City Manager, with the approval of the applicable township representative or designated official. Such approval shall be submitted prior to final City approval. 
(8)  Bond and fees. The applicant, at the time of filing the application, shall furnish a cash bond and fees in an amount determined by resolution of the City Commission to cover the cost of processing the application, including necessary plan review, testing and inspection. 
(b)  Materials and design. 
(1)  Materials generally. Any generally accepted material for sewers will be given consideration, but the material selected should be adapted to local conditions, such as the character of industrial wastes, the possibility of septicity, soil characteristics, exceptionally heavy loadings, abrasion and similar problems. Sewer joints and materials shall be designed to minimize infiltration and to prevent the entrance of roots. All joints shall be of a premium nature. Based on items in paragraphs (b)(3) and (4) hereof or on other pertinent data, the City Engineer may reject any type of sewer pipe or joint for any project whose wastewater is proposed to be processed by the wastewater facilities under the control of the City. 
(2)  Bulkheads. A bulkhead shall be installed at each outlet to an existing system and shall not be removed until the new sewerage system has been accepted by the City Engineer. 
(3)  General design. 
a.  Public sewers shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter unless outletting to an older, smaller public sewer. 
b.  Public sewers shall be designed for mean velocities, when flowing full, of not less than two feet per second, based on Kutter's formula, using an "n" value of 0.013. Use of other "n" values may be permitted if deemed justifiable on the basis of research or field data presented. 
c.  Public sewers shall be designed with a uniform slope and direction between manholes. 
d.  If a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the invert of the larger sewer shall be lowered at least enough to maintain the 0.8 depth point of both sewers at the same elevation or as accepted by the City Engineer. 
e.  If velocities greater than twelve feet per second are expected or attained, special provisions may be required to protect against scouring and thrust displacement. 
f.  All public sewers shall be designed so as to limit infiltration to 200 gallons per inch of pipe diameter, per mile, per day, or as determined by the City Engineer. 
g.  Public sewers shall be sufficiently deep so as to prevent freezing. 
h.  Public sewers shall be properly vented. 
i.  Public sewers shall have the following design flows: 
1.  Sewers shall be designed on the basis of an average daily flow which shall include not less than 100 gallons per occupant and the estimated flow from nondomestic sources. 
2.  Sewers shall be designed to carry, when running full, not less than the following peak flows: 
i.  Lateral sewers, 400 percent of the average daily flow; and 
ii.  Trunk sewers, 260 percent of the average daily flow. 
3.  When deviations from such design flows are requested, a complete description of the procedure used for sewer design shall be included. 
(4)  Manholes. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line, at all changes in grade, type of pipe, size and alignment, at all intersections and at distances not greater than 400 feet, and shall comply with the following: 
a.  A standard drop connection shall be provided for a sewer whose invert is at an elevation of 24 inches or more above the manhole invert. Where the difference in elevation between the invert of the incoming sewer and the manhole invert is less than 24 inches, the proposed sewer shall enter the manhole at its bottom or as approved by the City Engineer. 
b.  The minimum inside diameter of a manhole shall be 48 inches. 
c.  Only solid manhole covers shall be used. Where venting is required, vent pipe shall be installed. 
d.  The flow channel through manholes shall be made to conform in shape and slope to that of the sewers. 
e.  All manholes shall be watertight. Precast manholes shall have approved joints. Joints shall be wrapped with a bituminous waterproof coating if required. Manholes of brick or segmented block shall be waterproofed on the exterior with plaster coatings, supplemented by a bituminous waterproof coating, if required. 
(5)  Pumping systems. All pumping systems in the public sewerage system should be equipped with an approved recording totalizing flow meter and a wet well level indicator. Provision of an emergency power supply for pumping stations should be made and may be accomplished by connection of the station to at least two independent public utility sources, by provision of portable or in-place internal combustion engine equipment which will generate electrical or mechanical energy or by provision of portable pumping equipment. 
(6)  Flow rate; relief valves. At design average flow, a cleaning velocity of at least two feet per second shall be maintained in the public sewerage system. If necessary, an automatic air relief valve shall be placed at high points in the force main to prevent air locking. A velocity reducing device may be required at the juncture of the force main and the gravity sewer. 
(7)  Inverted siphons. Inverted siphons in a public sewer shall have not less than two barrels. The inlet and outlet details shall be arranged so that normal flow is diverted to one barrel and so that either barrel may be taken out of service for cleaning. Inverted siphons shall comply with the following: 
a.  The minimum pipe size shall be six inches. 
b.  The terminal manholes shall have adequate clearances for rodding and shall be equipped with necessary appurtenances for convenient flushing and maintenance. 
c.  Sufficient head shall be provided and pipe size shall be selected to obtain a velocity of at least three feet per second for maximum daily flow. 
d.  The smallest pipe shall be designed to obtain a velocity of three and for the maximum daily flow anticipated five years from the date of installation. 
(8)  Testing sewers. Testing shall include the following: 
a.  Appropriate tests shall be required for all public sewers before acceptance. The use of a television camera for inspection may be required. Tests and television inspections shall be witnessed by the City Engineer or his or her authorized representative. Satisfactory results shall be obtained prior to permitting any building sewer connection. Leakage tests shall be specified. This may include appropriate water or low pressure air tests. The leakage outward or inward (exfiltration or infiltration) shall not exceed 200 gallons per inch pipe diameter, per mile, per day for any section of the system, or as required by the City Engineer. 
b.  Tests of pumping systems shall be conducted to verify performance curves of each pumping device installed in the system. 
(Ord. 336. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1042.06 - Existing sewers. 
(a)  Alterations. Work which would change the capacity of existing sewerage systems or result in nonconformity with these regulations shall not be performed, except by written permission of the City Engineer. Such work shall comply with the following: 
(1)  When it is necessary to excavate adjacent to manholes or similar structures, the excavation shall extend around the entire perimeter, except by permission of the City Engineer. 
(2)  Siphons shall not be constructed in existing sewers, except where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that such siphons will not have a detrimental effect on the maintenance of the sewer or hydraulic gradient of the system. 
(b)  Approval. Sewer systems not having been previously approved as City sewers may be accepted as City sewers, provided they meet all general requirements of this chapter. The City Engineer shall cause such tests on the sewer as deemed necessary, including television inspection. All costs of performing such tests shall be borne by the owner of the facility. 
(Ord. 336. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1042.07 - General discharge restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, footing drainage, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water directly or indirectly to any sanitary sewer, except as specifically allowed herein. 
(b)  Storm water and unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet. Unpolluted process waters shall be discharged into a storm sewer or natural outlet subject to the approval of the City and all applicable governmental agencies. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any wastewater or other material which may singly or by interaction with other material: 
(1)  Damage, impair or retard the strength or durability of sewers, sewer facilities or processes, such as by chemical reaction, mechanical action or otherwise; 
(2)  Interfere with the normal inspection or maintenance of sewers or sewer facilities; 
(3)  Create a hazardous condition to sewer maintenance or treatment personnel or to the general public or a segment of the public; 
(4)  Endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a public nuisance; or 
(5)  Be contrary to any provision of this chapter. 
(d)  Wastewater shall not be discharged into any sewer except as may be allowed by Chapter 1043 or other ordinance. 
(Ord. 336. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1042.08 - Sewer connections required; private sewage disposal systems. 
(a)  Findings. Septic tank disposal systems and similar private sewage disposal facilities are subject to failure due to soil conditions or other reasons. Failure or potential failure of such disposal systems poses a threat to the public health, safety and welfare; presents a potential for ill health, transmission of disease, mortality and potential economic blight and constitutes a threat to the quality of surface and subsurface waters of the state. The connection to available public sanitary sewer systems at the earliest reasonable date is a matter for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and necessary in the public interest. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  No person shall deposit or discharge any wastewater or waste upon any public or private property. The disposal by the City of stabilized, processed sludge under the control of the City Manager shall not be a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  No person shall discharge into any natural outlet or storm sewer in the City, or which leads into the City, any wastewater, waste or other polluted water. 
(3)  No person shall erect any building without providing sanitary wastewater disposal facilities and connections to the public sewer if such property is located within 500 feet of a public sewer. 
(4)  No person shall occupy any property located within 500 feet of a public sanitary sewer, which property is not connected to such sanitary sewer, within 12 months after written notice by the City Manager to connect the property to the public sewer. The connection shall be made earlier if the septic tank has to be pumped out or drained or becomes unsanitary or offensive. Procedure thereafter shall be as defined in Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended. All septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be properly abandoned for sanitary use. 
(5)  No property split or conveyance of any property shall be effective to render City sewer service unavailable. 
(6)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under this section, the building sewer shall be connected to an approved water carried private sewage disposal system. The owner shall operate and maintain the water carried private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City. 
(7)  No person shall construct or maintain any privy or privy vault. 
(8)  No person shall use portable privies, except at special events for a maximum of two weeks or at construction sites during actual construction. 
(9)  The Health Department may impose additional requirements as allowed by law, however in the event of a conflict the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. 336, Passed 9-8-92; Ord. 1080 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
1042.09 - Tampering with facilities. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, dam, destroy, uncover, deface, interfere with or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities or stormwater facilities. 
(Ord. 336. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1042.10 - Violations; nuisances; abatement; right of entry. 
(a)  In addition to the penalty provided in Section 1042.99, whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by such violation. A violation of any regulation or standard adopted by this chapter, or a violation of any order, notice or permit authorized by this chapter, shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the same penalty and remedies as would a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  If the City deems there to be a public nuisance under procedures established by the City, the City may abate the nuisance and, in addition, the City Engineer may order the following: 
(1)  A property owner and the occupier of the property to connect to or repair the sewer within 60 days after service of written notice on the owner or occupier, or within such shorter time as may be necessary to protect the public health, in the discretion of the City Engineer; 
(2)  That a privy, vault, cesspool or septic tank be cleaned, removed or altered within five days after service of written notice on the owner or occupier, or within such shorter time as may be necessary to protect the public health, in the discretion of the City Engineer; 
(3)  The separation of wastes, including the separation of storm or surface water drains or any drain for cooling water of air conditioners, compressors, air filters, air washers or other appliances of a similar nature from the sanitary sewerage system, and order suitable separate drains within 60 days after service of written notice on the owner or occupier, or within such shorter time as may be necessary to protect the public health, in the discretion of the City Engineer; or 
(4)  The termination or limit the times of occupancy of a structure or property as deemed necessary, in the discretion of the City Engineer. 
(c)  The City Manager or his or her authorized representative is hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to any violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A. 765.9c(2); M.S.A. 28.868(3)(2)). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(d)  The City Manager or his or her authorized representative is hereby authorized to enter at all reasonable times upon and into any premises, building or structure for the purpose of examining and inspecting the same to ascertain the condition thereof with regard to sewer construction, use or discharge. 
(e)  While working within the scope of their authority, the City and duly authorized representatives and employees of the City shall be held harmless for negligence causing damage, injury or death. 
(Ord. 336. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1042.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1043 - Wastewater Discharge Regulations[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Constitution reference- Sewers and sewer systems generally, Mich. Const. Art. 7,  24 
State Law reference- Sewers and sewer systems generally, M.C.L.A.  46.171 et seq., 67.34; Sewers and sewer systems in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4f, 117.35 
Cross reference- Special assessments for sewers,  232.04, 232.05; Sewers in lodging houses and hotels,  836.03; Sewer construction and maintenance, Ch. 1042; Ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control, Ch. 1068; Sewers in subdivisions,  1248.05, 1248.08; Sewers for mobile homes,  1480.01; Sewers in rental dwellings,  1482.11(h) 

1043.01 - Purposes. 
    This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people; to provide uniform requirements for all uses of and discharges into the collection system and treatment plant; to provide for the connection of structures in which sanitary sewage originates to an available public sanitary sewer system; to prescribe limitations on the discharge of certain waters and wastes into the public sewer system; to comply with applicable regulations, prevent pollution, guard against injury to persons and property and enhance efficient economical operation of the collection system and treatment plant; to provide for the administration of this chapter; and to establish remedies. 
    This chapter and the companion ordinances adopted by the City and the townships set forth uniform requirements for all uses of and discharges into the collection system and treatment plant to enable compliance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to wastewater treatment and industrial pretreatment. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.02 - Responsibility of city as control authority. 
    The City as Control Authority, shall: 
(1)  Regulate and control discharges into the collection system and treatment plant in accordance with this chapter and applicable state and federal laws and regulations, including federal categorical pretreatment standards; 
(2)  Regulate or prohibit discharges which could interfere with the operation of the collection system or the reclamation or disposal of wastewater or sludge, cause the treatment plant to exceed the NPDES permit effluent limits or cause pass-through of pollutants to the receiving stream or atmosphere; 
(3)  Control discharges to the collection system and treatment plant by regulation, permit, order and other means; 
(4)  Inspect and monitor facilities and discharges to determine the extent of compliance; 
(5)  Require compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(6)  Require the development of a compliance schedule by each industrial user for the installation of personnel, procedures and facilities necessary or desirable to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements and reports from such users necessary to determine adherence to the compliance schedule; 
(7)  Seek judicial enforcement of the standards of this chapter and penalties imposed by the Control Authority under this chapter; 
(8)  Recover from users all damages to the collection system, treatment plant and the environment caused by such users, including any fines, penalties (and the cost of administrative and judicial proceedings in connection therewith) imposed upon the Control Authority, the City of Traverse City, Grand Traverse County and the townships, attributable to that user's indirect discharge, in whole or in part. 
(9)  Halt or prevent any indirect discharge which threatens the health or welfare of persons or property, endangers or may endanger the environment or interferes or threatens to interfere with the operation of the collection system or treatment plant; 
(10)  Comply with the confidentiality requirements imposed by law; and 
(11)  Impose fines and penalties as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.03 - Scope. 
    This chapter shall apply to all persons discharging or intending to discharge to the collection system and treatment plant, including those who have agreements or permits from the Control Authority. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.04 - Administration. 
    The Control Authority will administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject to any agreement between the Control Authority and a township or municipal corporation adopting an equivalent ordinance. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.05 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise indicated, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Part 1251, et seq. 
(2)  Approval authority means the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
(3)  Approved method or test procedure means analyses performed in accordance with the analytical test procedures approved under 40 CFR, Part 136. Analysis for those pollutants not covered therein shall be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the Approval Authority. 
(4)  Authorized signatory means: 
a.  A responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user is a corporation. As used in this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means: 
1.  A president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
2.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
b.  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively; or 
c.  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in paragraph (4)a. or b. hereof if: 
1.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in paragraph (4)a. or b. hereof; 
2.  Such authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or well-field superintendent, a position of equivalent responsibility or a position having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
3.  The written authorization is submitted to the Control Authority. 
(5)  Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) in accordance with an approved test procedure. 
(6)  Bypass means an action which bypasses, in whole or in part, approved pretreatment facilities, permitting wastewater to flow into the collection system without the usual treatment. 
(7)  Categorical user means an industrial user classified according to specific industrial subcategories for which separate regulations have been established under subparts of 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N. These regulations establish specific quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties that may be discharged to a collection system and treatment plant. 
(8)  Collection system means the sanitary sewer system established by the City and the townships of Acme, East Bay, Elmwood, Garfield and Peninsula, which flows directly and indirectly to the treatment plant, including all attachments and appurtenances to the collection system as modified and extended from time to time. 
(9)  Compatible pollutant means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria and such additional pollutants in quantities that the collection system and treatment plant has the designed capacity to treat. 
(10)  Compliance schedule means a schedule of remedial measures, including an enforceable sequence of actions or operations leading to compliance with water quality standards, an effluent limitation or other limitation, prohibition or standard. 
(11)  Composite sample means, as defined by 40 CFR, Part 403, Appendix E, a sample comprised of a minimum of 12 aliquots collected over a period of no more than 24 hours. The sample may be collected manually or automatically. 
(12)  Control authority means the City of Traverse City. 
(13)  Cooling water means any water used for the purpose of carrying away excess heat, and which may contain biocides used to control biological growth or other additives to protect the system against corrosion, scaling or other deterioration. 
(14)  Discharge means an intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a pollutant into the waters of the State, onto land or into wells from which it might flow or drain into such waters or into waters or onto lands outside the jurisdiction of the State, which pollutant enters the waters of the State or the United States. The term "discharge" includes the release of any pollutant into a collection system and treatment plant. 
(15)  Domestic wastewater means the wastewater discharged from the usual and customary residential use of premises. 
(16)  EPA or USEPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(17)  Effluent data means information necessary to determine the identity, amount, frequency, concentration, temperature or other characteristics of any pollutant discharged. 
(18)  Effluent limitation means any restriction on quantities, quality, rates and concentration of chemical, physical, thermal, biological and other constituents of pollutants. 
(19)  Federal categorical pretreatment standards means pre-treatment standards as codified in 40 CFR 1(N), specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged or introduced to a collection system and treatment plant by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial subcategories. 
(20)  Flow-proportioned means a composite sample that is collected continuously or discretely. Discrete sampling may be flow-proportioned by varying either the time interval between each aliquot or the volume of each aliquot. All composites must be flow-proportional to each stream flow at the time of collection of the aliquot or to the total flow since the previous aliquot. 
(21)  Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, dispensing, handling, storage and/or sale of food, fruits, vegetables, poultry, fish or other aquatic organisms or meat. 
(22)  Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. It is a single sample taken at neither a specific time nor flow and is representative of conditions or characteristics of the indirect discharge at the time that it is collected. 
(23)  Highest ranking official means the industrial user's official having day-to-day managerial and operational responsibilities for the discharging facility. 
(24)  Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
(25)  Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as defined in this section. 
(26)  Indirect discharge means the discharge of wastewater into the collection system and treatment plant. 
(27)  Industrial pretreatment coordinator or IPC means the authorized representative of the Control Authority that implements and coordinates the pretreatment program. 
(28)  Industrial user means a user who is a source of indirect discharges of non-domestic wastewater. 
(29)  Industrial waste survey questionnaire means a request for information by the Control Authority of users of the collection system and treatment plant on indirect discharge characteristics, operating procedures and schedules, water consumption and waste disposal methods and amounts. 
(30)  Interference means an indirect discharge which, alone or in conjunction with indirect discharges from other sources: 
a.  Inhibits or disrupts the collection system or treatment plant, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; or 
b.  Causes a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in accordance with applicable permits, laws and regulations. 
(31)  Liquid waste hauler means any person who transports waste by way of truck or rail. 
(32)  Maximum allowable headworks loading (MAHL) means the maximum mass of any pollutant that can enter the wastewater treatment plant per day without causing interference or pass-through. 
(33)  National pollutant discharge elimination system or NPDES means the federal system for issuing, modifying, suspending, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing discharge permits pursuant to the Act. 
(34)  Nondomestic wastewater means any wastewater that is not "domestic wastewater" as defined in this section. 
(35)  Pass-through means an indirect discharge which exits the treatment plant into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with indirect discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Control Authority's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
(36)  Permit means the discharge control mechanism issued by the Control Authority to a user. 
(37)  Permit holder means any person who legally has a permit. 
(38)  Person means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, owner or operator of a treatment works, any political subdivision of this state and any state or interstate agency. "Person" shall also mean any responsible corporate official for the purpose of enforcement action under this chapter. 
(39)  pH means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in moles per liter of solution. Solutions with a pH greater than seven are said to be basic. Solutions with a pH less than seven are said to be acidic. A pH equal to seven is considered neutral. Analysis shall be performed in accordance with an approved test procedure. 
(40)  Pollutant means any dredged soil, solid waste, holding tank waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, septage, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive substances, thermal wastes, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal or agricultural waste or other residue directly or indirectly discharged into the waters of the state. The term "pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants. 
(41)  Pretreatment means the alteration, reduction or elimination of pollutants in the wastewater before discharge to the collection system or treatment plant. 
(42)  Program means the industrial pretreatment program of the Control Authority. 
(43)  Significant industrial user means: 
a.  All industrial users subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6, and 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N; and 
b.  Any other industrial user that: 
1.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the collection system; 
2.  Discharges process wastewater which makes up five percent or more of the hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or 
3.  Is designated by the Control Authority as having a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of the collection system and treatment plant or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(44)  Significant noncompliance means a violation by an industrial user which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for any pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
c.  Any other violation of an effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the Control Authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other indirect discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of collection system and treatment plant personnel or the general public); 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent danger to human health or welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the Control Authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such an indirect discharge; 
e.  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
f.  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
g.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
h.  Any other violation or group of violations which the Control Authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the program. 
(45)  State means the State of Michigan. 
(46)  Slug means any indirect discharge with an instantaneous flow rate or concentration, or both, which exceeds five times any applicable limit. 
(47)  Storm water means any flow occurring during or immediately following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. CFR, Part 136. 
(48)  Total suspended solids means the total nonfilterable residue as defined in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and analyzed in accordance with 40. 
(49)  Treatment plant means the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), known as the Traverse City Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant, located in Traverse City, Michigan. 
(50)  Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with an effluent limitation because of an event beyond the reasonable control of the permittee, including fire, riot, sabotage, flood, storm event, natural cause, other act of God or other similar circumstances, which is the cause of the violation. 
(51)  User means a person who is the source of indirect discharges of wastewater. 
(52)  Violation means noncompliance with federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements, any provisions of or adopted pursuant to this chapter or any requirements or conditions of an industrial discharge permit. 
(53)  Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions. 
Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, Seventeenth Edition, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federations; the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Part 1251 et seq., and 40 CFR, Title 40, Part 403. 
(Ord. 432. Passed 12-4-95. Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.06 - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
ASPP - Accidental Spill Prevention Plan or Accidental Spill Prevention Program. 
BMR - Baseline monitoring report. 
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand. 
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations. 
IWSQ - Industrial waste survey questionnaire. 
mg/l - Milligrams per liter (i.e., parts per million). 
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
SIU - Significant industrial user. 
TSS - Total suspended solids. 
USC - United States Code. 
USEPA - United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.07 - Prohibited wastewater discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user may discharge any pollutants into the collection system or treatment plant which cause pass-through or interference. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. In addition to the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, no user shall discharge the following into the collection system or treatment plant: 
(1)  Pollutants in such concentrations that, either alone or by interaction with other substances, create a fire or explosion hazard in the collection system or treatment plant including, but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides; 
a.  Pollutants shall not cause the atmosphere in a monitoring manhole or any part of the Collection System to exceed ten percent of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) for any single reading five percent of the LEL for more than nine minutes per day. 
(2)  Any indirect discharges which have a pH lower than 6.0 Standard Units or higher than 11.0 Standard Units, which will react with water to form products which have a pH value lower than 6.0 Standard Units or greater than 9.0 Standard Units or which have any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment and personnel of the collection system or treatment plant. Prohibited wastes include, but are not limited to, concentrated acids, alkalies, chlorides, sulfides, fluoride compounds and any iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the collection system or treatment plant or other interference with the proper operation of the collection system or treatment plant; any garbage, except domestic wastewater discharged from garbage disposal units in private dwellings, that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles float or are carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevalent in the collection system and which contains particles of a size not greater than one-half of one inch in any dimension; or other wastes, including, but not limited to, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, whole blood, recognizable portions of the human anatomy, tissue fluids, entrails, ashes, cinders, mud, straw, sand, wood, grass clippings, spent lime, stone or marble dust, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, asphalt residues, glass grinding or polishing wastes, plastics, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, styrofoam and residues from the refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in an indirect discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the collection system or treatment plant. 
(5)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case heat of a temperature in excess of 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 65 Celsius at the sewer connection or of a quantity that causes the temperature at the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit or 40 degrees Celsius. 
(6)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the collection system or treatment plant in a quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, pass-through or interfere with the collection system and treatment plant, or that exceed standards promulgated by either the USEPA pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act or the state pursuant to any applicable statutory provisions. 
(7)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants or sludge from septic tanks, cesspools, chemical toilets, privies, grease traps or grit traps, unless received by the Grand Traverse County Septage Treatment Facility in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Grand Traverse County Septage Treatment Facility. Discharge of such material into a township collection system shall require the consent of that township. 
(8)  Any substance which, either singly or by interaction with other substances, is noxious or malodorous or is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or health, or whose concentrations prevent entry into the collection system and treatment plant for maintenance, repair or other reasons. 
(9)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by federal or state regulations; 
(10)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters, either discharged by gravity or from sump pumps. 
(11)  Any waste producing excessive discoloration that may cause the water of the treatment plant to exceed appropriate color criteria; 
(12)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids or dissolved matter of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials in the collection system and treatment plant. 
(13)  Any water or wastes containing algicides, fungicides, antibiotics, insecticides, strong oxidizing agents or strong reducing agents. 
(14)  Any wastes requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound used for disinfection purposes or excessive treatment in order to meet the NPDES discharge limitations of the treatment plant. 
(15)  Any slug discharge. 
(16)  Any water or waste containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or which causes the treatment plant effluent to fail to meet the discharge requirements established by the NPDES permit. 
(17)  Any substance which may cause sludge to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or which may interfere with the reclamation process of the treatment plant, or which may preclude the treatment plant from selecting the most cost-effective alternative for sludge disposal or which may cause the treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria established by state or federal regulation. 
(18)  Any material discharged into a manhole through its top. 
(19)  Detectable concentrations of mercury or polychlorinated biphenols (PCBs). 
(20)  Ethylene glycol-based antifreeze. 
(21)  Any other pollutant which the Control Authority determines to be, or have the potential to be, detrimental to the collection system, treatment plant or receiving waters. 
(Ord. 432. Passed 12-4-95. Ord. 914. Passed 5-16-11.) 
1043.08 - Limitations on wastewater discharges. 
(a)  No user shall discharge wastes to the collection system and treatment plant having pollutant concentrations in excess of those in the following lists without an industrial waste discharge permit issued by the Control Authority. Permits may be issued by the Control Authority that specifically permit discharge of greater concentrations, up to maximums established by the Control Authority, and incorporated into the industrial waste discharge permit. 
Maximum Daily Average 
Pollutant Concentration (mg/L) Arsenic 0.01 Barium 8.7 Cadmium 0.008 Chloride 750 Chromium 0.43 Copper 0.11 Cyanide 0.01 Lead 0.05 Mercury** 0.0002 Molybdenum 1.0 Nickel 0.08 Selenium 0.02 Silver 0.01 Thallium 0.005 Zinc 0.18 Phenol 4.0  
Pollutant Maximum Instantaneous Concentration (mg/L) Oil and grease 200.0 Total BTEX 0.13  
(b)  No user shall discharge wastes to the Collection System and treatment plant having daily pollutant concentrations in excess of the following without an industrial waste discharge permit issued by the Control Authority and payment of the appropriate surcharge established pursuant to this Code. 
Pollutant Maximum Daily Average Concentration (mg/L) BOD 285 TSS 285 TKN 60 Phosphorus 13.0  
    The Control Authority reserves the right to establish by ordinance or permit more stringent limitations or requirements on indirect discharges to the Collection System and treatment plant if deemed necessary to comply with objectives presented in Section 1043.01 of this Code. 
(Ord. 432. Passed 12-4-95. Ord. 914. Passed 5-16-11.) 
1043.09 - Conflicts with federal or state pretreatment standards; alternative methods of computing pollutant limits. 
(a)  If the federal standard for a particular industry, pursuant to a federal categorical pretreatment standard, and/or state standard, is more stringent than a standard imposed under this chapter, then the federal and/or state standard shall apply. Affected industrial users shall comply with the appropriate standard within the compliance deadlines provided in 40 CFR 403.6(b). The Control Authority will notify affected industrial users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12, but failure of the Control Authority to notify does not relieve such users of the obligation to comply with such reporting requirements. 
(b)  The Control Authority may change the way in which categorical users are regulated through the implementation of equivalent mass/concentration limits defined in 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2)-(7), through the combined waste stream formula defined in 40 CFR 403.6(e), or thorugh the net/gross calculation defined in 40 CFR 403.15. The Control Authority will consider requests from any categorical user to examine the use of any of these alternative methods of computing pollutant limits. 
(c)  Federal or state requirements and limitations on indirect discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than limitations contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.10 - Conflicts with industrial discharge permits. 
    Industrial discharge permit requirements shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than limitations contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.11 - Dilution. 
    No industrial user shall in any way dilute an indirect discharge to achieve compliance with federal categorical pretreatment standards, state limitations or any other pollutant-specific limitation contained in this chapter or a permit. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.12 - Noxious or offensive conditions. 
    No person shall suffer or permit any premises belonging to or occupied by him or her or under his or her control, or any cellar, vault, privy, cesspool, holding tank, pretreatment facility, protective facility, sewer or private drain thereon or therein, to become nauseous, foul, offensive or prejudicial to the public health or public comfort. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.13 - Unauthorized entry into, destruction or operation of collection system and treatment plant facilities. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall enter any sewer, manhole, pumping station, collection system, treatment plant or appurtenant facility in the jurisdiction covered by this chapter. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the collection system and treatment plant. 
(b)  No unauthorized person shall operate or change the operation of any sewer, pumping station, treatment plant, outfall structure or appurtenant facility. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.14 - Response of control authority to discharges of prohibited substances. 
    If wastewaters containing any prohibited substance exceeding prescribed limits or violating restrictions imposed by Section 1043.07 through 1043.13 are discharged or proposed to be discharged into the collection system and treatment plant, the Control Authority may take any one or more of the following actions necessary to protect the collection system and treatment plant: 
(1)  Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater; 
(2)  Require the user to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will bring such indirect discharge into conformance with this chapter; 
(3)  Require pretreatment by physical, chemical or biological processes, manufacturing process changes or by other means (except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d)), including, but not limited to, storage facilities or flow equalization necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter; 
(4)  Require the user, within 24 hours of the prohibited discharge or violation, or both, to provide the Control Authority with additional information regarding the discharge as may be required by the Control Authority, including, but not limited, to requested laboratory analysis results; 
(5)  Require the user creating the prohibited discharge to pay all additional costs or damage attributable to such discharge, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Incidental and consequential damages; 
b.  Fines or penalties assessed against the Control Authority; and 
c.  Actual attorney fees incurred by the Control Authority in connection with the discharge, including actions relating to paragraphs (5)a. and b. hereof. 
(6)  Assess civil penalties, seek injunctive relief and petition for criminal prosecution pursuant to applicable statutory provisions; and 
(7)  Take such other remedial action, including, but not limited to, suspension or termination of service as may be deemed to be necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter. If the Control Authority takes a regulatory action, it will not foreclose taking a different regulatory action for the same discharge or a continuation of that discharge. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.15 - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Protective facilities. Each user shall provide protection against accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Users shall provide and maintain, at their expense, protective facilities, such as, but not limited to, retention basins, dikes, storage tanks or other devices designated to eliminate, neutralize, offset or otherwise negate the effects of prohibited materials or indirect discharges in violation of this chapter. Prior to construction, or as otherwise required by the Control Authority, the user shall submit to the Control Authority for approval detailed plans of the protective facilities or equipment and operating procedures. 
(b)  Accidental spill prevention plans. All significant industrial users and other users as required by the Control Authority shall submit an accidental spill prevention plan. At a minimum, this plan shall include the following elements: 
(1)  A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  A description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the treatment plant and Control Authority of slug discharges, including any indirect discharge that would violate a prohibition provided in Sections 1043.07 through 1043.13, with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
(4)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials loading and unloading operations, control of plant-site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency responses; 
(5)  Other information as required by the Control Authority. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the Control Authority shall not relieve the user from the responsibility for the effectiveness of the facility and for modifications to the facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter or a permit. 
(c)  Posting of emergency numbers. The user shall cause to be furnished and permanently posted on the user's bulletin boards notices advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge. 
(d)  Notification. The user shall immediately notify the treatment plant upon the accidental discharge of wastes to the collection system so that countermeasures may be taken to minimize damage to the environment, the collection system and treatment plant and the receiving waters. Such notification shall include the location of the discharge, the date and time thereof, the type of waste, the concentration and volume of the discharge and corrective actions taken by the user. This notification shall be followed, within 15 days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement to the Control Authority describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. 
    Such notification will not relieve the user of liability for any fines provided for in this chapter or any ordinance, for any expense, loss or damage to the environment, the collection system and treatment plant or treatment processes or for any fines imposed on the Control Authority on account thereof. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.16 - Upsets. 
    An industrial user experiencing an upset shall submit the following information to the Control Authority as soon as possible and no later than 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset: 
(1)  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(2)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; 
(3)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance; and 
(4)  Other information as required by the Control Authority. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.17 - Bypasses. 
(a)  A bypass may be approved by the Control Authority if request is made at least ten days before the proposed date of the bypass and if: 
(1)  The bypass is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation; 
(2)  Pretreatment standards or requirements will not be violated by the bypass; and 
(3)  The Control Authority determines that no adverse effect will result from the bypass. 
(b)  An emergency bypass initiated without the prior approval provided in subsection (a) hereof will not be subject to enforcement if: 
(1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or substantial property damage; 
(2)  There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, reduction or cessation of production, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime; and 
(3)  The need for the bypass shall not have resulted from the failure to install adequate back-up equipment if required by a permit or in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment. 
(c)  Any user who experiences a bypass, whether approved or not, shall submit the following information: 
(1)  In the case of an emergency or unapproved bypass, the user shall submit oral notice to the Control Authority as soon as reasonably practical following discovery of such bypass, and in any event within 24 hours of such bypass. 
(2)  In all cases a written statement shall be submitted to the Control Authority within five days of the bypass, providing, at a minimum, the following information. 
a.  A description of the bypass and its cause; 
b.  The duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; 
c.  Steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the bypass; and 
d.  Other information as required by the Control Authority. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.18 - Discharges of hazardous waste. 
(a)  A user shall notify the Control Authority, the USEPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge from a facility under the user's control into the collection system and treatment plant of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR, Part 261 or Section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. Such notification must include, at a minimum: 
(1)  The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR, Part 261; 
(2)  The USEPA hazardous waste number; 
(3)  The type of discharge (continuous, batch or other); 
(4)  The following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: 
a.  Identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; and 
b.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged. 
(b)  For the purposes of notification under this section, the user must contact, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator or Plant Manager 
Traverse City Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant 
606 Hannah Avenue Traverse City, MI 49686 
(616) 922-4921 
(2)  The Office of Solid Waste and Hazardous Waste 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
260 S. Dearborn Avenue 
Chicago, IL 60604 
(3)  Chief, Waste Management Division 
Michigan Dept of Natural Resources 
P.O. Box 30241 
Lansing, MI 48909 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92. Ord. 914. Passed 5-16-11.) 
1043.19 - Notice of prohibited discharges. 
    All users shall notify the treatment plant and the Control Authority immediately of any prohibited discharge to the collection system or treatment plant, including any slug loading. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.20 - Additional monitoring; control of production. 
(a)  In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, each industrial user shall take all reasonable steps to identify and minimize any indirect discharge in violation of the standards of this chapter or of a permit, including accelerated or additional monitoring necessary to determine the nature and impact of the noncomplying discharge. 
(b)  Each industrial user shall control production and all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements upon reduction, loss or failure of its pretreatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies, for example, in the situation where the primary source of power to the pretreatment facility is reduced or fails. 
(Ord. 432. Passed 12-4-95.) 
1043.21 - Compliance required prior to discharge to the collection system and treatment plant. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge directly or indirectly into the collection system and treatment plant without having satisfied all applicable terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.22 - Industrial waste survey questionnaires. 
    All industrial users proposing to connect to or discharge wastewater into the collection system and treatment plant shall complete and file with the Control Authority, prior to connecting to the collection system and treatment plant, an industrial waste survey questionnaire (IWSQ). Each existing industrial user shall file an IWSQ periodically as required by the Control Authority. All IWSQs shall be signed by an authorized signatory of the user. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.23 - Industrial discharge permits. 
(a)  If the Control Authority determines, following review of the IWSQ for a user, that the user is a significant industrial user, or if the Control Authority deems it necessary to impose special requirements on the user, the user shall provide any further information, including a baseline monitoring report, if requested, pay any applicable fees that may be required by the Control Authority and obtain an industrial discharge permit. This permit shall be in addition to all others permits required by the City. The application form and required information for such permit shall be at the discretion of the Control Authority. 
(b)  The Control Authority will evaluate such application and approve and issue the permit, deny the permit or require the submission of additional information. Notice of denial of completed applications shall be given expeditiously and shall contain a statement of reasons for denial. Written notices will be sent to the address provided by the applicant. Any user whose permit application is proposed to be denied shall have the opportunity for a hearing before the Control Authority before the application is denied unless immediate action is necessary to protect the collection system, treatment plant or the public health, safety or welfare approvals may be subject to certain pre-conditions which, if not met, shall negate and void the permit without further action of the Control Authority. Approvals may be subject to certain requirements, which, if not met, may result in revocation of the permit. 
(c)  Each permit shall be deemed to incorporate all provisions of this chapter as if the same were fully set forth herein. Each permit requires the permit holder to take the following steps and meet the following standards (whether or not expressly recited in the permit), except as the permit may otherwise provide: 
(1)  Achieve effluent limitations based upon standards and requirements established pursuant to any and all applicable federal, state or local regulations, including this chapter, together with such further discharge restrictions and safeguards against unauthorized discharges as may be necessary to meet water quality standards, area-wide plans adopted pursuant to law or other legally applicable requirements; 
(2)  Where appropriate, meet schedules for compliance with the terms of the permit and interim deadlines for progress or reports of progress towards compliance; 
(3)  Ensure that all indirect discharges are consistent at all times with the terms and conditions of the permit and that no pollutant will be discharged more frequently than authorized or at a level in excess of that which is authorized by the permit; 
(4)  Submit a written request for revision of the permit prior to any contemplated facility expansion, process modification or changes in production that would result in new or increased indirect discharges, or, if these would not violate effluent limitations or other restrictions specified in the permit, notify the Control Authority of such new or increased indirect discharges; 
(5)  Install, use and maintain monitoring equipment, sample in accordance with methods, maintain and retain records of information from monitoring activities for a minimum of three years and submit to the Control Authority reports of monitoring results, as such may be stipulated in the permit or required by the Control Authority. Users shall report their monitoring results to the Control Authority as required by the permit, unless otherwise required by the Control Authority. Users shall identify the authorized signatory, as defined in this chapter, and discharge monitoring reports shall be signed by such authorized signatory of such users. 
(6)  At all times, maintain in good working order and operate as effectively as possible all facilities or systems of control installed to achieve compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(d)  Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, but in no case for more than five years. The permittee shall submit such information, forms and fees as are required by the Control Authority for renewal of the permit 30 days prior to the date of expiration. If the permittee is not notified of reissuance or denial of the permit by the Control Authority prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall be extended until such time as the Control Authority reissues or denies a new permit. 
(e)  Transfer by way of incorporation of an unincorporated entity, or transfer of control of a corporate entity by way of merger or consolidation, shall not be deemed an assignment of the permit. If all or substantially all of the assets of the user at the facility are sold and the operation for which the permit is issued is carried-on without substantial change, the purchaser shall be deemed the permit holder with the same rights and responsibilities. The original permit holder shall give notice, in writing, to the Control Authority prior to transfer and shall provide a copy of the permit to the purchaser. The purchaser shall identify an authorized signatory and shall submit a letter to the Control Authority within 30 days, stating that a transfer has occurred. 
(f)  Any permittee who violates any conditions of the permit, this chapter or 40 CFR, Part 403, is subject to revocation of the permit. 
(g)  Unless the payment condition is waived by the Control Authority, no permit may be issued, modified or renewed by the Control Authority until the applicant or permittee, as the case may be, has paid all fees, charges, penalties or fines due and owing, or has entered into an agreement with the Control Authority establishing a payment schedule therefor, except that if a penalty or fine is contested, the applicant or permittee shall satisfy the provisions of this section by posting financial security as required pursuant to applicable statutory provisions. 
(h)  The Control Authority may revise a permit in order to meet the changing needs of the collection system and treatment plant or the user or to meet the requirements of new or revised regulations. When a permit is to be revised, the permit holder shall be given written notice of the proposed revision and the opportunity to comment, if time permits, prior to issuance of the revised permit. 
(i)  If pretreatment, operational changes, maintenance or any combination thereof is required to meet the requirements of the user's permit, the user shall develop and submit a compliance schedule to the Control Authority. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet applicable Federal categorical pretreatment standards and requirements or any local pretreatment standard or requirement, e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc. No increment shall exceed nine months and the total length of the compliance schedule shall not exceed 18 months. The Control Authority will review the proposed schedule and decide whether it is appropriate for the improvements needed to meet applicable standards. The Control Authority will notify the user of its decision and may then incorporate the compliance schedule into a permit or other control document and issue it to the user. Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Control Authority including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the Control Authority. 
(j)  No permit shall be issued allowing an indirect discharge to the collection system and treatment plant, that, taken together with existing and projected discharges, would exceed the design average capacity of the treatment plant or exceed a maximum allowable headworks loading or probably exceed the ability of the treatment plant to effectively treat the wastewater inflow. Provided that, no such permit shall issue which would cause the total inflow of any factor or pollutant to exceed the capacity allocated to the unit of government in which the permit holder is discharging into the system. 
(Ord. 432. Passed 12-4-95.) 
1043.24 - Liquid waste haulers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to transport and discharge holding tank waste into the collection system or treatment plant unless received by the Grand Traverse County Septage Treatment Facility in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Grand Traverse County Septage Treatment Facility. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92. Ord. 914. Passed 5-16-11.) 
1043.25 - Monitoring and reporting. 
(a)  Within 180 days after the effective date of a federal categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such federal categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the collection system and treatment plant shall submit to the Control Authority a baseline monitoring report (BMR) which contains, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners; 
(2)  A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classification of the operations carried-out by such industrial user. This description shall include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the collection system and treatment plant from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the treatment plant from each of the following: 
a.  Regulated process streams; and 
b.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  The federal categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
(6)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the applicable standard or Control Authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be done in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b)(iii) and (iv). 
(7)  Other information as required by the Control Authority. 
All categorical users, and any other users required by the Control Authority, shall submit a baseline monitoring report containing the information provided in this subsection as a requirement of application for a permit to discharge to the collection system and treatment plant. 
(b)  Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable federal categorical pretreatment standards, or, in the case of a new source as defined in 40 CFR 403.5(k)(1), following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the collection system and treatment plant, any industrial user subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the Control Authority a compliance status report. 
(c)  Each industrial user shall complete monitoring and submit monitoring reports to the Control Authority as required by this chapter, the program and a permit. If during any reporting period an industrial user fails to comply with permit requirements and limitations, the industrial user shall include in the report an explanation of the noncompliance, any known or suspected causes and actions taken or to be taken to prevent further occurrences. 
(d)  If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Control Authority, using approved procedures, the results of such monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  All sampling, analyses and flow measurements shall be performed by a laboratory approved by the Control Authority. Monitoring and analysis shall be conducted according to methods approved under 40 CFR, Part 136, unless other test procedures have been specified by the Control Authority. 
(f)  All users shall furnish to the Control Authority, upon request, any information which may be requested to determine if cause exists for modifying, revoking or reissuing a permit or to determine compliance with this chapter, the program or a permit. 
(g)  All users shall provide any and all information to the Control Authority that may be required to determine the characteristics or nature of the potential discharge. 
(h)  If monitoring and/or analysis is performed by the Control Authority in lieu of the user performing it, the user may be charged and shall be required to pay any fees imposed by the Control Authority. 
(Ord. 432. Passed 12-4-95.) 
1043.26 - Notifications of noncompliance. 
(a)  A user shall promptly notify the treatment plant or the Control Authority in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in the indirect discharge. 
(b)  A user shall notify the Control Authority of any indirect discharge which causes injury to persons or damage to the environment, or poses a threat to human health or the environment, as soon as the user becomes aware of the occurrence. 
(c)  If sampling performed by an industrial user, or other information available to it, indicates a violation, the user shall notify the Control Authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. If the standard violated is a categorical pretreatment standard, or if the Control Authority requires it, the user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Control Authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except that the industrial user is not required to resample if the Control Authority performs sampling of the industrial user within 30 days of the initial violation. 
(d)  All users shall comply with the notification requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 432. Passed 12-4-95.) 
1043.27 - Retention of records; sampling requirements; falsification. 
(a)  Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements required by this chapter, the program or a permit shall be required to retain, for a minimum of three years from the date of the sample, measurement, report or application, any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this chapter) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the Control Authority. Records include all calibration and maintenance records, copies of all reports required by this chapter, the program or a permit and records of all data used to complete the application for a permit. This period may be extended by request of the Control Authority at any time. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or when requested by the USEPA or the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)  The following information, at a minimum, is required for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking such samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  Who performed the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(5)  The results of such analyses. 
(c)  The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained under this chapter, the program or a permit are subject to the provisions of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements, the provisions of Section 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation or certification and the provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Act regarding responsible corporate officers, which sections provide for civil and/or criminal penalties for making any false statement, record, report, plan or other document. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.28 - Right of entry for inspection, sampling and analysis. 
    All users shall allow any authorized representative of the Control Authority bearing proper credentials to enter upon the premises of any facility without delay where a real or potential discharge is located to inspect the facility, monitoring equipment and practices and pretreatment operations, and/or to measure, sample or test any discharge of wastewater to the collection system and treatment plant. Where records are required to be kept under the terms and conditions of this chapter or a permit, access must be granted at reasonable times to copy records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of this chapter or a permit in order to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter, a permit or 40 CFR, Part 403. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.29 - Confidential information; public access. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in 40 CFR 2.302, any records, reports or other information obtained pursuant to this chapter, the program or a permit, including any correspondence relating thereto, shall be available to the public. However, any information submitted by a user which the user believes to be entitled to protection as a trade secret should specifically be identified by the user when submitted. If the Control Authority determines that making public of any report or information, or a part thereof, other than effluent data, would divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets, the Control Authority will consider such record, report or information, or part thereof, to be confidential, and access thereto shall be limited to authorized officers or employees of federal or state agencies or the Control Authority. 
(b)  The Control Authority will serve upon the furnisher of such confidential information verbal notice of the intent to disclose such information prior to disclosure, written notice of the disclosure of such information and the person who properly requested such information. The Control Authority will submit the claim of confidentiality with the information to the requesting person. 
(c)  Information provided by users or the Control Authority pursuant to this chapter and the program that has not been classified as confidential are open for public inspection. Requests for such review are to be made in writing and an appointment for review may be required. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.30 - Notice of violation. 
    A notice of violation will be issued, in writing, by the Control Authority to any user for failure to meet any pretreatment standards or requirements pursuant to federal, state or local regulations, this chapter or a permit. The notice shall be delivered to the user or mailed. If mailed, the notice shall be addressed to the permit holder if a permit has been issued or, if not, to the user, by registered or certified mail, to such user's or permit holder's last known address. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.31 - Enforcement response plan. 
    The Control Authority will enforce the provisions of this chapter according to an enforcement response plan which contains detailed procedures for investigation and response to violations of this chapter or a permit. The plan: 
(1)  Describes escalating enforcement responses to all anticipated types of violations by users and the time periods within which enforcement action shall be taken. 
(2)  Identifies, by title, the officials responsible within the Control Authority for taking enforcement action. 
(3)  Will be made available to users in such manner as the Control Authority will determine, and, at a minimum, will be distributed to each permit holder at the time the permit is issued. 
    The Control Authority will at all times retain the authority to vary from the express terms of the plan if it determines that the public interest and the interests served by this chapter will be furthered by the variance. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.32 - Suspension of wastewater discharge services or permits. 
(a)  The Control Authority may suspend wastewater treatment service or a permit, or both, without notice, or with such notice, including notice by telephone or facsimile, as the Control Authority deems feasible, when, in the opinion of the Control Authority, an indirect discharge or other act or omission violates or threatens to violate this chapter or a permit and such suspension is immediately necessary to prevent an actual or threatened discharge or other activity which presents a serious danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, the environment, the collection system or the treatment plant. Immediately following a suspension under this section, the Control Authority will promptly proceed as provided in subsection (b) hereof. 
(b)  In the event the Control Authority determines that an indirect discharge or other act or omission violates or threatens to violate this chapter or a permit, the Control Authority may take action under this section to suspend sewer service, a permit or both. The Control Authority will give written notice of such proposed action to the user or permit holder, as the case may be, by personal delivery or certified mail. In case of delivery, notice shall be given not less than 30 days in advance of the proposed action, counting the date of delivery as the first day. In the case of certified mail, the date the mail was deposited with postage fully paid in a U.S. Postal Service receptacle shall count as the first day. The notice shall be addressed to the user or permit holder's last known address, as the case may be. If the address is unknown, the notice shall be sent to the address of the owner of the premises at which the indirect discharge is made into the collection system. The notice shall contain a statement of the reasons for the proposed action. The permit holder or the user, as the case may be, shall be given the opportunity for a hearing before the Control Authority or its designee prior to taking final action. Failure to respond in writing to the notice of violation during the notice period shall be deemed consent to the proposed action. 
(c)  Thirty days after notice (and following a hearing, if requested by the user or permit holder, as the case may be), the Control Authority may modify or suspend the permit or limit, regulate or suspend the user's indirect discharge into the collection system and treatment plant, all as the Control Authority deems appropriate, or may terminate the notice if the violation or threat of violation has abated. The Control Authority will provide written notice of its actions to the user or the permit holder, as the case may be, in like manner as the notice of action. 
(d)  Any user or permit holder notified of suspension of wastewater treatment service, a permit or both, shall immediately stop its indirect discharge or eliminate the violation. In the event the indirect discharge is not stopped or the violation eliminated, the Control Authority may take such steps it deems necessary, including, but not limited to, immediate capping of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize the violation. 
(e)  The Control Authority may reinstate the wastewater treatment service, permit or both, if it is satisfied that the violation has been or will be corrected and upon payment of all fines and costs outstanding against the user or permit holder assessed by the Control Authority in connection with the sewer service. Prior to reinstatement, the Control Authority may require a written statement submitted from the user or permit holder describing the cause of the violation and describing the measures completed to prevent future violations. Reinstatement may be conditioned upon completion of such measures. The Control Authority may require the posting of a bond or other financial security as a condition of restoring sewer service, the permit or both. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.33 - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
    The Control Authority, at least annually, will publish in the daily newspaper with the greatest circulation in the City and the townships of Acme, East Bay, Elmwood, Garfield and Peninsula, a public notice which will identify all users meeting the criteria for "significant noncompliance" with pretreatment requirements, as defined in this chapter, during the period since the last publication. The notice will identify the user and state the basis for the finding of significant noncompliance, together with such other information as the Control Authority deems appropriate in light of the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.34 - Costs of abatement. 
    All costs of abatement of any and all violations by any user shall be borne by that user. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.35 - Affirmative defenses to violations. 
    A person shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against him or her alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established in Section 1043.07(a) and the specific prohibitions provided in Section 1043.07(b)(3)-(7) where such person can demonstrate that: 
(1)  An upset occurred; 
(2)  He or she did not know or have reason to know that his or her indirect discharge, alone or in conjunction with an indirect discharge or indirect discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference; 
(3)  A local limit was developed for each pollutant in the indirect discharge that caused pass-through or interference, and that the user was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference; or 
(4)  If a local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or interference, as the case may be, has not been developed for the pollutants that caused the pass-through or interference, the indirect discharge directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the prior discharge activity when the treatment plant was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal. 
    In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof and may not claim an upset unless it has complied with the requirements of Section 1043.16. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.36 - Construction and location of pretreatment and monitoring facilities. 
(a)  A wastewater pretreatment system or device may be required to treat flows prior to discharge to the collection system and treatment plant of certain waste constituents not in compliance with this chapter, the program or a permit, in order to distribute more equally over a longer time period any peak discharges of wastewater, or to meet effluent limits required by this chapter, the program or a permit. All pretreatment systems or devices shall be approved by the Control Authority, but such approval shall not relieve the user of the responsibility of meeting any requirement of this chapter, the program or a permit. 
(b)  All users shall be required to install, use and maintain such monitoring equipment or methods as may be necessary to carry out the objective of this chapter, including, but not limited to, suitable manholes, meters and appurtenances or other facilities to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the combined wastes from the premises. All monitoring equipment and facilities shall be installed by the user at his or her expense and shall be maintained by such user so as to be safe, operable and accessible at all times. All manholes installed to meet the requirements of this section shall be located on the user's premises unless the such a location would be impractical or cause an undue hardship. If no suitable location exists on the user's premises, the Control Authority may permit construction of a manhole in the public right-of-way or easement, subject to the approval of the local unit of government. If the monitoring facilities are located within a locked fence, the Control Authority shall be provided with keys to the gate lock. Unrestricted access to monitoring manholes or other meters, appurtenances or monitoring facilities shall be available to authorized personnel of the Control Authority at all times. 
(c)  The Control Authority may require any user to furnish and install at the monitoring manhole or other appropriate location a calibrated flume, weir, flow meter or similar device approved by the Control Authority and suitable to measure the flow rate and total volume of the indirect discharge. A flow indicating-, recording- and totalizing-register may be required by the Control Authority. 
(d)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided and installed by any user when, in the opinion of the Control Authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Control Authority and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(e)  All monitoring facilities, whether on public or private property, shall be constructed in accordance with applicable State and local construction standards and specifications. Plans and specifications for all such work shall be submitted, prior to construction, to the Control Authority for approval as conforming to requirements of the program, this chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
(f)  All users shall obtain approval from the Control Authority prior to construction, installation, modification or operation of any facility for the collection, treatment or discharge of any pollutant into the collection system and treatment plant. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.37 - Establishment of charges and fees. 
    The Control Authority may establish, by resolution, reasonable charges and fees, which may include, at a minimum: 
(1)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(2)  Fees for permit applications, modifications or renewals; 
(3)  Fees for treatment of extra-strength pollutants; 
(4)  Fees for monitoring and/or analysis of a user's indirect discharge; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(6)  Other fees as the Control Authority may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Such charges and fees relate solely to matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by any local unit of government. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.38 - Recovery of costs. 
    For each and every occurrence of any impact to the environment, the collection system, treatment facilities or other appurtenances thereto or the receiving waters, caused by an indirect discharge, and notwithstanding any fines, penalties and/or surcharges that may be applicable to the discharge, the Control Authority may recover from the user, and the user shall pay, the direct and indirect costs associated with the clean-up, repair, recovery or any other activity required directly or indirectly due to the impact of the discharge. Costs shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The actual direct and indirect costs of any labor required to monitor, test, repair, clean-up, pick-up, pump, vacuum, sweep or in any other way recover from the discharge and return the affected facility to the conditions required by permit; 
(2)  The actual direct and indirect costs of any outside services billed to the Control Authority and/or its representatives for any services, monitoring, testing, repairs, clean-up, pumping, recording, containment, work or other activity engaged in to directly or indirectly assist the Control Authority in returning the affected facility to the conditions required by permit; 
(3)  The actual direct and indirect costs of any materials, supplies, parts and/or equipment used by the Control Authority and/or its representatives for any services, monitoring, testing, repairs, clean-up, pumping, recording, containment, work or other activity engaged in to directly or indirectly assist the Control Authority in returning the affected facility to the conditions required by the permit; 
(4)  The actual direct and indirect costs of any services related to the discharge provided to the Control Authority by any public agency; 
(5)  The actual amount of any and all legal fees incurred by the Control Authority in defending against fines, penalties, administrative fees, judgments and/or settlements against the Control Authority or its representatives resulting directly or indirectly from the discharge; 
(6)  The actual amount of any and all attorney fees and costs incurred by the Control Authority in enforcing this chapter, a permit or a compliance schedule, in prosecuting violations and in collecting any and all fines, penalties, administrative fees, judgments and/or settlements against the user or its representatives resulting directly or indirectly from the discharge; or 
(7)  The actual amount of any fines, penalties, administrative fees, judgments and/or settlements against the Control Authority or its representatives resulting directly or indirectly from the discharge, whether imposed, adjudicated, negotiated or required by any legal means. 
    Costs shall be calculated by the Control Authority from the records, reports, documents and/or invoices submitted by the contractors, vendors, suppliers, agencies and/or claimants and may be verified by legal counsel to the Control Authority if requested by the user. The user shall be invoiced for these costs as they are developed and submitted, and payment is due net ten days, with the Control Authority receiving interest at the highest rate of interest permitted by law. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.39 - Rates and service charges. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health, welfare and convenience to levy and collect rates and service charges upon premises served by the collection system. 
(b)  To determine the sanitary wastewater flow from any source, the City Manager may use one of the following methods: 
(1)  The amount of water supplied to the premises by a public or private water supply as shown upon the water meter, if the premises are metered; 
(2)  If the premises are supplied with unmetered water from sources, such as private wells, the estimated amount of water supplied from such sources; 
(3)  If such premises are used for a nondomestic purpose of such a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be entirely discharged into the sewerage system, the estimated amount of wastewater discharged into the sewer system; 
(4)  The number of cubic feet of wastewater discharged into the sewerage system, as determined by measurements and samples taken at a manhole installed by the owner of the property served by the sewerage system in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit issued by the City; or 
(5)  A figure determined by the City Manager by any combination of the methods described in paragraphs (b)(1) and (4) hereof or by another equitable method. 
(c)  Wastewater treatment service charges shall be established for all users of the public sanitary sewerage system in the City by resolution of the City Commission placed on file with the City Clerk. When establishing rates, the City Commission shall establish a late payment interest and penalty as allowed by law. 
(d)  The City shall not honor deductions from any customer's sanitary wastewater treatment account for water consumed which does not reach the sanitary sewer, unless such water is taken from a separate "deduct" metered connection. The expense of such connection shall be borne by the consumer in the same manner as other water supply connections. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in order to give credit for lawn sprinkling for residential customers for the period from April 15 through October 15, the average waste consumption for the months of January, February and March shall be used as the basis for a sewer service charge. 
(e)  For disposal of holding tank waste, the rate shall be established by the City Manager for each delivered load. 
(f)  The City may enter into a special agreement or arrangement with any nondomestic user whereby waste of an unusual strength or character may be accepted by the treatment plant, subject to payment therefor. Additional payment will be required to cover the added cost of handling and treating the waste. Surcharges required for excessive BOD, suspended solids and phosphorus shall be made. Where surveillance is required to limit wastewater flows or to sample waste to ensure compliance with this chapter, the user shall be billed for actual costs incurred by the City. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.40 - Collection of charges, fees, penalties, etc. 
    The Control Authority may use all legal means of collecting charges, fees, costs, rates, interest, penalties and all other monetary charges, including the following: 
(1)  The Control Authority may terminate or interrupt service to secure collection. 
(2)  The Control Authority may commence litigation in any court of competent jurisdiction to secure collection, and the user shall be responsible for and shall pay all reasonable attorney's fees nd costs of such litigation. 
(3)  Charges for services furnished to premises shall be a lien on the premises at the time the services are rendered. Charges delinquent for six months or more shall be certified annually to the proper tax assessing officer, who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises to which the services have been rendered. Charges shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as other local property taxes. Where a tenant is responsible for the payment of the charges and the City is so notified in writing, together with a true copy of the lease for the affecting party premises, if there is one, the charges shall become a lien against the premises after the date of the notice. If a tenant is responsible for the payment of charges, the City may require a cash deposit in a sum not to exceed two-months estimated service charges as security for the payment of such charges. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.41 - Injunctive relief. 
    In addition to penalties provided in Section 1043.99 and all other remedies for violations of this chapter, a permit or a compliance schedule, an action may be commenced for an injunctive order restraining a violation of this chapter or a permit or requiring compliance therewith in the Circuit Court for the County in which the user is located. 
(Ord. 337. Passed 9-8-92.) 
1043.99 - Penalty. 
(a)  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, a permit or a compliance schedule, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a fine not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation (or such lesser sum as may be established by law as a maximum penalty for violation of this chapter). Each day during which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of the terms of a permit or a compliance schedule established under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions of Section 1043.41 and the penalties provided in this section, the Control Authority and any township affected by a violation of this chapter, a permit or a compliance schedule may recover from any person committing such violation all costs and damages as set forth in detail in Section 1043.38. Suit may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 432. Passed 12-4-95.) 
Chapter 1044 - Water[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate water,  150, 151 
State Constitution reference- Water supply generally, Mich. Const. Art. 7,  24 
State Law reference- Water supply generally, M.C.L.A.  46.171 et seq., 486.51 et seq., 486.101 et seq.; Water supply in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4f, 117.35, 123.115; Collection of water charges, MSA  5.2531(1) 
Cross reference- Special assessments for water mains,  232.03; Water pollution,  1062.11; Ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control, Ch. 1068; Water in subdivisions,  1248.06; Water for mobile homes,  1480.01; Water in rental dwellings,  1482.11(g) 

1044.01 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The City finds that the use of wells and secondary water supplies from wells for the delivery or use of water may influence the movement of contaminated groundwater and constitute a potential public health risk. It is further recognized that protection of residents from consumption of groundwater containing hazardous substances or contaminants which may be injurious to human health may in certain cases be fostered by the adoption of restrictions regarding the installation and use of wells. The term "contamination" means groundwater contamination that exceeds residential drinking water criteria developed by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality pursuant to Section 20120(a)(1)(a) of the Natural Resources Environmental Protection Act, 1994 Public Act 451, as amended, and its rules. 
1044.02 - Connections; permit required; fee. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall connect a water service pipe to the City water distribution system without first obtaining a permit. An application shall be made to the City Treasurer's office and shall contain the legal description or parcel code number of the premises to be served, the size of the service desired and such other pertinent data as may be required by the City Treasurer. 
(b)  Fee. Connections to the distribution mains shall be installed only by the City for a fee as established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(c)  Costs included in fee. The connection permit fee shall include the costs of excavation and backfill, making the tap, furnishing and installing a service pipe from the main to a point between the curb and the sidewalk within the public right-of-way and furnishing and installing the service box and curb stop. 
(d)  Reasons for not granting permit. A connection permit shall not be granted if the application is incomplete, or if, in the judgment of the City Manager, the making of the connection will endanger the mains due to frost, excess usage withdrawal rates, potential cross connections, or for any other cause. 
1044.03 - Service pipes. 
(a)  Water service material. Water service pipe used in connecting to the City water system shall be copper tube, Type K Soft, no larger than two inches in diameter and shall meet all American Society for Testing and Materials standards and the following specifications: 
Pipe Size (in) Outside 
Diameter (in) Wall 
Thickness (in) Inside 
Diameter (in) Weight (lbs/ft) 3/4;.875 .065 .745 .641 1 1.125 .065 .995 .839 1 1/2 1.625 .072 1.481 1.36 2 2.125 .083 1.959 2.06  
(b)  Depth. The minimum depth of cover for service lines shall be five feet below the surface of the ground or established street grade, whichever is lower. 
(c)  Frost. No service line shall be laid inside a building along an outside wall or in any position where there is danger of the service line freezing. 
(d)  Valves. Every service line shall be furnished with a valve both on the influent side and the effluent side of the meter. 
(e)  Location. A water line laid in the same trench with a sewer line shall be installed in accordance with the Michigan Plumbing Code, as amended. 
1044.04 - Supply and distribution. 
(a)  Connection requirements. Every connection to a water main for a potable water supply shall include a corporation or tapping sleeve at the main, a shut off valve and curb box or valve manhole on the public side of the property line, and a meter approved by the Water Maintenance Division with appropriate prescribed valving. 
(b)  Meter required. No water connection shall be made prior to the installation of a meter. 
(c)  Separate service line; fire line; access. Each building to be served with City water shall have a separate service line and connection to the public water main. When a building is served by a two inch or greater fire suppression line, a domestic water service for that building may be tapped off this fire line, provided the City is granted acceptable access and control to turn on or to turn off such domestic service, as the City may deem necessary. Failure of the business to provide acceptable access to City personnel may require, upon written notification to the owner of the business served, the termination of availability of City water for fire suppression purposes. The location of the post indicator valve shall be approved by the Fire Marshall and the potable water supply shall be protected against contamination as outlined in the American Water Works Association Manual M-14, as amended, and as required by the Michigan Department of Health and the State Plumbing Code, as amended. 
1044.05 - Inspections. 
    All work performed in making additions, connections, repairs, extensions or alterations to any fixture connected to the water distribution system from the point on the system designated by the State Plumbing Code including connection to the curb stop valve shall be subject to inspection by the Plumbing Inspector who may order any part of such work discontinued or changed to comply with the rules and regulations of the State Plumbing Code or this chapter. 
1044.06 - Ownership and maintenance of connections. 
    Ownership and maintenance of the street portion of the water service, including the corporation, tapping sleeve, curb stop, service box, valves, valve manhole and service pipe, is vested in the City. 
1044.07 - Application for service. 
    A person may apply for and be granted the use of water if application is made in writing at the City Treasurer's office on such forms as shall be prescribed. 
1044.08 - Responsibility for maintenance. 
(a)  Maintenance required. Every person having service from the City water distribution system shall, at his or her own cost and expense, keep in repair that portion of the service between the service box and the meter, the inlet and outlet meter valving and bypass connection. If the service is permitted to remain out of repair, the Water Maintenance Division may shut off the water. 
(b)  Fire suppression maintenance. All fire suppression systems which were installed in compliance with any law or order shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times. The Fire Marshal shall be notified before disconnection, interruption of protection, when test, repairs, alterations or additions are started and upon completion of such work. When booster pumps are approved for installation in areas of marginal low volume and residual system pressure, a pressure sustaining control valve on the discharge side of the pump, preset to a minimum suction pressure to throttle the discharge of volume, or a low pressure cutoff valve set at 10 PSI to control the pump's suction pressure, shall be installed to prevent damage to the public distribution system. 
1044.09 - Meters generally. 
(a)  Required. All connections to the water mains, with the exception of fire hydrants and automatic fire suppression systems, shall require the water to pass through a meter. No water shall be supplied to any property unless the water is measured by a water meter of a size and design approved and installed by the City. The City shall not furnish meters larger than the City Manager deems necessary. 
(b)  Exceptions. Water for automatic fire suppression systems shall be furnished at the rates set forth by resolution of the City Commission. No person shall use any water from the automatic fire suppression system except in case of fire. An approved control valve for all automatic fire suppression systems shall be located so as to be readily accessible to the Fire Department in accordance with National FPA standards. 
(c)  Non-domestic meter. Meters used to measure water that is not returned in the sanitary sewer system (such as lawn irrigation or cooling system meters) are termed non-domestic meters. Non-domestic meter installations shall be installed with proper backflow protection through a separate tap placed in the water line after the regular service meter. 
(d)  Placement. The meter for the water supply shall be located in a clean, dry and sanitary place inside the building as close as practical to the outside wall of the building being served. It shall be readily accessible, no more than four feet above the floor and capable of being reached quickly requiring no removal of obstacles or the use of ladders for inspection, maintenance or operation. Actual installation of the meter shall be done by the City when a City-approved location has been provided by the property owner at his or her own expense. All metered water lines in excess of one inch in diameter, hereafter installed, shall be provided with a bypass around the meter, plumbed and valved so as to allow removal of the meter for testing, repair or replacement without disrupting the service to the premises. All bypass valves shall be sealed except when used in meter work. 
(e)  Maintenance. The City shall maintain all meters, meter horns, wiring and meter reading accessories and make all necessary replacements caused by wear and tear through normal usage. The consumer shall be held responsible for care and protection of the meter from freezing or damage by hot water and from damage by any person. Any damage which may occur to any water meter, wiring or outside service register (OSR) shall be paid for by the consumer upon presentation of a statement of damages. 
(f)  Testing. The accuracy of the meter on any premises shall be tested by the City upon written request of the owner accompanied by a fee determined by resolution of the City Commission. If, on such test, the meter is found to register greater than three percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter shall be substituted therefor, the fee shall be refunded to the owner and the water bill for the previous 12 months may be adjusted by the City Treasurer. If, on such test, the meter is found to register less than or equal to a three percent variance, the fee shall not be refunded. 
(g)  New construction. All new building construction which is proposed to have water service and building construction which significantly alters a meter location shall be prewired in a neat and workmanlike manner with an acceptable conduit providing for an outside service register (OSR), at the expense of the building owner and at no cost to the City, except that wire shall be supplied by the City. If there is a failure to provide prewiring or acceptable conduit for an OSR, the City may so provide on a time and material cost basis to the building owner. The wire shall be UL approved, 3 conductor, 18 gauge, Class 2 cable run from the inside water meter location to a location outside the building next to the electrical meter. 
1044.10 - Reading of meters. 
(a)  Statements. The City shall cause all meters to be read periodically and shall render statements for the amounts due as shown by the reading. Statements shall be payable as determined by this chapter, but in no event shall failure to receive a statement excuse any consumer for nonpayment. 
(b)  Estimates. If a meter reading does not appear to be consistent or if the meter has ceased to register, the amount of water charged for shall be an amount estimated by the City Treasurer. In making such an estimate, previous quantities of water used at that location shall be used as a basis for the estimate. The estimate shall be retroactive for a maximum period of 12 months. Special conditions such as leaky fixtures or an abnormal demand for water may also be considered. When it appears that an abnormal use of water has resulted from leakage or carelessness on the part of the consumer, no deduction shall be made therefor. 
1044.11 - Access for inspections. 
(a)  Meter accessibility. The City shall have access to the meter and to all water plumbing fixtures at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspecting the meter or any other plumbing used in connection with the water supply system. No such meter or auxiliary equipment shall be covered or fenced in such a way as to be inaccessible. Meters installed in new construction and as a result of major plumbing renovation of a building shall be readily accessible, that is, capable of being reached quickly requiring no removal of obstacles, locks or the use of ladders for inspection, maintenance or operation. 
(b)  Failure to allow access. If a person fails to allow access to the water meter for service, after reasonable notice, the City may cause the water supply to be turned off until arrangements for access to the meter are made. 
1044.12 - Use of hydrants. 
(a)  Permit required. Except for the City, no person shall draw water from any hydrant or any other public connection with the water supply system without first obtaining a permit. A permit to use a hydrant may be granted by the City Treasurer only for specific hydrants, at specific times and for specific work. 
(b)  Deposits. Persons desiring service from a fire hydrant shall place on deposit an amount equal to the value of the size meter desired. This sum shall be held until all charges incurred have been fully paid and all City equipment has been returned in acceptable condition. The cost of water registered on the meter during its use shall be charged at prevailing rates with a minimum monthly rental on meters. The City may use any portion of such deposit to repair or replace any equipment damaged through negligence by the consumer or by reason of the use thereof. 
(c)  Meter. Before drawing water from a hydrant is permitted, the discharge port shall be fitted with a valve, vacuum breaker, and meter under the direction of the City. 
(Ord. 830. Passed 5-4-09.) 
1044.13 - Cross connections prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall make or maintain any cross connection between the municipal water supply system and another public or private water supply. 
(b)  State rules adopted. The City hereby adopts by reference the water supply cross connection rules of the Michigan Department of Public Health, being R325.11401 to R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended. 
(c)  Inspections. 
(1)  The City shall inspect all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on the potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the City Manager and as approved by the Michigan Department of Public Health. 
(2)  A representative of the City may enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the City for the purpose of inspecting the piping system thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system of such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(d)  Service discontinuance; precautionary measures. The City shall discontinue water service to any property where any connection in violation of this chapter exists. The City may take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  Contamination protection; labeling. A person connected to the City water supply shall insure that on their property the public water supply is protected from possible contamination as specified by this chapter and by the State Plumbing Code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system shall be labeled in a conspicuous manner as "WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING." 
1044.14 - Private wells. 
(a)  Defined; exceptions. A private well is defined as an opening in the surface of earth for the purpose of removing water through mechanical or non-mechanical means for any purpose except construction site dewatering or conducting response activity, including sampling or treatment of the groundwater, under a plan approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. These exceptions apply only when all necessary permits have been obtained for the well in question. 
(b)  Prohibitions; permits. A private well for an open loop geothermal system shall be prohibited. No person shall install a private well, without first obtaining a permit from the City Director of Public Services. No permit for a private well shall be issued where City water is available within 200 feet of the property. If municipal water service is unavailable within 200 feet of any developable parcel, a private well may be permitted if the well water is tested annually and approved for human consumption by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Drinking Water and Radiological Protection Division or the County Health Department and if written proof of such annual approval is delivered to the City Director of Public Services. 
(c)  Temporary use. A well meeting the above criteria may be used temporarily for water until the City water service is available within 200 feet of the property, at which time the well shall be properly capped and abandoned and proper hook-up to the City water system shall be required. The cost of proper abandonment of a well that was temporarily allowed under this section and proper hookup to the city water system shall be the owner's responsibility. 
(d)  Property split or conveyance. No split or conveyance of any property shall be effective to render City water service unavailable. 
(e)  Modification notice. At least 30 days prior to adopting a modification of this section or 30 days prior to the lapsing or revocation of this section, the City shall notify the Director of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality by registered mail. 
(Ord. No. 1068 . Passed 3-19-18) 
1044.15 - Tampering. 
    Unless authorized by the City, no person shall tap any pipe, open or close any hydrant, valve or stopcock or interfere in any manner or tamper with any part of the public waterworks system, or use water which does not pass through a meter, except as provided herein. No person shall interfere with or remove a meter from any service connection. No person shall break, remove or tamper with any seal, wires or outside service registers. No person shall place in use any device which allows water to be used which does not pass through a meter. A person shall pay all costs and damages resulting from such unlawful interference or tampering with the system. A person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
1044.16 - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Fixing of rates. The City Commission shall by resolution establish reasonable rates and such other charges for supplying water. 
(b)  Due date. Water use charges shall be payable quarterly or monthly at the discretion of the City Commission, and shall be due as indicated on the statement for the period during which billing is made, unless otherwise provided. 
(c)  Connection fees. Charges for water service connections to the City's water distribution system shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the City Commission. Sizes larger than one inch are charged on a time and material basis. For the extension of water service to a franchised area outside the City, the person requesting service shall be required to pay the cost of the installation of the water main extension, monthly rates for service and the fee for water connection as established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(d)  Customers who have a separate irrigation meter will be invoiced monthly from May 1 through October 31. The final irrigation read will be the date of the last bill that has a reading date of October 31 or before. Any used water subsequent to the read date will be invoiced with the next read date, the subsequent year. A customer may annually request different activation and deactivation dates than prescribed in the ordinance. The first read date after activation and the last read date before activation will be used for meter readings and a "paper turn on and off" fee established through resolution will be charged. 
(e)  M-22 connection area. In addition to other established fees, connection to or obtaining potable water from the City's water main, as constructed along M-22 during the 1990 construction season, shall have a connection fee at the rate of $1,890.00 for all parcels with 100 feet or less footage abutting M-22, and at the rate of $1,890.00 plus $18.90 for each foot in excess of 100 feet with footage of more than 100 feet abutting M-22. This connection fee shall be in lieu of a special assessment for that water main, which is more fully described in engineering plans on file with the City Engineer. Parcels of land, estimates of footage and connection fees, for which this subsection shall apply, are designated as of March, 1991, as follows: 
City Tax Number Footage (ft) Connection Fee 145-00 125.0 $ 2,326.50 140-00 85.0 1,890.00 139-00 325 6,142.00 136-10 106.25 2,008.13 137-00 156.8 2,963.52 136-00 189.0 3,572.10 132-00 138.6 2,619.54 131-00 69.3 1,890.00 130-00 66.0 1,890.00 112-00 79.76 1,890.00 124-00 123.9 2,341.71 126-00 99.4 1,890.00  
    Other parcels as may be approved by the Water Maintenance Division not listed above may connect service leads to this water main at the rates herein stated above, plus interest, at a cost as may be determined by the City Treasurer. The connection charge for such parcels not listed shall be in addition to normal tap and service lead installation fees as may be established by the City Commission from time to time. Payment of the fee may be made in full at the time of connection or may be based on ten equal installments, with an annual interest rate of six percent on the unpaid balance. The ten-year installment payment period shall commence on July 1, 1991, and end on July 1, 2001. For connections after July 1, 1991, the initial installment at the time of connection shall be equal to all installment payments, including interest that would have been paid if payments had commenced on July 1, 1991. In any event the maximum accrued interest shall be ten years' worth. 
    The City Clerk is directed to mail notice to the owners of record of the above affected property as the City's property tax records so indicate. 
(f)  M-72 connection area. In addition to other established fees, connections to or obtaining potable water from the City's water main, as constructed along M-72 during the 1994 construction season, shall have a connection charge at the rate of $2,174.00 for all parcels in the City and $3,999.00 for all parcels in Garfield Township with 100 feet or less footage abutting M-72. The connection charge shall be at a rate of $2,174.00, plus $21.74 for each foot in excess of 100 feet with footage of more than 100 feet abutting M-72 for all parcels in the City, and $3,999.00, plus $39.99 for each foot in excess of 100 feet with footage of more than 100 feet abutting M-72 for all parcels in Garfield Township. This connection charge shall be in lieu of a special assessment for that water main, which is more fully described in engineering plans on file in the office of the City Engineer. Parcels of land, estimate of footage and connection charges, for which this subsection shall apply, are designated as of October, 1994 as follows: 
City Tax Number Footage Connection Fee 45-051-033-058-00 174 $ 3,782.76 45-051-033-063-00 75 2,174.00 45-051-033-057-00 88.2 2,174.00 45-051-033-056-00 186 4,043.64 45-051-033-055-00 175 3,804.50 45-051-033-044-00 108 2,347.92 45-051-033-043-00 150 3,261.00 45-051-033-050-00 88.72 2,174.00 45-051-033-049-00 88.6 2,174.00 45-051-033-048-00 58.76 2,174.00 45-051-033-047-00 114.88 2,497.49 45-051-033-052-00 55 2,174.00 45-051-033-053-00 55 2,174.00 45-051-033-046-00 54.76 2,174.00 45-051-033-045-00 89.5 2,174.00  
Garfield Twp. Tax Number Footage Connection Fee 28-05-004-015-00 75 $ 3,999.00 28-05-004-014-00 75 3,999.00 28-05-004-013-00 75 3,999.00  
    Other parcels as may be approved by the Water Maintenance Division not listed above may connect service leads to this water main at the rates herein stated above, plus interest, at a cost as may be determined by the City Treasurer. The connection charge for such parcels not listed shall be in addition to normal tap and service lead installation fees as may be established by the City Commission from time to time. 
    Payment of the charges for property within the City may be made in full at the time of connection or may be based on ten equal installments, with an annual interest rate of six percent on the unpaid balance. The ten-year installment payment period shall commence on July 1, 1995, and end on June 30, 2005. For all connections after July 1, 1995, the initial payment at the time of connection shall be equal to all installment payments including interest, that would have been paid if payments had commenced on July 1, 1995. In any event, the maximum accrued interest shall be ten years' worth. 
    Payment of this connection charge for property within Garfield Township shall be made in full, prior to the time of connection. Beginning July 1, 1995, the connection charges listed shall be increased at a rate of six percent per annum, simple interest, for a period of ten years, as may be determined by the City Treasurer. 
    The City Clerk is directed to mail notice to the owners of records of the above affected property as the City's property tax records so indicate. 
(Ord. 973. Passed 7-1-13) 
1044.17 - Collection of unpaid charges. 
(a)  Lien. In addition to other remedies possessed by the City for the collection of water service charges connection fees and other similar charges, the City shall have a lien upon the premises to which such water has been supplied. Such lien shall become effective immediately upon the distribution of water to the premises, and the official records of the City shall constitute notice of the pendency of such lien. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens, except taxes and special assessments, even where such other liens accrued or were recorded prior to the lien herein created. 
(b)  Exception. In all cases when a tenant is responsible for the payment of any such rates and other fees or charges under a legally executed lease containing a provision that the lessor shall not be liable for the payment of rates and other fees or charges for water service and the City Treasurer is so notified in writing by the owner, then no such rates and other fees or charges shall become a lien against the premises occupied by the tenant from and after the date of such notice. Such notice shall be in the form of an affidavit with respect to the execution of such lease and shall set forth the expiration date thereof. Twenty days' notice shall be given the City Treasurer by the lessor of any cancellation, change in, or termination of such lease. Failure to give such 20 days' notice shall reinstate such lien for rates and other fees or charges, for water service furnished to such premises by the City on and after the date of such cancellation, change in, or termination, until a new notice is filed as above required. Each such notice shall be accompanied by a true copy of the lease executed between the lessor and the lessee. 
(c)  Guarantee deposits required where no lien exists. In each case where such a notice has been filed with the City by any lessor, the lessee shall deposit with the Treasurer a guarantee deposit before water may be turned on in, or continued to, the premises specified in such notice. Such guarantee deposit shall be in a sum estimated by the City Treasurer to be the rates and other charges to the premises affected equal to any two billing periods and shall be held by the City to hold the City harmless in the event of delinquency in paying rates and other charges for water service and any damages to service pipe, service cock, stop box and water meters used in extending such services to the premises. Whenever any customer shall have promptly paid for rates and other charges for such services for two years and has otherwise established satisfactory credit the City therefor, the Treasurer may refund the guarantee deposit, without interest. 
(d)  Notice of nonpayment. All unpaid water charges which, upon April 1 of each year, have remained unpaid for three months or more shall be reported by the City Manager to the City Commission at its first meeting in April. The City Commission shall thereupon order the publication, in a newspaper published in the City, of notice to all owners of property that all unpaid water charges which have remained unpaid for three months or more, as of April 1, and which have not been paid by April 30, shall be transferred to the City tax roll assessed against the property upon which the water was used, to be collected in the same manner as the lien created by City taxes on the tax roll. If the charges remain delinquent and unpaid after the expiration of the time limited in the warrant for the collection of taxes, such charges shall be returned to the County Treasurer to be collected in the same manner as the delinquent tax roll of the City. 
(e)  Spread of rates and charges on tax roll. On or before the tenth day of May, the City official in charge of the collection of rates and other fees or charges for water service shall certify to the Assessor a list of all such rates and other charges remaining unpaid, whereupon the Assessor shall enter such unpaid rates and other charges upon the tax roll against such premises in a column designated therefor. 
(f)  Discontinuance of service. The City Treasurer may discontinue water service from any premises because of the nonpayment of rates or other fees or charges for period of 30 days after the due date. Service shall not be recommenced, until application therefor is made to the City in the same manner as that of a new customer, except that all delinquent rates and other fees or charges shall be paid or provisions satisfactory to the City Treasurer. 
(g)  Suit for delinquent rates and other charges. In addition to the lien procedure, the City may institute suit for any delinquent rates and other fees or charges for water service in any court of competent jurisdiction within six years of delinquency. Suit may be instituted against any person receiving or benefitting from such service. 
(h)  Continuance of lien. Litigation to enforce the payment of any such rates, fees and other charges shall not invalidate or constitute a waiver of the lien created by this Code and the same shall stand until payment thereof is made in full. 
1044.99 - Penalty. 
    Where practicable, a person who violates this chapter shall be served a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time not exceeding 60 days for the satisfactory correction of said violation, except any well in violation of this chapter shall be declared and deemed a nuisance, subject to abatement, and shall be immediately taken out of service and lawfully abandoned. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a person who continues the violation beyond the time limit provided is responsible for a civil infraction. Each day in which such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition, the City may seek injunctive relief to restrain any person from violating this chapter, including the collection of costs and attorney fees associated with such enforcement action. 
Chapter 1045 - Gas Service[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- Franchises, Ch. XI 

1045.01 - Grant of gas franchise and consent to laying of pipes, etc. 
    Subject to all the terms and conditions of the Traverse City Charter, Chapter 11, and as stated in this chapter, consent is hereby given to Michigan Consolidated Gas Company, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of Michigan (the "Company"), and to its successors and assigns, to lay, maintain, operate, and use gas pipes, mains, conductors, service pipes and other necessary equipment in the highways, streets, alleys, and other public places in the City, and a non-exclusive franchise is hereby granted to the Company, its successors and assigns, to transact local business in the City for the purposes of conveying gas into and through and supplying and selling gas in the City and all other matters incidental thereto. 
(Ord. 753. Passed 6-4-07.) 
1045.02 - Gas service and extension of system. 
    If the provisions and conditions herein contained are accepted by the Company, as in Section 1045.06, then the Company shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations; and provided further that such initial installation and any extensions shall be subject to the Main Extension provisions, the Area Expansion Program provisions, (if and where applicable), and other applicable provisions now or from time to time hereafter contained in the Company's Rules and Regulations for Gas Service as filed with the Michigan Public Service Commission or successor agency having similar jurisdiction. 
1045.03 - Use of streets and other public places. 
    The Company, its successors and assigns, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the passage of any of the highways, streets, alleys, or other public places within the City and shall within a reasonable time after making an opening or excavation, repair the same and leave it in as good condition as before the opening or excavation was made. The Company, its successors and assigns, shall hold the City harmless from any and all claims made against the City as a result of the Company's activities under this ordinance. The Company shall, in connection with this obligation, pay or reimburse the City for all damages, costs and expenses experienced by the City in connection with any such claim, including but not limited to judgments or awards for damages, settlements, court, dispute litigation or settlement costs, attorney fees, consultant and laboratory fees and any other expenses which may be incurred by the resulting from the activities of the Company or its officers, employees, agents or servants under this ordinance. The Company will not hold the City harmless from claims arising out of the sole negligence of the City. No road, street, alley or highway shall be opened for the laying of trunk lines or lateral mains except upon application to the City or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises, stating the nature of the proposed work and the route. Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of the City Engineer, or such other authority as may have jurisdiction, to issue a permit to the Company to do the work proposed. 
    All facilities erected by the franchise within the City shall be so located as to cause minimum interferences with the proper use of the public rights-of-way and public places and to cause minimum interference with the rights and conveniences of adjoining property owners. In case of any disturbance or damage by company work to the buildings, streets, sidewalks, alleys, public ways or other public or private property, the franchisee shall at its own expense and in a manner acceptable to the City, replace, repair and otherwise restore such disturbance or damage. 
    If the City or the County Road Commission shall elect to alter the grade, alignment, or location of any street, sidewalk, alley or public way, the franchisee shall, upon reasonable notice from the City or the Road Commission, remove and relocate its facility in a manner acceptable to the City and at the franchisee's expense. The franchisee shall also promptly move, raise, and relocate any facility at the request of any private party, when required by the private road, but at the cost of that person. 
(Ord. 753. Passed 6-4-07.) 
1045.04 - Standards and conditions of service; rules, regulations and rates. 
    The Company is now under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Public Service Commission to the extent provided by statute; and the rates to be charged for gas and the standards and conditions of service and operation hereunder shall be the same as set forth in the Company's schedule of rules, regulations and rates as applicable in the several cities, villages and townships in which the Company is now rendering gas service, or as shall hereafter be validly prescribed for the City under the orders, rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises. 
1045.05 - Successors and assigns. 
    The words "Michigan Consolidated Gas Company" and "the Company," wherever used herein, are intended and shall be held and construed to mean and include both Michigan Consolidated Gas Company and its successors and assigns, regardless if so expressed. 
(Ord. 753. Passed 6-4-07.) 
1045.06 - Effective date; term of franchise; acceptance by company. 
    This franchise shall continue in effect for a period of 15 years after its effective date, subject to revocation at the will of the City at any time during said 15-year period; provided, however, that when this franchise shall become effective, the City Clerk shall deliver to the Company a certified copy of the ordinance accompanied by written evidence of publication and recording as required by law, and the Company shall, 60 days after the date this franchise takes effect, file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of the conditions and provisions hereof, or the franchise shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 753. Passed 6-4-07.) 
1045.07 - Effect and interpretation of chapter. 
    All ordinances and resolutions, and parts thereof, which conflict with any of the terms of this chapter, are hereby rescinded. In the case of conflict between this chapter and any such ordinances or resolutions, this chapter shall control. The Company shall reimburse the City all costs associated with the preparation and issuance of this franchise. 
Chapter 1046 - Electricity[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Constitution reference- Electricity generally, Mich. Const. Art. 7,  24, 25 
State Law reference- Electrical Code in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3, 117.4b et seq., 117.4f 
Cross reference- Aerial wires,  1020.06, 1610.13; Electrical Inspector,  1444.03; Electrical equipment in floodways,  1458.08; Electric signs,  1476.19(d); Electricity for mobile homes,  1480.01; Electricity in rental dwellings, 1482.13 

1046.01 - Delinquent bills. 
(a)  Lien. Charges for services provided by the Light and Power Department pursuant to Section 21 of Act 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended (M.C.L.A. 141.121) are a lien on all premises served thereby, unless written notice is given by the owner that a tenant is responsible pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Placement on tax roll. Whenever any such charge against any piece of property exceeds $200.00 and is delinquent for six months, the City Treasurer or other official in charge of the collection thereof may certify, on or before May 1 of each year to the City Assessor, and on or before September 1 of each year to the proper tax assessing officer outside of the City, the fact of such delinquency. Upon such certification, such delinquent charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises, and a lien thereof shall be enforced in the same manner as general taxes against such premises are collected. 
(c)  Tenancy. Where written notice is given by the owner that a tenant is responsible for such charges as provided by Section 21 of Act 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended, no further service shall be rendered to such premises until a cash deposit of an amount, not exceeding two months service, has been made as security for payment of such charges. 
(Ord. 225. Passed 5-18-87.) 
(d)  Collection. The Utility may utilize third party collection efforts in collecting any outstanding receivable before it is certified to the City Assessor. 
(Ord. 983. Passed 10-21-13) 
1046.02 - Telecommunication services. 
    The Light and Power Department of the City is hereby authorized to engage in telecommunications services. All powers and duties possessed by the Light and Power Department and the Light and Power Board pursuant to Chapter XVIII of the City Charter are hereby made applicable to telecommunication services. As used in this section, "telecommunication services" means approved cable television systems, approved cable communication systems or telephone systems, including plants, works, instrumentalities and properties used or useful in connection with such systems and further means wired and wireless broadband services, and services whether wired or wireless for the transmission of two-way interactive communication and associated usage. 
(Ord. 261. Passed 10-3-88. Ord. 865. Passed 04-19-10.) 
1046.03 - Meter tampering. 
(a)  TCL&P Meters. All electric meters receiving service from the Traverse City Light and Power Department are property of that electric utility. 
(b)  Tampering. Unless authorized by the electric utility owning the meter, a person shall not work on, interfere with, damage or remove an electric meter or allow or assist another person to do so. 
(c)  Bypassing meter. A person shall not place in use any device which allows electricity to be used and not measured by an electric utility's meter. 
(d)  Responsibility. An adult person occupying or having control over the property at which the meter is located or receiving a benefit from the electricity consumed is presumed responsible for any discovered tampering or bypassing of that meter. 
(e)  Sanctions. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, the sanctions for such violation, and the retail price of electricity that has not been metered. The electric utility's estimate of the unmetered electricity consumed shall be presumed correct unless proven otherwise. 
(Ord. 983. Passed 10-21-13) 
1046.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1047 - Uniform Septage Control Ordinance 

1047.01 - Purpose. 
    This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people; to regulate the use of septic and holding tanks, to prohibit the discharge of septage on the ground surface and to require the treatment of City septage at the Grand Traverse County Septage Treatment Facility; to prevent pollution, guard against injury to persons and property and enhance efficient economical operation of the septage treatment system and the Grand Traverse County Septage Treatment Facility; to provide for the administration of this chapter; and to establish remedies. 
    This chapter and the companion ordinances adopted by the City and the townships set forth uniform requirements for all septage to enable compliance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to septage discharge and treatment. 
(Ord. 883. Passed 10-18-10.) 
1047.02 - Title. 
    This chapter may be known and cited as the Uniform Septage Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. 883. Passed 10-18-10.) 
1047.03 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
(a)  Biosolids means the solid or semi-solid portion of septage and holding tank waste following treatment at the Septage Treatment Facility. 
(b)  Holding tank waste means any human excrement or other domestic or food service or restaurant waste or other material stored in one or more tanks permitted as a holding tank by the county health department in the county in which the tank is located which is not connected to a drain field or leaching field. 
(c)  Person includes natural persons, firms, associations, corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, trusts, and all other entities. 
(d)  Septage means human excrement, other domestic or restaurant waste or othermaterial or substance removed from a portable toilet, septic tank, seepage pit, cesspool, septage lift station, or other enclosure used for the storage or decomposition of septage waste. Septage includes waste removed from grease traps which are a part of a food service or restaurant facility. Septage excludes waste removed from holding tanks. Septage excludes industrial waste, medical waste, or hazardous waste regulated under the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act CL 324.8501 et seq. 
(e)  Septage hauler means a person required to be licensed as a Septage Waste Servicer under MCL 324.11701 et seq. or under successor legislation. 
(f)  Septage treatment facility means the facility located at 1717 Ahlberg Drive Traverse City, Michigan 49686, those portions of the sanitary sewer system used to transport the effluent from the facility to the Traverse City Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant, and the Traverse City Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant. 
(g)  Prohibited substance means any: 
(1)  Substance which, alone or by interaction with other substances, will create the risk of fire or explosion hazard in the septic tank, or holding tank, collection pumper or at the septage treatment facility, or any gasoline or other petroleum product, kerosene, naptha, benzene, toulene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides or sulfides; 
(2)  Substance having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment and personnel of the septic tank, or holding tank, collection pumper, or septage treatment facility including, but not limited to, concentrated acids, alkalies, chlorides, sulfides, fluoride compounds and any iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(3)  Any solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the septic tank or holding tank, collection pumper or treatment facility or cause other interference with the proper operation of the septic tank or holding tank, collection pumper or septage treatment facility; 
(4)  Any garbage except domestic wastewater discharged from garbage disposal units in private dwellings, that has been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles float or carry freely in suspension; 
(5)  Waste which contains particles of a size greater than one-half inch in any dimension; other wastes including, but not limited to, bones, hair, hides, or flesh, whole blood, recognizable portions of the human anatomy, tissue fluids, entrails, ashes, cinders, mud, straw, sand, wood, grass clippings, spent lime, stone or marble dust, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, asphalt residues, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, styrofoam, disposable diapers, and residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil; 
(6)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the septic tank, collection pumper, or septage treatment facility in a quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or interference with the collection system and treatment plant or that exceed standards promulgated by either the EPA pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act, or the state pursuant to any applicable statutory provisions; 
(7)  Waters or wastes containing suspended solids or dissolved matter of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials in the collection system and septage treatment facility; 
(8)  Water or wastes containing algicides, fungicides, herbicides, antibiotics or other pharmaceuticals, insecticides, strong oxidizing agents or strong reducing agents; 
(9)  Wastes requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound used for disinfection purposes or excessive treatment in order to meet the discharge requirements of the collection system and treatment plant; 
(10)  Water or waste containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or which causes the treatment plant effluent to fail to meet the applicable discharge requirements and limitations; 
(11)  Substance which may cause sludge to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or which may interfere with the reclamation process of the septage treatment facility or which may preclude the treatment plant from selecting the most cost-effective alternative for sludge disposal or which may cause the treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria established by state or federal regulation; 
(12)  Detectable concentrations of arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, cyanide, lead, nickel, phosphorus, silver, zinc, sulfides or sulphates, (except as the same may be present in trace amounts in domestic or household products) oil, grease, mercury or polychlorinated biphenols (PCBs), ethylene glycol-based antifreeze. Any liquid industrial waste, medical waste, or hazardous waste regulated under the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act 35 MCLA 324.8501 et seq; 
(Ord. 883. Passed 10-18-10.) 
1047.04 - No land discharge. 
    Upon the effective date, as described below, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to discharge untreated septage or holding tank waste upon any lands within the City. Biosolids produced by the Septage Treatment Facility are treated, and are not subject to the limitations of this paragraph. 
(Ord. 883. Passed 10-18-10.) 
1047.05 - Facility. 
    The City hereby designates the Septage Treatment Facility for deposit and treatment of all septage and holding tank waste collected within the City. All septage haulers collecting septage or holding tank waste within the City shall transport that waste to the Septage Treatment Facility and pay the treatment charges therefore in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Septage Treatment Facility. 
(Ord. 883. Passed 10-18-10.) 
1047.06 - Discharge of a prohibited substance. 
    No person shall discharge directly or indirectly into any septic or holding tank within the City any prohibited substance or material other than domestic strength wastewater; domestic strength wastewater includes household products in customary concentrations. 
(Ord. 883. Passed 10-18-10.) 
1047.07 - Transportation of prohibited substance. 
    No person shall transport or cause another to transport septage or holding tank waste containing a prohibited substance as defined herein to the Septage Treatment Facility unless the character of the waste is fully disclosed to the hauler and the Septage Treatment Facility before pumping, transportation, or receipt, as the case may be; any person causing another to transport or treat any septage or holding tank was containing a prohibited substance shall be responsible for all of the costs incurred in connection with such transportation, testing, storing, and treatment of such waste. 
(Ord. 883. Passed 10-18-10.) 
1047.08 - Liability for costs. 
(a)  The owner of premises upon which is located any septic or holding tank containing a prohibited substance as defined herein or material other than domestic strength wastewater shall be responsible for all of the costs incurred by the City, any person, any hauler or treatment facility in transporting, testing, storing, and treating any such waste. 
(b)  The charges for services which are under the provisions of Act 178 Public Acts of Michigan 13 1939 as amended are made a lien on all premises from which said sewage or holding tank waste originated unless notice is given that a tenant is responsible, and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six months the City official or officials in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually on September 1 of each year to the tax assessing office of the City the facts of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced, in the same manner as general taxes against such premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced: provided. however, where notice is given that a tenant is responsible for such charges and services by delivering to the Grand Traverse County Department of Public Works an affidavit deposing that a lease has been executed containing a provision that the lessor is not responsible for the payment of any charges for septage or holding tank services rendered to the premises no such lien shall attach during the term of the lease. 
(c)  The City and the Department of Public Works shall have the right to refuse service to any premises in the event of any unpaid charges with respect to such premises under this section. 
(Ord. 883. Passed 10-18-10.) 
1047.09 - Severability. 
    Whenever possible, each provision of this chapter should be interpreted in such a way as to be effective and valid under applicable law. If a provision is prohibited by or invalid under applicable law, it will be ineffective only to the extent of such prohibitions or invalidity, without invalidating the remainder of such provision or the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 883. Passed 10-18-10.) 
1047.10 - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Civil infraction. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  For a first offense, the offender shall pay a fine of $100.00. 
(2)  For a second or subsequent offense within ten years from the date the person was found responsible for the first violation, the offender shall pay a fine of $500.00. 
Each day this chapter is violated shall be considered a separate violation. 
(b)  City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized official to issue municipal civil infraction citations. 
(c)  Nuisance per se. A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and is declared to be offensive to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Civil action. In addition to enforcing this chapter through the use of a municipal civil infraction preceding the City may initiate proceedings in the Circuit Court to abate or eliminate the nuisance per se or any other violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 883. Passed 10-18-10.) 
Chapter 1048 - Cable Television[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference- Franchises, Ch. XI 
State Law reference- Notice of public meetings, MCLA  15.264; Construction and maintenance of facilities,  247.183 et seq.; Cables improperly located; insurance, MCLA  500.3123 
Cross reference- Telecommunication services,  1046.02, 1050 

1048.01 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Cable Television Ordinance." 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05.) 
1048.02 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is directory and discretionary and not mandatory. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
(1)  Act means the Michigan Uniform Video Services Franchise Act, MCL 484.3301 et seq. 
(2)  Applicable law means any law, statute, charter, ordinance, rule, regulation, code, license, certificate, franchise, permit, writ, ruling, award, executive order, directive, requirement, injunction (whether temporary, preliminary or permanent), judgment, decree or other order issued, executed, entered or deemed applicable by any governmental authority. 
(3)  Basic cable service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. Basic cable service as defined herein shall be consistent with 47 U.S.C.  543(b)(7), as it may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  Cable service or service means (1) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming or (ii) other programming service, and (2) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. Cable service as defined herein shall be consistent with the definition set forth in 47 U.S.C.  522(6), as it may be amended from time to time. 
(5)  Cable system or system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
a.  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
b.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
c.  A facility of common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C.  201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C.  541(c) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on demand services; 
d.  An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C.  653; or 
e.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
(6)  Channel or cable channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel. 
(7)  City means City of Traverse City, a municipal corporation, in the State of Michigan, acting by and through its City Commission, or its lawfully appointed designee. 
(8)  City commission means the governing body of the City of Traverse City, Michigan. 
(9)  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
(10)  Franchise fee includes any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by the City or other governmental entity on grantee or subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. It does not include any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is discriminatory against grantees or cable subscribers); capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code. 
(11)  Grantee means a person who, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and section 13 of the Act, executes a voluntary franchise agreement with the City for the nonexclusive privilege to erect, construct, operate, maintain, or dismantle a cable system in the City. 
(12)  Gross revenue shall be defined consistent with section 6 of the Act. 
(13)  Installation means the connection of the cable system from feeder cable to the point of connection including standard installations and custom installations with the subscriber converter or other terminal equipment. 
(14)  Internet means the international computer network of both federal and non-federal interoperable packet switched data networks, known as the Internet. Consistent with 47 U.S.C.  230(e)(1), as may from time to time be amended. 
(15)  Local franchise means a voluntary franchise agreement consistent with the terms of section 13 of the Act. 
(16)  Member municipalities means those municipalities that are parties to a then valid and existing intergovernmental agreement for coordinated regulation of cable television which include Acme Township, Bingham Township, Blair Township, East Bay Township, Elmwood Township, Garfield Township, Green Lake Township, Village of Kingsley, Long Lake Township, Paradise Township, Peninsula Township, and Traverse City, Michigan. 
(17)  Other programming service means information that a grantee makes available to all subscribers generally. 
(18)  PEG means public, educational and governmental. 
(19)  Right-of-way or rights-of-way means the area on, below or above any real property in City in which the City has an interest including, but not limited to any street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park, skyway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the control of City, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements. 
(20)  Service area or franchise area means the geographic boundaries of the City and shall include any additions and/or deletions thereto by annexation or other legal means. 
(21)  Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
(22)  Standard installation means any residential or commercial installation which can be completed using a drop of 125 feet or less. 
(23)  Subscriber means any person who lawfully receives cable service via the system. 
(24)  Uniform franchise means a uniform video service local franchise agreement prepared by the Michigan Public Service Commission as contemplated by the Act. 
(25)  Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.03 - Nonexclusive local franchises. 
    The City, may grant a nonexclusive local franchise for the occupation and use of streets, roads, and rights-of-way in the City for the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system to the extent permitted by the Act. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.04 - Local franchise binding. 
    All provisions of this chapter and any local franchise shall be binding upon the grantee, its successors, lessees of the system, or assignees. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any local franchise, the terms of the local franchise shall govern. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.05 - Local franchise required. 
    No cable system shall occupy or use the streets, roads, alleys, or rights-of-way of the City and no cable operator shall operate a cable system in the City without an executed local franchise granted pursuant to this chapter or a uniform franchise granted pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.06 - Local franchise duration. 
    A local franchise granted by the City may be granted for a maximum of ten years. A local franchise may be renewed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and applicable laws. 
(Ord.675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.07 - Franchise fee. 
    During the term of a local franchise, grantee shall pay quarterly to the City or its delegates a franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent of its quarterly gross revenues. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.08 - Local franchise transfer. 
(a)  To the extent permitted under the Act, no sale or transfer of a local franchise, or sale, transfer, or fundamental corporate change of or in grantee shall take place without the prior written consent of City which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, or by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the grantee in the local franchise or cable system to secure indebtedness. Grantee shall not be required to obtain approval from the City if such sale, transfer or assignment is to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the grantee. However, grantee shall provide written notice to City explaining such internal reorganization. 
(c)  The grantee shall file, in addition to all documents, forms and information required to be filed by applicable laws, either FCC Form 394 or all contracts, agreements or other documents that constitute the proposed transaction and all exhibits, attachments, or other documents referred to therein which are necessary in order to understand the terms thereof. City shall have such time as is permitted by applicable law to review a transfer request. 
(d)  In no event shall a sale, transfer, corporate change, or assignment of ownership or control pursuant to this section be approved without any new grantee becoming a signatory to the local franchise and assuming all rights and obligations thereunder, and assuming all other rights and obligations of the transferor to the City including, but not limited to, any adequate guarantees or other security instruments required by the City. 
(e)  The approval of any sale, transfer or assignment pursuant to this section shall not be deemed to waive any rights of City to subsequently enforce noncompliance issues relating to the local franchise even if such issues predate the approval, whether known or unknown to City. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.09 - Authorization for use of right-of-ways. 
    A local franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall confer upon the holder named therein the nonexclusive right to erect, install, construct, reconstruct, replace, remove, repair, maintain and operate in, upon, under, above, across and from the streets, easements and right-of-ways, all necessary towers, poles, wires, cables, coaxial cables, transformers, amplifiers, underground conduits, manholes and other television or radio conductors and fixtures for the installation, construction, maintenance and operation of a cable system or for the furnishing of a cable service. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.10 - Construction; permit required. 
    A grantee shall at all times comply with the permitting requirements of the City before undertaking any work in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.11 - Underground facilities. 
    In areas or portions of the City where all transmission or distribution facilities of both public utilities providing telephone service and electric service are underground, or are required to be underground, any grantee shall likewise install, construct, maintain and operate its transmission and distribution facilities in like manner underground. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.12 - Construction standards; safety. 
    All construction, installation, maintenance and operation of any cable system or of any facilities employed in connection therewith shall be in compliance with the National Electric Safety Code as well as all other applicable standards issued by the FCC, or other local, state or federal regulatory agencies in relation thereto. Each system installed, constructed, maintained or operated shall be so designed, constructed, installed, maintained and operated as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.13 - Street openings; barricades and warning lights. 
    Any opening or obstruction in, disturbance of or damage to a road, street, alley, public right-of-way or public place by any person in the exercise of any right granted pursuant to a local franchise shall be properly guarded by barriers, lights, signals and warnings so as to prevent danger to any person or vehicle using such road, street, alley, public right-of-way or public place and shall be promptly repaired, at the grantee's expense, all in a manner specified and approved by the government having jurisdiction. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.14 - Relocation of facilities. 
    A grantee or a person acting under a grantee shall, at its expense, and without reimbursement from the City, upon request of the City relocate, remove, temporarily disconnect, protect or support facilities in the roads, streets, alleys, easements, public right-of-ways or public places. A grantee shall also, at the request of a private party holding an appropriate permit issued by a governmental entity, temporarily raise or lower its transmission or distribution wires or cables to permit the moving of any building or other structure, provided that the actual expense of such temporary raising or lowering shall be paid in full by the party requesting the same. Such requests shall be made not less than 30 days in advance of the activity requested, unless an emergency situation exists. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.15 - Costs for work by governmental entity. 
    If, after reasonable notice and opportunity to correct, a grantee or any person acting under a grantee fails to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or this chapter to be done in any road, street, alley, public right-of-way, easement or public place, the appropriate governmental entity may cause such work to be done, and such grantee shall pay to the governmental entity the cost thereof within 30 days of receipt of an itemized statement of such cost. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.16 - Regulation of service rates. 
    Subject to any prohibition contained in the Act, the City reserves the right to regulate rates for the provision of cable service, equipment, or any other communications service provided over the system in accordance with applicable federal law, in particular 47 C.F.R. Part 76 subpart N. In the event the City chooses to regulate rates it shall, in accordance with 47 C.F.R.  76.910, obtain certification from the FCC, if applicable. The City shall follow all applicable FCC rate regulations and shall ensure that appropriate personnel are in place to administer such regulations. City reserves the right to regulate rates for any future services to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.17 - Customer service standards. 
    A grantee shall comply with the customer service obligations required under the Act and, to the maximum extent permissible, those set forth by the FCC. The grantee shall comply with the standards and requirements for customer service set forth in 47 C.F.R.  76.309 and  76.1601-1604, and shall comply with all applicable regulations relating to customer service obligations, including any amendments to FCC regulations should FCC regulations change during the term of a local franchise. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.18 - Subscriber contracts. 
    A grantee shall file with City any standard form residential subscriber contract utilized by grantee. A list of grantee's current subscriber rates and charges for cable service shall be maintained on file with City and shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.19 - Refund policy. 
(a)  If a grantee's cable service is interrupted or discontinued for 24 or more consecutive hours, subscribers will be credited pro rata for such interruption, upon request. Credits must be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For this purpose, every month will be assumed to have 30 days. 
(b)  In the event a subscriber establishes or terminates service and receives less than one full month of service, grantee shall prorate the monthly rate on the basis of the number of days in the period for which service was rendered to the number of days in the billing. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
1048.20 - Local franchise enforcement. 
(a)  If the City believes that the grantee has not complied with the terms of the local franchise, the City shall first informally discuss the matter with grantee. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem, the City shall notify the grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance (the "Violation Notice"). 
(1)  The grantee shall have 30 days, or such longer period of time as grantee can reasonably demonstrate is necessary, from receipt of the violation notice to (i) respond to the City, contesting the assertion of noncompliance, or (ii) to cure such default. 
(2)  If the grantee fails to respond to the violation notice received from the City, or if the default is not remedied within the cure period set forth above, the City shall schedule a public hearing if it intends to continue its enforcement procedure. The City shall provide the grantee at least ten to 14 days prior written notice of such hearing, which specifies the time, place and purpose of such hearing, notice of which shall be published by the City in accordance with applicable law. The grantee shall have the right to present evidence and to challenge the validity of the alleged noncompliance. The City shall determine if the grantee has committed a violation and shall make written findings of fact relative to its determination. 
(3)  In the event the City, after the hearing set forth in subparagraph (ii) above, determines that the grantee is in default of any provision of the local franchise, the City may: 
a.  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages or determine damages of up to $500.00 per day for each day of violation. Such damages may be determined by City on grantee or drawn by City from any bond or other security posted by grantee under any local franchise granted hereunder; or 
b.  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the local franchise, seek to revoke the local franchise following the procedure in paragraph (b) below. 
(4)  If a violation is found, the grantee shall have the right to appeal such decision to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Procedures for revocation. 
(1)  City shall provide grantee with written notice of a cause for revocation and the intent to revoke and shall allow grantee an additional 30 days subsequent to receipt of the revocation notice in which to correct the violation or to provide adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the local franchise. In the revocation notice City shall provide grantee with the basis of the revocation. 
(2)  Grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing, in addition to the public hearing required under Section 1048.25(a)(2) above, affording due process before the City Commission prior to the effective date of revocation, which public hearing shall follow the 30 day notice provided in subparagraph (a)(1) above. Following conduct of the public hearing City shall provide grantee with written notice of its decision together with written findings of fact. 
(3)  Only after the public hearing and upon written notice of the determination by City to revoke the local franchise may grantee appeal said decision with an appropriate state or federal court or agency. 
(4)  During the appeal period, the local franchise shall remain in full force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires or unless continuation of the local franchise would endanger the health, safety and welfare of any person or the public. 
(Ord. 675. Passed 04-18-05. Ord. 796. Passed 06-02-08.) 
Chapter 1050 - Telecommunications[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, MCL  484.3101, et seq. 
Charter reference- Utilities generally, Ch. XI; Municipally owned utilities, Ch. XII 

1050.01 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the City qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.02 - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.03 - Definitions. 
(a)  The terms used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
(2)  City means the City of Traverse City. 
(3)  City commission means the City Commission of the City of Traverse City or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the City Commission. 
(4)  City manager means the City Manager or his or her designee. 
(5)  MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act. 
(6)  Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the City for its telecommunications facilities. 
(7)  Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
(8)  Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
(9)  Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
(10)  Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan telecommunications act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
a.  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
c.  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(b)  All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.04 - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the City for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this ordinance. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the City Clerk. Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall distribute a copy to the City Manager, the City Engineer, the Executive Director of Traverse City Light & Power, the Streets Department, and the City Fire Department. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The City Manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the City Manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the City Manager. If the City and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the City, the City or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the City under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the City to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the City as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the City an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02; Ord. 1046 . Passed 2-21-17) 
1050.05 - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the City Manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under Section 1050.04(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the City. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the City Manager shall notify the MPSC when the City Manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The City Manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the City Manager may impose the following conditions on the issuance of a permit: 
(1)  Construction standards; safety. All construction, installation, maintenance, and operation of any telecommunication service or of any facilities employed in connection therewith shall be in compliance with applicable provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, as prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, the Bell Telephone Systems Code of Pole Line Construction, any standards issued by the Federal Communications Commission or other federal or state regulatory agencies in relation thereto. Each system installed, constructed, maintained, or operated shall be so designed, constructed, installed, maintained, and operated as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property. 
(2)  Street openings; barricades, and warning lights. Any opening or obstruction in, disturbance of, or damage to a road, street, alley, public right-of-way or public place by any person in the exercise of any right granted pursuant to a permit shall be properly guarded by barriers, lights, signals, and warnings so as to prevent danger to any person or vehicle using such road, street, alley, public right-of-way or public place and shall be promptly repaired, at the permit holder's expense, all in a manner specified and approved by the City. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(3)  Relocation of facilities. A telecommunication provider or a person acting under a telecommunication provider shall, at its expense, and without reimbursement from the City, upon request of the City relocate, remove, temporarily disconnect, protect, or support facilities in the roads, streets, alleys, easements, public rights-of-way or public places. A telecommunication provider shall also, at the request of a private party holding an appropriate permit issued by a governmental entity, temporarily raise or lower its transmission or distribution wires or cables to permit the moving of any building or other structure, provided that the actual expense of such temporary raising or lowering shall be paid in full by the party requesting the same. Such requests shall be made not less than 30 days in advance of the activity requested, unless an emergency situation exists. 
(4)  Damage to right-of-way. The telecommunication provider's access and usage shall not cause damage to the street or trees, benches, landscaping, or other objects lawfully located within the right-of-way. 
(5)  Right-of-way permit. The City Engineering Department's terms and conditions for a right-of-way permit as appropriate. 
Additionally, a telecommunication provider is subject to the applicable terms and conditions contained in Chapter XI of the City's Charter and any other conditions the City Manager may impose relating to the telecommunication provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the City Manager shall require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. It shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.06 - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the City without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.07 - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.08 - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the City, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the City. The route maps should be in paper and in GIS format unless and until either the City or the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.09 - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the City, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.10 - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the City set forth in subsection 1050.04(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the City's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.11 - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the City hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the City also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the City's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The City shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the City's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the City, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.12 - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under Section 11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.13 - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the City from the Authority shall be used by the City solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the City from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street Fund maintained by the City under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.14 - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an annual report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the Authority. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.15 - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the City shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. This chapter does not affect the requirements of cable operators to obtain a franchise as required by Traverse City Code of Ordinances Chapter 1048. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.16 - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this ordinance shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the City may have under a permit issued by the City or under a contract between the City and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.17 - Compliance. 
    The City hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The City shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in Section 1050.04(c) of this chapter; 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with Section 1050.04(f) of this chapter; 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with Section 1050.04(g) of this chapter; 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the City, in accordance with Section 1050.05(a) of this chapter; 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the City has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with Section 1050.05(a) of this chapter; 
(6)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with Section 1050.05(a) of this chapter; 
(7)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in Section 1050.05(b) of this chapter; 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with Section 5(c) of this chapter; 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with Section 1050.05(d) of this chapter; 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with Section 1050.06 of this chapter; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the City's right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with Section 1050.11 of this chapter; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with Section 1050.14 of this chapter; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with Section 1050.15 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.18 - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the City's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the City's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.19 - Costs for work by governmental entity. 
    If, after reasonable notice and opportunity to correct, a telecommunications service provider or any person acting under a telecommunications service provider fails to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or this ordinance to be done in any road, street, alley, public right-of-way, easement, or public place, the appropriate governmental entity may cause such work to be done, and such telecommunications service provider shall pay to the governmental entity the cost thereof within 30 days of receipt of an itemized statement of such cost. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.20 - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.21 - Authorized by city officials. 
    The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized City official to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices on a form approved by the City Attorney for violations under this chapter as provided by the City's ordinances. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.22 - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the City in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
1050.23 - Repealer. 
    All ordinances and portions of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. 584. Passed 10-20-02.) 
TITLE SIX - OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapter 1060 - Solid Waste[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- The previous Chapter 1060 was repealed on January 18, 2011. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate disposal of garbage and rubbish, MCL 123.361 et seq., 324.4301 et seq., MSA 5.2726(1) et seq., 13A.4301 et seq.; Hazardous waste management, MCL 324.11101 et seq., MSA 13A.11101 et seq.; Solid waste management, MCL 324.11501 et seq., MSA 13A.11501 et seq.; Waste management and resource recovery finance, MCL 324.11901 et seq., MSA 13A.11901 et seq.; Recycling and related subjects, MCL 324.16101 et seq., MSA 13A.16101 et seq.; Disposal of medical waste, MCL 333.13801 et seq., MSA 14.15(13801) et seq.; Low-Level Radioactive Waste Authority Act, MCL 333.26201 et seq., MSA 14.528(362) et seq. 

1060.01 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Act 451 means Public Act. No. 451 of 1994, MCL 324.101 et seq. 
(2)  Bulk item means large solid waste items, including furniture, appliances, washers, dryers, heaters, carpet, wood, metal, construction and demolition debris not in excess of one cubic yard, and other items with a weight and volume greater than allowed for container collection. 
(3)  Commingled means recyclable materials that have been mixed at the site of generation and placed in the same container for curbside pickup. 
(4)  Compost means the humuslike product of the composting process. 
(5)  Compostables means yard clippings and residential compostables. 
(6)  Container means a vermin proof, watertight, wooden, metallic, plastic or masonry receptacle for the storage and placement of solid waste. 
(7)  Curbside means a location near the traveled portion of the roadway or alley used for the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials or yard clippings. 
(8)  Designated facility means a facility that the County of Grand Traverse has identified as an approved location for the disposal of solid waste or the collection process and marketing of yard waste or recyclable material as defined by Ordinance No. 17. 
(9)  Designated waste hauler means any person awarded a contract by the City to engage in the business of collecting of solid waste, recyclable materials, yard clippings, and bulk items from residential generation sites within the City and hauling, transporting or disposing of such materials. 
(10)  Garbage means rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables. 
(11)  Generator of waste means any person who has acquired or stored any waste at a site of generation. 
(12)  Hazardous waste means waste or a combination of waste and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, that because of its quantity, quality, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible illness or serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. Hazardous waste does not include material that is solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage discharge, solid or dissolved material in an irrigation return flow discharge, industrial discharge that is a point source subject to permits under section 402 of title IV of the Federal Waste Pollution Control Act, chapter 758, 86 Stat. 880, 33 USC 1342, or is a source, special nuclear or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, chapter 1073, 68 Stat. 919. 
(13)  Licensed waste hauler means a waste hauler who has been issued a hauler license by the County of Grand Traverse. 
(14)  Litter means all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description. 
(15)  Newspaper means all newsprint and materials which are part of a newspaper except the glossy inserts placed in the newspaper. 
(16)  Ordinance No. 17 means the County of Grand Traverse, Ordinance No. 17 regulating the collection, transportation, delivery and disposal of solid waste, yard waste, and recyclable materials as may be amended from time to time and its rules and regulations. 
(17)  Premises means any area of land used for residential, commercial, industrial or governmental purposes, separately or in combination, to which a separate street address, postal address or box number, tax roll description, or other similar identification has been assigned or is in use by a person having control of such area. 
(18)  Recyclable materials means source-separated materials, site-separated materials, high-grade paper, glass, metal, plastic, aluminum, newspaper, corrugated paper, yard clippings and other material deemed to be recyclable materials by the County of Grand Traverse, Ordinance No. 17 or resolution of the City Commission unless the licensed hauler is capable of sorting recyclable materials at a designated facility. 
(19)  Residential compostables means fruit and vegetable material which is produced incidental to the preparation of food for human consumption in residential structures. 
(20)  Residential generation site means all single-family residential structures and multi-family residential structures with four or less residential units per parcel located within the City of Traverse City. 
(21)  Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials, or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
(22)  Site of generation means any premises in or on which litter is generated by any person. 
(23)  Site-separated material means glass, metal, wood, paper products, plastics, rubber, textiles, garbage, yard clippings or other material that may be recycled that is separated from solid waste for the purpose of conversion into raw material or new products. Site-separated material does not include the residue remaining after glass, metal, wood, paper products, plastics, rubber, textiles or other recyclable materials is separated from solid waste. 
(24)  Site separation means the act of removing site-separated material from rubbish. 
(25)  Solid waste means solid waste as the term is defined in Act 451. 
(26)  Specialty waste hauler means a licensed waste hauler that accepts specialty recyclable or other waste materials in a truck weighing one ton or less. 
(27)  Waste solid waste, litter, garbage, recyclable materials, yard clippings, hazardous waste, and all other waste regulated by Act 451. 
(28)  Waste hauler means any person engaged in the business of collecting waste within the City and hauling, transporting or disposing of such materials. 
(29)  Yard clippings means leaves, grass clippings, vegetables or other garden debris, shrubbery, brush or tree trimmings less than four feet in length and two inches in diameter, that can be converted to compost humus. This term does not include stumps, agricultural wastes, animal waste, roots, sewage, sludge or garbage. 
    Terms, words and phrases not otherwise specifically defined in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Act 451. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
1060.02 - Prohibited storage or disposal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store or dispose of waste except as expressly authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
1060.03 - Prohibited collection. 
    All waste shall become the property of the licensed waste hauler at the time the material is collected at curbside or other designated collection location. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed waste hauler or the generator of the waste to collect or cause to be collected any waste after it has been placed at curbside or other designated collection location. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
1060.04 - Prohibited placement of waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed waste for disposal upon the premises of another person or with the waste of another person placed at curbside without the permission of the owner of the premises. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
1060.05 - Storage regulations. 
    All waste at any site of generation shall be stored in the following manner: 
(1)  Solid waste. All solid waste shall be: 
a.  Gathered, stored and placed in a closed container or containers sufficient in number and size to store such waste; 
b.  Shielded from public view upon the site of generation; and 
c.  Not commingled with yard clippings. 
(2)  Recyclable materials. All recyclable materials not commingled with solid waste shall be: 
a.  Site-separated from other waste and stored and placed in a recycling collection container suitable for such purpose; or if newspapers or other recyclable paper products, be stored and placed in recycling collection containers, paper bags or tied into bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds; and 
b.  Rinsed and cleaned before storage if metal, glass or plastic. 
(3)  Residential compostables. All residential compostables not commingled with solid waste shall be collected, stored and disposed of pursuant to the following conditions: 
a.  Compost piles shall not be located within any drainage easement. 
b.  Compost piles shall not be located in any side yard or closer than five feet to any property line. 
c.  Compost piles shall not exceed four feet by eight feet or six feet in diameter and shall not exceed four feet in height. 
d.  Double compost piles may be utilized, provided the total size does not exceed the above. Compost piles shall be maintained in a manner to prevent the escape of offensive odors to adjacent property, the harboring of rodents, becoming a public nuisance. 
(4)  Yard clippings. All yard clippings shall be site-separated from other waste and: 
a.  Stored in a manner that will not harbor rodents or become a public nuisance; and 
b.  Not commingled with solid waste or other recyclable materials. 
(5)  Other. The storage of all other waste not expressly prescribed in this section shall be stored in accordance with Act 451 at any site of generation. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
1060.06 - Disposal regulations. 
    All waste at any site of generation shall be disposed of in the following manner: 
(1)  Solid waste. All solid waste shall be removed from the site of generation within 30 days or before it becomes a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare by a licensed waste hauler or transport of a generator of waste's own solid waste to a designated facility. 
(2)  Recyclable materials. All recyclable materials not commingled with solid waste shall be removed from the site of generation within 30 days or before such materials become a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare by a licensed waste hauler or transport by a generator of waste's own recyclable materials to a designated facility. 
(3)  Yard clippings. All yard clippings shall be site-separated from other waste and, unless composted at the site of generation in accordance with Section 1060.05(3) of this chapter or applied to the site of generation for use in mulching, enhancing soil, erosion control or compost or a combination of these, removed from the site of generation before such clippings become a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety or welfare by: 
a.  A licensed waste hauler; or 
b.  A person engaged in the business of providing landscaping services. 
(4)  Preparation of yard clippings for disposal. If collected by the licensed waste hauler, twigs, brush and branches shall be prepared as specified by the licensed waste hauler. All other yard clippings shall be placed in bulk carts or containers or kraft paper bags clearly marked as yard clippings. Bulk disposal of yard clippings pursuant to rules and regulations of the City for pick-up by the City shall be allowed. 
(5)  Other. The disposal of all other waste not expressly prescribed in this section shall be in accordance with Act 451. 
(6)  Curbside placement. 
a.  No waste or containers for same shall be placed or left at curbside for more than 48 hours; 
b.  It shall be presumed that the owner, lessee or occupant in physical possession of a site of generation abutting a curbside where waste is located is the person who placed such waste at the curbside; and 
c.  The presumption of placement may be rebutted by competent evidence. 
(6)  Collection refusal by waste hauler. A waste hauler may refuse to collect waste from any site of generation if such waste is not prepared for disposal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
1060.07 - Waste hauler license required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a waste hauler within the City without a valid license. 
(b)  A license issued to such person by the County in accordance with Ordinance No. 17 shall be a valid license for operation within the City unless revoked by the City under Section 1060.08. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
1060.08 - Revocation of waste hauler license. 
(a)  A license to operate in the City may be revoked by the City Manager upon any violation of a federal or state law, local ordinance or related rules and regulations in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Written notification shall be served on the waste hauler by depositing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the waste hauler at the address shown on the waster hauler's license as issued by the County. Such notice shall be deemed served upon the waste hauler upon deposit in the mail. 
(2)  The notice shall inform the waste hauler of the reasons for such revocation, the beginning date of the revocation, and the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  The revocation shall be effective ten days after written notice is served on the waste hauler. 
(b)  A revocation may be appealed to the City Commission in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The appeal shall be filed in writing within ten days of service of the notice of revocation. 
(2)  The appeal shall state what action is being appealed and shall have attached a copy of the notice of revocation and shall specifically set forth the reasons for believing the action was in error. 
(3)  Upon receipt of an appeal pursuant to this section, the City Clerk shall schedule such appeal for a hearing before the City Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting following the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Commission and inform the person who initiated the appeal of the time and place of such meeting and the opportunity to appear and be heard by the City Commission. 
(4)  The City Commission may set aside the action appealed from and reinstate a license as the facts may warrant based upon the provisions of this chapter, Ordinance No. 17, or other conditions as the City Commission may deem advisable. The decision of the City Commission shall be made within 10 days of the date of the public hearing, and the City Clerk shall notify the person who initiated the appeal of the City Commission's decision in writing at the address provided by the person in its appeal. A decision of the City Commission shall be final. 
(5)  An appeal shall automatically stay the revocation pending the final decision of the City Commission. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
1060.09 - Single hauler waste collection and disposal program. 
(a)  Residential generation sites. Commencing on the effective date of the contract between the City and the designated waste hauler, collection and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials, yard clippings, and bulk items from residential generation sites shall be in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Except as set forth in this section, no person shall dispose of any waste generated from a residential generation site within the City other than by means of the designated waste hauler contracted by the City for such purpose. 
(2)  The designated waste hauler shall deliver solid waste to a designated facility for disposal of such materials. 
(3)  Except as set forth in this section, no waste hauler except the designated waste hauler shall engage in the business of collection, transporting, delivery or disposal of waste generated by residential generation sites within the City. 
(4)  The designated waste hauler shall comply with Act 451, Ordinance No. 17, as applicable, and all applicable federal, state and county laws, local ordinances, and rules and regulations in the collection, transportation and delivery of waste. 
(5)  No person shall knowingly place hazardous waste at curbside or other designated locations for collection, and the designated waste hauler shall not knowingly collect or deliver hazardous waste to a processing or disposal site. 
(6)  Exceptions: 
a.  Yard clippings in accordance with Section 1060.06(3). 
b.  Compost in accordance with Section 1060.05(2). 
c.  A generator of waste's own waste transported by the generator of waste to a designated facility or waste not accepted by the designated waste hauler and accepted by a specialty waste hauler. 
d.  Bulk yard clipping collection by the City pursuant to rules and regulations of the City. 
e.  Solid waste collected from units in a condominium where the association for the condominium has entered into an agreement with a waste hauler for the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials, yard clippings, or bulk items for those units. 
f.  Solid waste, recyclable materials, yard clippings, or bulk items collected pursuant to a prepaid agreement with a waste hauler entered into prior to the effective date of this section until the expiration of the prepaid agreement or April 1, 2012, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  Rates, charges, and payments for solid waste and recycling collection and disposal services. The designated waste hauler shall charge fees for collection and disposal of waste and shall bill for such services in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The designated waste hauler shall charge fees for collection and disposal of waste placed for collection as set forth in the contract between the designated waste hauler and the city. 
(2)  The designated waste hauler shall send a quarterly invoice, in advance, to each residential generation site for which services are provided in the City. Such invoice shall represent charges for services to be rendered in the following quarter. 
(3)  Unless otherwise specified by the City, the invoice shall be delivered by regular mail at least three weeks prior to the beginning of the quarter for which charges are imposed. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
1060.10 - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction and is further declared to be a nuisance per se and subject to abatement as provided in this code and by state law. 
(b)  City costs. Upon failure of any person to store or dispose of garbage or refuse in the manner set forth in this chapter and when such improper storage or disposal creates or is likely to create nuisance by virtue of littering, odor, putrefaction, rodent or insect attraction, or broken or hazardous substances, the enforcing officer may take immediate steps to abate such nuisance. All costs thereof shall be recoverable shall be collected as a debt from the owner maintaining or permitting the violation and shall be assessed against the real estate involved pursuant to the single parcel special assessment procedure set forth in Section 232.04 of this Code. City costs shall include, but not be limited to, actual attorney fees and expense of removal and abatement. 
(c)  Penalties. Penalties for violations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential generation site. All violations of this chapter by owners or occupants of residential generation sites pertaining to waste collected or generated on the property of the residential generation site shall be municipal civil infractions and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00. 
(2)  Waste haulers. Penalties for violations by waste haulers shall be municipal civil infractions as follows: 
a.  All violations of this chapter by waste haulers shall be subject to sanctions as provided in Section 202.99(c). 
b.  Repeated violations of this article by a waste hauler shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a waste hauling unit license by the City. 
(d)  Each day separate offense. Every day that a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
1060.11 - Severability. 
    In the event any provision of this section is held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction or any other such legal authority, then the remaining subsections shall remain in such full force and effect as permitted by law. 
(Ord. 901. Passed 1-18-11.) 
Chapter 1062 - Harbor and Waterfront[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Constitution reference- Parks generally, Mich. Const. Art. 7,  23; Ch. 1064 
Charter reference- Authority of City re parks, Ch. XIII; Power to regulate watercourses,  150, 151 
State Law reference- Parks and recreation facilities in home rule cities, MCL  117.4e, 117.5; Sale of park property, MCL  117.5; Harbors, channels and other navigational facilities, MCL  324.79301, et seq.; Marine Safety Act, MCL  324.80101; Harbor Development Act, M.C.L.A.  324.79101 
Cross reference- Parks generally, Ch. 1064; Launching of watercraft in parks,  1064.15 

1062.01 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Anchor means to secure a watercraft to the bed of a body of water by dropping an anchor or anchors or by using a buoy or other ground tackle. 
    Anchor equipment means an anchor, anchor chain, line and associated gear. 
    Dock lines means the line described in Section 1062.07. 
    Harbor means such portions of the Boardman River that lie downstream from the south Union Street bridge and such portions of East Grand Traverse Bay or West Grand Traverse Bay that are included between the waterfront and is one mile distant therefrom. 
    Harbormaster means the Police Chief of the City of Traverse City. 
    Moor means to secure a vessel other than by anchoring. 
    Watercraft means a contrivance used or designed for navigation on water, including a vessel, boat, motor vessel, steam vessel, vessel operated by machinery either permanently or temporarily affixed, scow, jet ski, personal watercraft, tugboat, barge, raft, or any marine equipment that is capable of carrying passengers except a ferry. 
(Ord. 443. Passed 7-1-96. Ord. 866. Passed 6-7-10.) 
1062.02 - Application of federal law. 
    All laws, rules and regulations of the United States government pertaining to the harbor, Boardman Lake and Boardman River shall be the law of the City. 
(1976 Code Sec. 11.012. Ord. No. 517. Passed 11-6-00.) 
1062.03 - Police chief as harbormaster. 
(a)  The Police Chief shall be the Harbormaster. He or she shall enforce this chapter and shall establish and enforce such reasonable rules and regulations as may be desirable to promote order in the harbor, Boardman River and Boardman Lake and to ensure the safety and convenience of the users as well as the general public. 
(b)  The owner, master or person having charge of any watercraft shall observe all orders of the Harbormaster with reference to the navigation and disposal of his or her watercraft while in the harbor, Boardman River or Boardman Lake. 
(1976 Code Sec. 11.01. Ord. No. 517. Passed 11-6-00.) 
1062.04 - Watercraft regulation. 
(a)  Anchoring. No person shall anchor a watercraft in the harbor, Boardman River or Boardman Lake except in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States government, the State and the City in respect thereto. In case of necessity, the Harbormaster may direct the location and length of time any watercraft may anchor. 
(b)  Obstructing passage. No person shall anchor, moor or otherwise fasten a watercraft in the Harbor, Boardman River or Boardman Lake in such a manner as to obstruct the passage of any other watercraft. 
(c)  Mooring. No person shall moor any watercraft anywhere in the Harbor, Boardman River or Boardman Lake without the permission of the Harbormaster and the riparian owner or where prohibited and posted by the City Manager or Harbormaster. 
(d)  Anchoring lights. All vessels anchored between sunset and sunrise in the Harbor and not in a special anchorage area shall display a white light on the forward part of the vessel to be visible to any vessel to be visible to any vessel approaching from any direction. 
(e)  Speed. No person shall operate a watercraft on the Boardman River so as to exceed a slow no-wake speed. Watercraft moving with the current shall have the right-of-way. 
(f)  Noise. No person shall operate a watercraft in the harbor, Boardman River or Boardman Lake so as to cause annoyance, disturbance or inconvenience to the public. 
(g)  Mufflers. No person shall operate a watercraft operated by an internal combustion engine in the harbor, Boardman River or Boardman Lake without being equipped with a muffler or other similar device which eliminates all unnecessary noise. 
(h)  Unsafe craft and anchor equipment. No person shall leave any watercraft, boat cradle or anchor equipment in the harbor, on any dock, along the shore of Boardman Lake or along the bank of the Boardman River or upon any portion of public land within the City (i.e. MDOT seawall, Huron Hills Park "C", street ends, Bryant, West Bay and East Bay parks) in an unsafe or unseaworthy condition, or which sinks, grounds or becomes otherwise disabled, or in such position or location that will be an attractive nuisance to children or can be set adrift by children. 
(i)  Unattended watercraft. No person other than the riparian owner or their permittee shall leave unattended any watercraft or anchor equipment above the high water mark in the harbor, along the shore of Boardman Lake, or along the bank of the Boardman River or upon any portion of public land within the City. 
(j)  A person who violates this section responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(1976 Code Sec. 11.02; Ord. 442. Passed 7-1-96. Ord. 518. Passed 11-6-00. Ord. 866. Passed 6-7-10. Ord. 907. Passed 2-22-11) 
1062.05 - Forbidden cargo. 
    No cargo shall be deposited upon any dock adjoining the harbor, Boardman River or Boardman Lake, which cargo contains anything that is forbidden entrance to the state by state or federal law or which is in any way dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(1976 Code Sec. 11.03. Ord. 517. Passed 11-6-00.) 
1062.06 - Right of entry. 
    The police and health officials shall at all-time have the right to enter upon any watercraft entering all waters within the City's corporate limits to inspect the craft or any person thereon for law enforcement purposes. Fire personnel shall at all times have the right to enter upon any watercraft entering all waters within the City's corporate limits to inspect the craft or any person thereon for fire safety and/or illegal discharge issues. 
(1976 Code Sec. 11.04. Ord. 517. Passed 11-6-00. Ord. 979. Passed 8-19-13) 
1062.07 - Dock lines. 
    The following dock lines are hereby established along the banks of the Boardman River within the City of Traverse City: 
(1)  Westerly bank dock line. Along the left or westerly bank of the Boardman River beginning at a point which is 149.09' north of the north line of Front Street and 1278.19' east of the east line of Park Street, said point of beginning having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 530361.68' North and 19361311.71' East; thence running upstream therefrom 78.10' southwesterly along a curve right having a radius of 60.74', central angle of 73E40'37", and long chord bearing distance of S62E33'36"W 72.83'; thence N85E58'35"W a distance of 448.42'; thence S00E14'53"W a distance of 40.47'; thence S88E05'53"W a distance of 137.61' to a point on the east line of Boardman Avenue extended 96.32' north of the north line of Front Street; thence S86E50'49"W a distance of 99.18' to a point on the west line of Boardman Avenue extended 90.0' north of the north line of Front Street; thence N89E30'06"W a distance of 135.19'; thence N79E26'39"W a distance of 400.93' to a point on the east line of Park Street 160.00' north of the north line of Front Street; thence N88E15'54"W a distance of 65.97' to a point on the west line of Park Street 161.45' north of the north line of Front Street; thence N82E24'31"W a distance of 259.04'; thence N85E45'11"W a distance of 77.06'; thence N84E54'40"W a distance of 332.70' to a point on the east line of Cass Street 225.10' north of the north line of Front Street, said point having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 530455.15' North and 19359302.72' East; thence N89E38'50"W a distance of 65.97' to a point on the west line of Cass Street 224.99' north of the north line of Front Street; thence N82E21'52"W a distance of 136.71'; thence N77E51'03"W a distance of 241.83'; thence N89E26'11"W a distance of 292.04' to a point on the east line of Union Street 291.00' north of the north line of Front Street; thence N90E00'00"W a distance of 66.00' to a point on the west line of Union Street 290.27' north of the north line of Front Street; thence S80E01'27"W a distance of 276.62'; thence S81E14'16"W a distance of 306.55' to a point 189.26' north of the north line of Front Street and 575.37' west of the west line of Union Street; thence S80E45'29"W a distance of 217.36'; thence S70E02'32"W a distance of 66.05'; thence S20E34'05"W a distance of 42.78'; thence S25E29'54"W a distance of 97.56' to a point on the north line of Front Street 906.94' west of the west line of Union Street; thence S31E14'28"W a distance of 90.51'; thence S48E21'15"W a distance of 137.79'; thence S01E58'14"W a distance of 183.98'; thence S24E39'44"E a distance of 95.35'; thence S40E32'48"E a distance of 102.54'; thence S67E29'25"E a distance of 121.09'; thence S73E47'07"E a distance of 270.52'; thence S75E24'35"E a distance of 262.62'; thence S73E12'46"E a distance of 369.03' to a point on the west line of Union Street 301.49' south of the south line of State Street, said point having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 529438.53' North and 19358498.35' East; thence S73E39'43"E a distance of 68.97' to a point on the east line of Union Street 320.44' south of the south line of State Street; thence S81E48'19"E a distance of 37.36'; thence S08E35'26"E a distance of 85.26'; thence S72E36'31"E a distance of 114.28'; thence S67E25'29"E a distance of 182.42'; thence S01E29'36"E a distance of 40.49'; thence S74E37'15"E a distance of 109.50'; thence N86E58'52"E a distance of 41.97'; thence S84E20'27"E a distance of 44.60'; thence N81E05'13"E a distance of 42.34'; thence S84E50'38"E a distance of 40.16'; thence N74E29'23"E a distance of 40.48'; thence N33E18'49"E a distance of 8.30'; thence N50E56'38"E a distance of 22.17' to a point on the west line of Cass Street 546.85' south of the south line of State Street, said point having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 529188.29' North and 19359227.27' East; thence S88?09'09"E a distance of 65.99' to a point on the east line of Cass Street 548.33' south of the south line of State Street; thence S42E29'39"E a distance of 24.07'; thence S21E09'02"E a distance of 78.51'; thence S58?27'45"E a distance of 42.16'; thence S65E46'25"E a distance of 254.89'; thence S56E46'30"E a distance of 68.16'; thence S49E31'58"E a distance of 53.92'; thence S61E36'05"E a distance of 67.06'; thence N76E28'17"E a distance of 29.04'; thence S57E05'55"E a distance of 92.52'; thence S61?41'26"E a distance of 32.24'; thence S50E13'10"E a distance of 107.68'; thence S35E51'37"E a distance of 62.78'; thence S58E58'26"E a distance of 48.54'; thence N81E44'41"E a distance of 84.45'; thence S54E41'18"E a distance of 103.97'; thence S62E20'47"E a distance of 121.09'; thence S21E57'01"E a distance of 60.11' to a point on the north line of Eighth Street (as extended west across the Boardman River) 188.30' west of the west line of Boardman Avenue, said point having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 528500.84' North and 19360356.80' East; thence S26E42'48"E a distance of 74.01' to a point on the south line of Eighth Street (as extended west across the Boardman River) 154.38' west of the West line of Boardman Avenue; thence S11E04'00"E a distance of 82.14'; thence S30E09'44"E a distance of 60.52'; thence S47E07'27"E a distance of 173.10'; thence S64E17'02"E a distance of 123.05'; thence S56E46'47"E a distance of 158.20'; thence S50E39'30"E a distance of 39.64'; thence S58E49'52"E a distance of 63.25'; thence S09E01'40"E a distance of 112.61' to a point on the north edge of a railroad trestle, said point having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 527874.87' North and 19360908.75' East, said point also being the point of ending of the left dock line of the Boardman River according to a map of the river as surveyed on November 30, 1998, and hereby approved and placed on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
(2)  Easterly bank dock line. Along the right or easterly bank of the Boardman River beginning at a point which is 144.92' north of the north line of Front Street and 1342.68' east of the east line of Park Street, said point of beginning having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 530356.94' North and 19361376.15' East; thence running upstream therefrom S30E31'12"W a distance of 20.59'; thence 136.65' southwesterly along a curve right having a radius of 163.85',central angle of 47E46'55", and long chord bearing distance of S53E49'58"W 132.72'; thence S89E08'04"W a distance of 3.67' to a point on the east line of Wellington Street extended 47.76' north of the north line of Front Street; thence continuing S89E08'04"W a distance of 40.03'; thence N66E42'32"W a distance of 28.27' to a point on the west line of Wellington extended 57.75' north of the north line of Front Street; thence S87E45'58"W a distance of 142.33'; thence S53E30'20"W a distance of 18.80'; thence N89E30'08" a distance of 174.10'; thence N47?11'16"W a distance of 14.05'; thence N89E22'24"W a distance of 84.45'; thence S85E34'54"W a distance of 28.69'; thence N89E55'35"W a distance of 72.59' to a point on the east line of Boardman Avenue extended 46.32' north of the north line of Front Street; thence S86E50'49"W a distance of 99.18' to a point on the west line of Boardman Avenue extended 40' north of the north line of front street; thence N89E30'06"W a distance of 140.41'; thence N77E24'15"W a distance of 301.26'; thence N82E22'19"W a distance of 95.72' to a point on the east line of Park Street 115.00' north of the north line of Front Street; thence N88E33'31"W a distance of 65.96' to a point on the west line of Park Street 116.11' north of the north line of Front Street; thence N82E24'31"W a distance of 263.25'; thence N85E45'11"W a distance of 405.09' to a point on the east line of Cass Street 175.10' north of the north line of Front Street said point having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 530405.15' North and 19359302.35' East; thence N89E38'50"W a distance of 65.97' to a point on the west line of Cass Street 174.99' north of the north line of Front Street; thence N83E51'52"W a distance of 437.66'; thence N83E43'32"W a distance of 230.16' to a point on the east line of Union Street 241.00' north of the north line of Front Street; thence N89E59'22"W a distance of 66.00' to a point on the west line of Union Street 240.28' north of the north line of Front Street; thence S78E47'12"W a distance of 269.19'; thence S81E14'16"W a distance of 306.18' to a point 135.00' north of the north line of Front Street and 566.39' west of the west line of Union Street; thence N89E22'05"W a distance of 45.96'; thence S69E13'35"W a distance of 118.92'; thence N71E45'40"W a distance of 20.06'; thence S51E02'32"W a distance of 40.92'; thence S56E15'02"W a distance of 43.43'; thence S41E45'38"W a distance of 62.45' to a point on the north line of Front Street 850.63' west of the west line of Union Street; thence S30E19'54"W a distance of 75.98' to a point on the south line of Front Street 294.18' west of the west line of Pine Street; thence S22E11'10"W a distance of 65.22'; thence S39E44'04"W a distance of 171.53'; thence S10E58'14"W a distance of 64.60'; thence S35E51'09"E a distance of 92.81'; thence S51E37'24"E a distance of 104.42'; thence S68E02'58"E a distance of 324.17' to a point on the west line of Pine Street extended 80.0' south of the south line of State Street; thence S74E42'15"E a distance of 614.57' to a point on the west line of Union Street 238.00' south of the south line of State Street, said point having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 529502.02' North and 19358498.82' East; thence S74E21'41"E a distance of 68.73' to a point on the east line of Union Street 256.07' south of the south line of State Street; thence N89E51'06"E a distance of 146.08'; thence S68E55'46"E a distance of 112.79'; thence S33E28'29"E a distance of 70.58'; thence S73E48'17"E a distance of 74.00'; thence N46E10'19"E a distance of 55.84'; thence N89E41'08"W a distance of 89.82'; thence S68E43'58"E a distance of 121.90'; thence S36E55'52"E a distance of 54.22'; thence S09E02'17"E a distance of 50.16'; thence S56E46'17"E a distance of 20.65' to a point on the west line of Cass Street 481.37' south of the south line of State Street; thence S86E41'43"E a distance of 66.06' to a point on the east line of Cass Street 484.72' south of the south line of State Street; thence N59E36'43"E a distance of .56'; thence S72E52'17"E a distance of153.10'; thence S57E37'17"E a distance of 297.60', thence N82E43'43"E a distance of 107.70'; thence S74E34'53"E a distance of 104.76'; thence S53E44'20"E a distance of 115.25'; thence S80E34'16"E a distance of 56.67'; thence N82E23'33"E a distance of 25.89'; thence S59E54'18"E a distance of 47.08'; thence S66E17'42"E a distance of 79.02'; thence S34E36'17"E a distance of 60.26'; thence S55E11'17"E a distance of 151.90'; thence S32E42'22"E a distance of 79.48'; thence S00E06'58"W a distance of 191.39'; thence S33E52'52"E a distance of 18.70' to a point on the north line of Eighth Street 131.27' west of the west line of Boardman Avenue, said point having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 528500.45' North and 19360413.83' East; thence S29E35'01"E a distance of 76.05' to a point on the south line of Eighth Street 93.07' west of the west line of Boardman Avenue; thence S15E59'47"E a distance of 21.84'; thence S45E13'25"E a distance of 139.89'; thence S77E37'18"E a distance of 109.53'; thence S64E58'58"E a distance of 215.83'; thence S32E58'23"E a distance of 49.93'; thence S44E39'14"E a distance of 41.85'; thence S44E57'02"E a distance of 85.55'; thence S05E31'09"E a distance of 150.03' to a point on the north edge of a railroad trestle, said point having Michigan Central Zone 1983 coordinates of 527918.50' North and 19360990.71' East, said point also being the point of ending of the right dock line of the Boardman River according to a map of the river as surveyed on November 30, 1998, and hereby approved and placed on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
(3)  Encroaching docks. The following described docks encroach beyond the above-described dock lines as of the adoption date of this chapter. In the event either dock is ever destroyed or damaged to the extent of half or more of its value, by fire, explosion, flood or other act of God or similar causes, the docks may not be restored or rebuilt beyond the above-described dock line. In no event shall these docks be enlarged or modified to create a different or greater degree of encroachment. 
a.  Encroachment "A". Survey description of encroaching wood dock at 415 Front Street, Parcel #28-51-798-179-00 : Commencing at a point where the north line of Front Street intersects the east line of Park Street; thence S89E30'08"E along said north line of Front Street a distance of 714.23'; thence N00E29'52"E a distance of 47.93' to a point where the 1998 Boardman River right dock line intersects the face of an existing wood deck, said point also being the point of beginning of the encroachment to be described; thence N77E55'19"E along the face of said wood deck 16.60'; thence S88E28'23"E along the face of said wood deck 84.20'; thence S42E11'07"E along the face of said wood deck 1.61', said point also being the point of ending of the encroachment being described. 
b.  Encroachment "B". Survey description of encroaching wood dock at 439, 441, 443, 447 and 449 Front Street, Parcel #28-51-798-177-00 and 28-51-798-176-00: Commencing at a point where the north line of Front Street intersects the west line of Wellington Street; thence N89E30'08"W along said north line of Front Street a distance of 149.08'; thence N00E29'52"E a distance of 45.69' to a point where the 1998 Boardman River right dock line intersects the face of an existing wood deck, said point also being the point of beginning of the encroachment to be described; thence S84E58'48"W along the face of said wood deck 11.59'; thence N53E40'12"E along the face of said wood deck 16.89'; thence N87E37'33"E along the face of said wood deck 89.66'; thence N88E18'43"E along the face of said wood deck 58.32'; thence S00E51'02"E along the face of said wood deck 3.98' to a point on said 1998 Boardman River right dock line, said point also being the point of ending of the encroachment being described 
(Ord. 471. Passed 1-22-99. Ord. 773. Passed 11-5-07.) 
1062.08 - Construction and unlawful deposits outside dock limits. 
    No person shall maintain, construct or extend any dock, structure, construction or fill of any kind, or deposit earth, rocks, sand, waste, rubbish or any other material or matter, in the Boardman River beyond the dock lines and limits set forth and described in Section 1062.07. However, with the prior approval of the City Commission, public projects may extend beyond the dock lines and limits set forth and described in Section 1062.07 if the project is to be constructed and maintained by a political subdivision, and if the project benefits the general public. 
(1976 Code Sec. 11.06; Ord. 127. Passed 10-5-81.) 
1062.09 - Hazardous docks. 
    No person shall allow any dock, structure, wharf, pier or landing strip operated by him or her to fall into disrepair or to remain in a dangerous condition. Any such structure, when no longer in use, shall be posted in a manner approved by the Harbormaster and may be removed as a nuisance in the manner provided in Chapter 662 of the General Offenses Code. 
(1976 Code Sec. 11.07) 
1062.10 - Watercraft near swimming area. 
    On the waters of the West Arm of Grand Traverse Bay, Lake Michigan, located in the City, south of a line as extended from the northernmost point of land at the Clinch Yacht Harbor, thence east to the northernmost portion of the Boardman River breakwater: 
(1)  No person shall operate a watercraft so as to exceed a slow no-wake speed. 
(2)  No person shall beach, moor or operate a vessel within 50 feet of the buoyed swim area, which area has been established by a permit within the portion of the West Arm of Grand Traverse Bay. 
(Ord. 265. Passed 4-17-89.) 
1062.11 - Water pollution. 
    No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged into the harbor or into any watercourse in the City any industrial waste, garbage, untreated sewage, refuse, ashes, cherries, cherry pits, oil, fruits, fruit juices, animal substance, mineral substance, vegetable substance, shavings, sawdust or other waste material. This section shall not prohibit the discharge into the Boardman River of the effluent of the City sewage disposal plant. (1976 Code Sec. 11.08) 
1062.12 - Swimming and diving. 
    No person shall swim, dive, bathe or wade in any area prohibited for that purpose and so posted by the City Manager. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. 399. Passed 10-3-94. Ord. 578. Passed 10-7-02) 
1062.13 - Impoundment of watercraft, boat cradle, or anchor equipment. 
    In addition to any other penalties provided by law, in the event of a violation of 1062.04(h) or 1062.04(i), then the watercraft, boat cradle, or anchor equipment may be impounded immediately, without notice to the owner. In such an event, written notice of impoundment shall be given to the registered owner of the watercraft, boat cradle, or anchor equipment if there is a registered owner. The owner shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city in impounding the watercraft or boat cradle as well as any cost of clean-up. If the city's costs are not paid to the City Treasurer within 20 days from the date of notice of impoundment, the watercraft, boat cradle, or anchor equipment shall become the property of the city. 
(Ord. 866. Passed 6-7-10.) 
1062.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1064 - Parks[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Constitution reference- Parks generally, Mich. Const. Art. 7,  23 
Charter reference- Authority of City re parks, Ch. XIII 
State Law reference- Parks and recreation facilities in home rule cities, MCLA  117.4e, 117.5; Sale of park property, MCLA  117.5; Misapplication of park funds, MCLA  123.67 
Cross reference- Harbor and waterfront, Ch. 1062 

1064.01 - Definitions. 
    Event means a planned activity to use a park which has an attraction to the public, such as games or amplified sound. 
    Park means and includes all park and recreation lands, facilities and water areas owned or under the control of the City, whether presently being used for recreation or being held for future recreational use, including, but not limited to, areas for picnicking, swimming or potential swimming, beach activities, boat launching sites, parking and sports, and excluding the Duncan L. Clinch Yacht Harbor. 
(Ord. 292. Passed 2-19-91. Ord. 791. Passed 3-17-08.) 
1064.02 - Hours of operation. 
    The City Manager shall establish and post at each individual park its hours of opening and closing. Parks open continuously shall be so posted. No person shall be in any park except when such park is open. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77. Ord. 643. Passed 6-21-04.) 
1064.03 - Property destruction; injuring wildlife and vegetation. 
    No person shall injure, damage, deface, disturb or destroy any part of any park or any facility, building, sign, structure, equipment, utility or other property found therein. No person shall dig for, remove, injure, damage or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing thing within any park. No person shall injure, kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb any wild bird or animal within any park, unless authorized by the City Manager for preservation of the peace. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77.) 
1064.04 - Garbage and rubbish. 
    No person shall deposit or abandon in any park, or in any waters in or adjacent to any park, any garbage, refuse, litter or obnoxious material, except in receptacles provided for such purpose. No person shall bring refuse or litter, originating outside any park into a park for the purpose of depositing such refuse or litter in park receptacles designated for park users. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77.) 
1064.05 - Camping. 
    No person shall camp within any park. No person shall park overnight any house trailer or camping vehicle in any park. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77. Ord. 644. Passed 6-21-04.) 
1064.06 - Swimming, bathing and wading. 
    No person shall swim, bathe or wade in any park in those areas prohibited for that purpose and so posted by the City Manager. No person shall have a glass container within any water area or land area used as a swimming or bathing beach area. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77. Ord. 579. Passed 10-07-02.) 
1064.07 - Fires. 
    No person shall build a fire in any park except in places designated for such purpose by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77.) 
1064.08 - Weapons and explosives. 
    No person shall possess or control any fireworks or explosive in any park. No person shall possessor control any bow or arrow in any park except in an area designated for use as an archery range. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77. Ord. 828. Passed 3-16-09.) 
1064.09 - Alcoholic beverages. 
    No person shall possess any alcoholic beverage, other than beer and wine, in any park. The consumption and possession of beer and wine, is not allowed in the Open Space during the events of the Traverse City Film Festival, the week of the Cherry Festival except in the Festival Beverage Pavilion and for the National Cherry Festival Wine Tasting Event. The City Commission, by resolution, may ban the consumption and possession of beer and wine, in any park or designated portion of a park. A ban of all alcoholic beverages shall be posted on signs at such points within or at the perimeter of the area where the ban is in effect. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77; Ord. 199. Passed 8-5-86; Ord. 473. Passed 4-19-99. Ord. 805. Passed 7-21-08; Ord. 815. Passed 11-17-08.) 
1064.10 - Disorderly conduct. 
    No person shall be intoxicated or engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct tending to create a breach of the peace or disturb or annoy a reasonable person using the park in a proper manner. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77. Ord. 805. Passed 7-21-08) 
1064.11 - Pets in parks. 
    No person shall bring or allow any dog or other pet in any park unless the dog or pet is kept on a leash not over eight feet in length, and under the immediate control of a responsible person. Dogs are permitted to be off-leash in city parkland which has been designated as an off-leash area by resolution of the City Commission subject to compliance with the rules and regulations adopted for the designated off-leash area. Dogs and other pets are not allowed in (1) park buildings or shelters, (2) designated swimming areas and (3) the city beaches, or portions thereof that are mechanically groomed. Dogs and other pets are not permitted in the Open Space area during the National Cherry Festival or in the Farmers' Market area during its hours of operation unless the dog or other pet is confined in a motor vehicle. The "Farmers" Market area is defined as that part of Parking Lot "B" extending from the water's edge of the Boardman River north to 12 feet north of the center of Parking Lot "B", which center is defined as the concrete island that is shared by and separates the north and south parking bays, and running east from the westerly edge of the Grandview Parkway entrance to the westerly edge of the sidewalk parallel to Cass Street. No dog or pet shall be permitted to touch, worry, disrupt or disturb any person using park facilities. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77. Ord. 435. Passed 3-18-96. Ord. 531. Passed 5-21-01. Ord. 846. Passed 9-18-09. Ord. 946. Passed 6-4-12; Ord. No. 1069 . Passed 3-19-18) 
1064.12 - Motor vehicles. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle in excess of 15 miles per hour in any park, except when otherwise posted. No person shall operate a vehicle except on designated roads. No person shall park a motor vehicle except in designated parking spaces; provided, however, that a Mobile Food Vending Unit as defined in Chapter 865, that has a valid Mobile Food Vending License may operate within and adjacent to parks in areas authorized by resolution of the City Commission. Drivers of motor vehicles shall obey all posted traffic control signs and devices. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77. Ord. 645. Passed 6-21-04. Ord. 965. Passed 5-6-13) 
1064.13 - Off-the-road vehicles. 
    No person shall operate an off-the-road motor driven vehicle, such as a snowmobile, dune buggy, trail bike, mini-bike or motorcycle, or any motorized device, in any park, except on designated roads, trails or areas posted for such use provided, however, that a Mobile Food Vending Unit as defined in Chapter 865, that has a valid Mobile Food Vending License may operate within and adjacent to parks in areas authorized by resolution of the City Commission. A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. (Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77. Ord. 663. Passed 02-22-05. Ord. 965. Passed 5-6-13) 
1064.14 - Parking. 
(a)  Vehicles and trailers shall be parked only in areas designated for parking. In such designated areas parking will be allowed only for persons utilizing park or recreation facilities related to the parking area. In no event shall parking be permitted for patrons or employees of commercial, residential or industrial facilities in proximity thereto. Parking shall be regulated in accordance with City ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any portion of a public park for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale or for advertising purposes. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77. Ord. 646. Passed 6-21-04.) 
1064.15 - Boat launching. 
    Boats may be launched from designated Municipal boat launching sites after a launch permit has been obtained from the City. The City Manager shall designate, in writing, the Municipal boat launching sites for which a launch permit is necessary and shall establish permit fees. Launch permits shall be displayed prominently and permanently on the tongue of the boat trailer when launching from the sites, or if a boat trailer is not used, the permit shall be displayed prominently and permanently on the motor vehicle used for transporting the boat to the launching site. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77; Ord. 134. Passed 5-17-82. Ord. 647. Passed 6-21-04.) 
1064.16 - Rules and regulations. 
    The City Manager is hereby authorized, subject to approval and adoption by the City Commission, to make such other rules and regulations pertaining to the conduct and use of parks as are necessary to administer the same or to protect public property or the safety, health, morals or welfare of the public. No person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77.) 
1064.17 - Park concessions. 
    No person shall sell or rent, or attempt to sell or rent, any service, merchandise or object in any park, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Park concessions may be authorized by contract approved by the City Commission. 
(2)  A group or organization, authorized to use a park by permit from the City Manager for a special occasion, may sell to its own members. 
(3)  A Mobile Food Vending Unit as defined in Chapter 865, that has a valid Mobile Food Vending License may operate within and adjacent to parks in areas authorized by resolution of the City Commission. 
(4)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. 291. Passed 2-19-91. Ord. 661. Passed 02-22-05.Ord. 965. Passed 5-6-13) 
1064.18 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administration. The uniformed employees of the Parking Violations Bureau and other officials designated in writing by the City Manager are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to any violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A. 764.9c(2); M.S.A. 28.868(3)(2)). 
(b)  Appearance ticket. Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 135. Passed 5-17-82.) 
1064.19 - Events. 
    No Person shall conduct, host or sponsor an event in a park except in compliance with the City Park and Public Land Use Policy. Any person who conducts, hosts, or sponsors an event in violation of the policy: 
(1)  May be removed from the City park or adjacent public land, and if a person fails to leave after being requested to do so, that person shall be deemed to be trespassing and may, at the discretion of the City Manager, be prosecuted; 
(2)  Is guilty of a municipal civil infraction; 
(3)  Shall be responsible for paying all costs that would have been owed had the event been conducted, hosted, or sponsored in compliance with the policy. The City Manager shall be responsible for determining what costs were incurred by the City as a result of the event. 
(Ord. 791. Passed 3-17-08.) 
1064.20 - Prohibited conduct at events. 
    In addition to any other applicable provision of law, the following conduct shall be prohibited at any event in any park: 
(1)  Conduct that materially and substantially prevents any other reasonable person from viewing, hearing or meaningfully participating in an event. 
(2)  Conduct that substantially interferes with the free passage of event participants or attendees by creating an insurmountable obstacle at any entrance, aisle, walkway, stairwell, ramp, esplanade, vendor booth, riser or other area commonly used for public access, egress or ingress. 
(3)  Entry into or remaining in any area of an event that is posted as not open to the public without the consent of the permit holder for the event or entry into or remaining in any area of an event that is posted as open to the public only upon the payment of an entry fee or charge, without first paying the applicable entry fee or charge. 
(4)  A person found responsible for violating this subsection after receiving an initial warning, may be removed from the City park, and if a person fails to leave after being requested to do so, that person may be guilty of criminal trespassing. 
(Ord. 804. Passed 6-16-08.) 
1064.99 - Penalty. 
(a)  Misdemeanor penalty. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the misdemeanor provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(b)  Civil infraction penalty. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the civil infraction provisions of this chapter shall incur the penalties provided in Section 202.99(b). 
(Ord. 32. Passed 8-15-77. Ord. 648. Passed 6-21-04.) 
Chapter 1065 - Brown Bridge Conservation[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- Parks, Ch. 1064 
State Law reference- Parks and recreation facilities in home rule cities, MCL  117.4e, 117.5 
Charter reference- Brown Bridge Trust,  129 

1065.01 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to assure that the City's property commonly known as the "Brown Bridge Quiet Area" will be preserved in its predominantly natural, scenic, forested and open space condition and to: 
(1)  Restore, preserve and protect the integrity of the natural environment, including its inhabitants, yet allow managed public use for generations to come; 
(2)  Protect its natural resource and watershed values; 
(3)  Maintain and enhance biodiversity, serenity and solitude; 
(4)  Retain quality habitat for native plants and animals; 
(5)  Maintain and enhance its natural features; 
(6)  Prohibit any uses which may impair or interfere with the management plan. 
(7)  Provide for limited oil and gas extraction. 
(Ord. 651. Passed 8-16-04.) 
1065.02 - Establishment. 
    The Brown Bridge property was established as a natural area for quiet recreation by City Commission resolution on March 21, 1977, and July 1, 1991, on the City-owned property including frontage on the Boardman River commonly known as "Brown Bridge Quiet Area" and legally described as: All of Section 15 and Section 14, except the North 1/2 of the Northeast 1/4, East Bay Township (T.26N., R.10W.,) and the Northeast 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 22, Paradise Township (T.26N., R.10W.), Grand Traverse County, Michigan. The Brown Bridge Quiet Area consists of the following described areas shown in the Brown Bridge Management Plan on a map entitled Brown Bridge Quiet Area: 
(1)  Core area, described generally as that portion of the Brown Bridge Quiet Area consisting of all City-owned land south of Hobbs Highway and Ranch Rudolf Road and north of Brown Bridge Road, extending to the east and west property lines of the Quiet Area. 
(2)  Grasshopper Ranch area purchased by the City on July 21, 1993. 
(3)  Perimeter area described generally as that portion of the Brown Bridge Quiet Area consisting of all City-owned lands outside of the Core area and the Grasshopper Ranch area. 
(Ord. 651. Passed 8-16-04. Ord. 1012. Passed 2-17-15) 
1065.03 - Brown bridge advisory committee. 
(a)  Established. Upon recommendation of the City Manager, the Brown Bridge Advisory Committee is established pursuant to Section 30 of the City Charter. This Committee shall be a committee advisory to the City Commission and City Manager. 
(b)  Composition; terms; expenses; vacancies. The Brown Bridge Advisory Committee shall consist of 12 voting members. No less than six of the members shall be City residents. Appointments shall be for three-year terms and shall be made by the City Commission. One member shall be the City Manager or his or her designee ex officio with voting authority and one member shall be a City Commissioner with voting authority. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in Committee activities. 
(c)  Organization. The Brown Bridge Advisory Committee shall hold regular meetings at least quarterly. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Committee may develop rules governing their operations. Seven members shall be considered a quorum. 
(d)  Duties. The Brown Bridge Advisory Committee shall make recommendations to restore, preserve and protect the integrity of the Brown Bridge Quiet Area under the direction of the City Manager. The Committee shall make recommendations regarding the Brown Bridge Quiet Area Management Plan. 
(Ord. 651. Passed 8-16-04. Ord. 872. Passed 8-16-10. Ord. 1012. Passed 2-17-15) 
1065.04 - Management plan. 
    A Brown Bridge Quiet Area Management Plan shall be prepared by the Brown Bridge Advisory Committee and adopted by the City Commission. The Plan shall be reviewed by the Brown Bridge Advisory Committee every five years or as directed by the City Commission. Any amendments shall be adopted by City Commission. 
(Ord. 651. Passed 8-16-04.) 
1065.05 - Real property disposition restrictions. 
    The following restrictions apply to disposition of real property in the Brown Bridge Quiet Area: 
(1)  Core area. The City Commission may sell, donate, or long-term lease real property in the Core area only after a public hearing and upon a unanimous vote. Such proposed action shall be introduced and scheduled for a public hearing at least two weeks after introduction. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in an official newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
(2)  Perimeter area. The City Commission may sell, donate or long-term lease real property in the Perimeter area only after a public hearing and upon a vote of at least five affirmative votes. Such proposed action shall be introduced and scheduled for a public hearing at least two weeks after introduction. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in an official newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
(3)  Grasshopper ranch area. Real property in the Grasshopper Ranch area may only be sold, donated or leased according to the terms of the City Charter and the Michigan Natural Resources Trust Fund Land Acquisition Project Agreement between the Department of Natural Resources and the City dated July 21, 1993. 
(4)  Utility easements. The City Commission may grant an easement for utility or related purposes according to its usual procedures. 
(Ord. 651. Passed 8-16-04.) 
Chapter 1066 - Cemeteries[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Constitution reference- Municipal cemeteries, Mich. Const. Art. 7  123 
Charter reference- Authority of City re cemeteries, Ch. XIII, Cemetery Care Funds,  130 
State Law reference- Authority of City re cemeteries, MCL  117.4f; Municipal cemeteries, MCL  128.1 et seq.; Vacation of cemeteries, MCL  128.51 et seq. 

1066.01 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Burial certificate means a document issued by the City confirming burial rights or the right to place human remains. All cemetery deeds previously issued by the City are hereby deemed to be burial certificates. 
(2)  Cemetery means any place in the City devoted to burial of persons. 
(3)  City cemetery means Oakwood Cemetery, including those parts known as the Jewish and Catholic sections. 
(4)  Plot means that land or space allocated for placement of human remains and for which burial rights have been allocated or are available for transfer. 
1066.02 - General regulations. 
(a)  Access. No person shall be in the City cemetery or enter or leave other than by the established and open entrances or gateways established by the City, and during hours allowed by cemetery rules. 
(b)  Alcohol. No person shall carry or consume any alcoholic beverage in a cemetery. 
(c)  Animals. No person shall allow any domestic animal to be upon or to run at large in a cemetery, except guide dogs accompanying the visually impaired. 
(d)  Firearms. No person shall carry any firearm in a cemetery except an escort accompanying a Veteran's funeral or memorial services or upon written permission from the Police Chief or his or her designee. 
(e)  Hours. No person shall be in the City cemetery after sunset and before sunrise or except during the hours set by the cemetery rules. 
(f)  Lawns. Persons shall use designated roads and pathways in a cemetery. No person shall walk, ride or drive upon or across a cemetery plot or cemetery lawn except for walking necessary to gain access to a cemetery plot. 
(g)  Littering. No person shall litter in a cemetery. 
(h)  Plant destruction. No person shall pluck any flowers or break any trees, shrubs, or plants in the City cemetery. This section shall not prohibit an owner from trimming shrubs and trees or removing plants on his or her own plot in those sections of the cemetery where the landscaping features are the responsibility of the owner. 
(i)  Property destruction. No person shall deface, mar, write upon or otherwise injure any monument, design, decoration or other property in a cemetery. 
(j)  Signs. No person shall advertise or post signs within the City cemetery. 
(k)  Vehicles. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a cemetery unless upon cemetery business. No person shall use any cemetery for the purpose of demonstrating any vehicle or instructing another or learning to drive a vehicle. No person shall tow another vehicle within any cemetery except in the case of a breakdown in the cemetery. Vehicles shall not be operated at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour. The City Manager may prohibit and restrict the use of vehicles within the City cemetery. 
(l)  Vehicle parking. No person shall park or leave a vehicle on any road in the City cemetery in such a manner as to prevent any other vehicle from passing. 
1066.03 - Administrative rules. 
    In addition to the regulations contained in this chapter, the City Manager, by written executive order, may promulgate cemetery rules concerning the City cemetery. Such rules shall be made a part of the Administrative Code. No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the City Manager concerning the City cemetery. 
1066.04 - Monuments, markers and improvements. 
(a)  Approval of city manager. No curb, decoration, embellishment or improvement of any sort shall be placed upon any burial plot, no alteration of the surface of the ground shall be made and no labor shall be done in the City cemetery except as permitted by cemetery rules. However, any aggrieved person, upon showing unusual circumstances, may request a waiver or change in a cemetery rule from the City Manager. 
(b)  Permit. No person shall erect, clean or repair a mausoleum, monument or memorial in the City cemetery without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager. Persons requesting such permit may be required to furnish satisfactory evidence of their ability to properly perform the work proposed and furnish proof of liability and worker's compensation insurance. 
(c)  Design review. Monuments, markers, crypts, niches, nameplates and other improvements on the grounds of the City cemetery shall comply with cemetery rules and shall not be offensive according to community standards as determined by the City Manager. 
(d)  Removal of improper objects. If any monument or other structure, or any inscription thereon, is placed in or upon any burial plot in the City cemetery which is determined by the City Manager to be offensive or if it does not comply with these regulations or cemetery rules, it shall be removed by the owner immediately. If the owner fails to remove it upon notice to do so from the City Manager, or if the owner cannot be found, the City may enter upon the premises and remove it at the owner's expense. 
(e)  Removal of trees, shrubs and plants. Within the City cemetery if trees, shrubs, flowers, weeds or plants of any kind on any plot shall, by means of their roots, branches or otherwise, become detrimental to the adjacent grounds or unsightly, dangerous, detrimental, diseased, or an obstacle to the public or cemetery personnel, the City may enter upon the premises and remove the plant or any part thereof. 
(f)  Flowers and decorations. Only such flowers and decorations as allowed by Cemetery Rules shall be permitted in the City Cemetery. 
1066.05 - Burials, interments and disinterments. 
(a)  Only personnel authorized by the City Manager shall bury, remove or disinter the body or cremains of any person in the City cemetery, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  When directed to make a disinterment by order of a court of competent jurisdiction and a certified copy of such order has been filed with the Sexton, all fees paid and prior notice given. 
(2)  When the coroner directs the disinterment for the purpose of holding an inquest and has filed with the Sexton his or her signed authorization to release the body to the coroner or the coroner's lawful agents. 
(b)  A burial transit permit from the Department of Public Health shall be required and provided for all burials including cremains arriving at the City cemetery. 
(c)  No holder of burial rights to a cemetery plot in the City cemetery shall allow any interment to be made therein for remuneration. 
(d)  No burials shall be allowed in the City cemetery for other than human remains. 
(e)  No person shall scatter cremains anywhere in the City cemetery except in a cremation garden set aside by the City for that purpose and with written authorization from the City Sexton. 
(f)  All burials in the City cemetery shall be in reinforced concrete vaults or equivalent material approved by the City Sexton. 
(g)  All buried cremations in the City cemetery shall be in a reinforced, durable material approved by the City Sexton or as otherwise approved by the City Sexton. 
(h)  Except as may be herein permitted, no burial shall be made in the City cemetery on a Sunday, New Years Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. The City Manager may grant special permission for a burial on any prohibited day if necessary to protect the public health and safety, and if the City Manager certified in writing the cause for which such burial was made necessary. When a Sunday or legal holiday fall on consecutive days, the prohibition of burial on the legal holiday may be suspended if the City Manager considers it warranted by an emergency. No disinterment shall take place from December 1 to April 1 except under court order or permission of the City Manager. 
(i)  No interment of two or more bodies shall be made in one grave in the City cemetery except in the case of parent and infant or two infants buried in one casket. In the case of cremation, two cremations per adult grave space or the combination of one cremation urn and one interment of a human body will be allowed. 
(j)  In the Third Addition, Block A, Lots 1-75, inclusive, are for the interment of cremations only, with no more than two cremations per lot. Lots 76-135, inclusive, are for the interment of one infant burial only in a vault not to exceed 40 inches in length. 
(k)  Cremations inurned in a columbarium are limited to one per niche unless designed for multiple inurnments. 
(l)  No burial or entombment shall take place or marker installed in the City cemetery until the plot purchase price, cost of any services required to open or close the plot, the cost of perpetual care and other fees and charges have been paid in full. 
(Ord. 424. Passed 6-19-95. Ord. 474. Passed 7-6-7-99.) 
1066.06 - Sale of plots. 
    In the City cemetery: 
(1)  No sale, transfer or conveyance of any burial certificate or the rights therein or any part thereof, or interest therein, other than by operation of law, shall be effectual to transfer any right to any person, unless such sale, transfer or conveyance is made from the seller to the City through the cemetery office and from the City to the purchaser and officially recorded by the office of the City Clerk. This section shall not apply to lots in the Jewish portion of the City cemetery, which shall be sold by the Jewish cemetery Sexton. 
(2)  Purchase of a plot or the issuance of a burial certificate does not transfer ownership of property but is the transferring of the right of burial of human remains on that land subject to the ordinances and cemetery rules as they may be amended. 
(3)  Payment of the perpetual care fee is required when a burial space is resold or transferred, unless prior payment for perpetual care has been made. 
(4)  Upon purchase of a plot, the purchaser will be issued a burial certificate transferring the burial right on the land indicated therein. 
(5)  When a plot is purchased by more than one person other than a husband and wife, each person's interest shall be joint with rights of survivorship. 
(6)  The ownership of burial rights to any plot in the City cemetery passes to the joint survivor or, if none, to the heirs of the last surviving owner as stated on the certificate. 
(7)  It is the duty of the certificate holder to notify the Sexton of any change in his or her mailing address. 
(8)  Descriptions of a plot will be in accordance with the City cemetery plans which are kept on file in the cemetery office. 
(9)  The City disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage from causes beyond its reasonable control, and from damage caused by the elements, act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, riots or order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage is direct or collateral. 
(10)  The right to enlarge, reduce, replat, or change the boundaries or grading of the City cemetery, or a section or sections, from time to time, including the right to modify or change the locations of or removal or regrade roads, drives, walks or any part thereof, is hereby reserved to the City. The right to lay, maintain and operate, or alter or change pipe lines or gutters for sprinkling systems, drainage, and so forth, is also expressly reserved, as well as the right to use plots not yet sold. The City reserves to itself and to those lawfully entitled thereto a perpetual right of ingress and egress over plots for the purposes of passing to and from other plots in the City cemetery. 
1066.07 - Third addition regulations. 
    The following regulations apply to the Third Addition of the City cemetery: 
(1)  All plots shall be maintained by the City in perpetuity. 
(2)  All planting and landscaping shall be done by the City. 
(3)  Upright monuments and markers may be placed in the following locations: Lots 1-40 inclusive and Lots 60-75, inclusive of Block B, and Lots 1-80 inclusive of Block C, Lots 91-118 inclusive of Block I and all lots in Block E and H. 
(4)  Monuments and markers shall be placed with the tops flush with the ground in the following locations: Lots 41-59 inclusive and Lots 76-96 inclusive of Block B; Lots 81-145 inclusive of Block C; Lots 1-90 inclusive and 119-178 inclusive of Block I; all of Block A, D, F, G and J. 
(Ord. 424. Passed 6-19-95. Ord. 475. Passed 6-7-99.) 
1066.08 - Fourth addition regulations. 
    The following regulations apply to the Fourth Addition of the City cemetery: 
(1)  All plots shall be maintained by the City in perpetuity. 
(2)  All planting and landscaping shall be done by the City. 
(3)  All monuments and markers shall be placed on concrete foundations and approved by the City Manager. 
(4)  All monuments and markers placed on the south half of the Fourth Addition shall face south. All monuments and markers placed on the north half of the Fourth Addition shall face north. 
(5)  On the south half of the Fourth Addition, all monuments and markers shall be placed on the south end of each burial plot. On the north half of the Fourth Addition, all monuments and markers shall be placed on the north end of each burial plot. 
1066.09 - Clear zone for aircraft. 
    No tree, shrub, tower, structure or other thing within the confines of the Oakwood Cemetery shall project into the clear zone space established for aircraft using Cherry Capital Airport. All such projections shall be removed by the City from the clear zone spaces. 
1066.10 - Fees. 
(a)  Determination. Price schedules on City cemetery plots and services shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Commission. Such resolution shall include prices for all standard services rendered by the City in the maintenance and operation of the cemetery and no amendments to the price schedule shall be made unless the entire schedule is stated in the resolution. 
(b)  Perpetual care. Perpetual care shall be obtained on all tomb sites, plots and crypts in the City cemetery. Before any structure containing human remains is built, the fee for perpetual care of that structure shall be paid to the City. 
(c)  Extra fees. The City may, in addition to a fee for perpetual care of any plot, require an additional fee if, in the opinion of the City Manager, the condition of the planting, landscape features or other improvements would require more expense for maintenance than would be required on a normal plot. In such cases, the plot will be cared for upon the payment of an additional fee determined by the City Manager. 
1066.11 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administration. The City Manager may appoint a Sexton and delegate all or a part of the City Manager's authority under this chapter to the Sexton. 
(b)  Appearance tickets. The Sexton, the officers of the Traverse City Police Department and other officials designated in writing by the City Manager are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to any violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCLA 764.9c(2); MSA 28.868(3)(2)). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney, on conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(c)  Civil infraction. A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. 
1066.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
(Ord. 424. Passed 6-19-95.) 
Chapter 1068 - Ground-Water Protection and Storm-Water Runoff Control[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
State Law reference- Drains and drainage; flood control projects, MCLA  280.429, 280.431; Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, MCLA  324.9101 et seq. 
Cross reference- Sewers generally, Ch. 1042; Water generally, Ch. 1044; Flood plain management, Ch. 1458 

1068.01 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to aid in the prevention of surface and ground-water contamination, to regulate and control the construction and use of storm-water runoff facilities, to control discharges to the public storm drain system, to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and to prevent the pollution, impairment or destruction of a natural resource and the environment of the City and the state. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
1068.02 - Objectives. 
    The specific objectives of this chapter include the following: 
(1)  To prevent ground-water contamination and accelerated soil erosion and to control storm-water runoff resulting from proposed earth changes both during and after construction. 
(2)  To assure that property owners control the volume and rate of storm-water runoff originating from their property so that surface-water and ground-water quality is protected, soil erosion minimized and flooding reduced. 
(3)  To preserve and use where feasible the natural or existing drainage system for receiving and conveying storm-water runoff. 
(4)  To preserve natural infiltration and the recharge of ground-water and to maintain subsurface flows which replenish lakes, streams and wetlands. 
(5)  To assure that storm-water runoff control systems are incorporated into site planning at an early stage in the planning design process and to aid in the proper design, construction and maintenance of all storm-water control facilities. 
(6)  To reduce the need for costly maintenance and repairs to roads, embankments, ditches, streams, lakes, wetlands and storm-water control facilities, which are the result of inadequate soil erosion and storm-water runoff control. 
(7)  To reduce long-term expenses and remedial projects which are caused by uncontrolled storm-water runoff containing hazardous substances and polluting materials. 
(8)  To encourage the design and construction of storm-water control systems which serve multiple purposes, including, but not limited to, flood prevention and water quality protection. 
(9)  To reduce any detrimental impacts of storm-water flows on downstream storm-water facilities and to allow for off-site storm-water control facilities and measures if the proposals meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(10)  To designate a local enforcing agency responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(11)  To provide for the enforcement of this chapter and penalties for violations. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
1068.03 - Definitions. 
    Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular. In addition, as used in this chapter: 
(1)  Accelerated soil erosion means the increased movement of soils that occurs as a result of human activities and development. 
(2)  Best management practice or BMP means a structural device, measure, facility or activity which helps to achieve ground-water protection and storm-water management control objectives at a designated site. 
(3)  Channel means the portion of a natural stream which conveys normal flows of water, or a ditch or channel excavated for the flow of water. 
(4)  City engineer means the City Engineer of the City of Traverse City or the authorized representative of the City Engineer. 
(5)  City manager means the City Manager of the City of Traverse City or the authorized representative of the City Manager. 
(6)  Commercial use means all land uses, except for registered and permitted home occupations and one-family and two-family detached dwellings and structures accessory thereto. "Commercial use" also means the use of private property in connection with or for the purchase, sale, display or exchange of goods, merchandise or personal services, as well as the maintenance or operation of businesses or recreational or amusement enterprises. 
(7)  Depression storage means the portion of precipitation trapped in depressions in the ground surface. 
(8)  Design standard or engineering design standard means a specification that prescribes the type of design, location, mode of construction, mode of operation or other engineering detail for storm-water control facilities. 
(9)  Design storm means a rainfall event that has a specific statistical probability of occurring in any given year. For example, a ten-year design storm is a storm with a ten percent chance of occurring during the year. Design storm figures are used to calculate the runoff volume and peak discharge rate through a detention or retention basin or other storm-water management facility. 
(10)  Detention basin means a structure or facility, natural or artificial, which stores storm-water on a temporary basis and releases it at a controlled rate. A detention basin may drain completely after a storm event, or it may be a body of water with a fixed minimum and maximum water elevation between runoff events. 
(11)  Discharge means the rate of flow of water through an outlet structure at a given point and time, measured in cubic feet per second (cfs). 
(12)  Disturbed area means an area of land subjected to erosion due to the removal of vegetative cover and/or earth-moving activities, including filling. 
(13)  Downstream means lands, waters or storm-water facilities which receive storm-water runoff and other surface-water flows from a designated site. Downstream lands, waters and storm-water facilities are normally downgrade from the designated site. 
(14)  Drainage means the interception and removal of ground-water or surface water by natural or artificial means. 
(15)  Drainage system means all facilities, channels and areas which serve to convey, filter, store and/or receive storm water, either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
(16)  Drainage well means a bed of stone or hole in the ground constructed for the purpose of trapping storm water for infiltration into the ground. 
(17)  Earth change means a man-made change in the cover or topography of land, including grading, building construction and cut-and-fill activities or other similar activities, which may result in, contribute to or have the potential to cause unwanted storm-water problems affecting either the quality or quantity of storm-water runoff. 
(18)  Extended detention basin means a detention basin designed to provide substantial removal of suspended solids and particulates, typically achieved by holding storm water for 24 hours or more. 
(19)  Flood means an overflow of surface water onto lands not normally covered by water. 
(20)  Floodplain means the area of land adjoining a lake or stream which is inundated when flow exceeds the capacity of the normal channel. For mapping purposes, floodplains are designated according to the frequency of the flood event, such as the 100-year floodplain. 
(21)  Grading means any extensive stripping, site clearing, stumping, excavating, filling, stockpiling, or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
(22)  Hazardous substances and polluting materials means hazardous chemicals, as defined by the Michigan Department of Public Health and the Michigan Department of Labor; flammable and combustible liquids, as defined by the Michigan State Police Fire Marshal Division; critical materials, polluting materials and hazardous waste, as defined by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources; hazardous substances, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; and hazardous materials, as defined by the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
(23)  Impervious area means impermeable surfaces, such as paved or gravel driveways, parking areas or any structures which, in general, prevent infiltration of water into the soil. 
(24)  Infiltration means the downward movement or seepage of water from the surface to the subsoil and/or ground-water. The infiltration rate is expressed in terms of inches per hour. 
(25)  Infiltration facility means a structure or area which allows storm-water runoff to gradually seep into the ground (e.g. French drains, seepage pits, infiltration basins, dry wells, or perforated pipes). 
(26)  Landscaping means moving, seeding, sodding and other planned activity which is not classified as an earth change. 
(27)  Maintenance agreement means a binding agreement between the landowner and the City of Traverse City which sets forth the location and design of best management practices as well as the terms and requirements for storm-water control facility maintenance recorded with the County Register of Deeds. 
(28)  Non-erosive velocity means a rate of flow of storm-water runoff, measured in feet per second, which does not erode soils. Non-erosive velocities vary for individual sites, taking into account topography, soil type and runoff rates. 
(29)  Normal maintenance means landscaping, repairs, road leveling, minor excavation or filling at a developed site, or other activities determined by the City Engineer to be exempt from permit requirements, provided that such activities do not violate standards set forth in this chapter. 
(30)  Off-site facility means a storm-water management or erosion control facility which is located partially or completely off of the development site. 
(31)  Outfall means the point where water flows out from a conduit, drain or stream. 
(32)  Outlet means a stream or facility receiving the flow from a basin, drain or other storm-water management facility. 
(33)  Owner means the last recorded titleholder of any lot or parcel of land or the person whose name is last listed upon the tax roll as the owner of a certain lot or parcel of land. 
(34)  Peak rate of discharge or peak flow means the maximum calculated rate of storm-water flow at a given point in a channel, watercourse or conduit resulting from a predetermined frequency storm or flood, measured in cubic feet per second (cfs). 
(35)  Permit means a storm-water runoff control permit. 
(36)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind. 
(37)  Pollution means the man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
(38)  Receiving body of water means any lake, pond, stream, wetland or ground-water into which storm-water runoff is directed. 
(39)  Regional detention basin means a basin to detain water flow from a number of development sites or a small watershed. 
(40)  Retention basin means a wet or dry storm-water holding area, either natural or man-made, which does not have an outlet to adjoining watercourses or wetlands other than an emergency spillway. 
(41)  Runoff means storm-water runoff. 
(42)  Sediment means mineral or organic solid particulate matter that has been removed from its site of origin by soil erosion; suspension in water; and/or wind or water transport. 
(43)  Site means any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots or parcels of land proposed for development. 
(44)  Stop-work order means a notice issued by the City Engineer requiring a person to cease grading or development activities. 
(45)  Storage facility means a basin, structure or area, either natural or man-made, which is capable of holding storm water for the purpose of reducing the rate of discharge from the site. 
(46)  Storm drain means a conduit, pipe, natural channel or man-made structure which serves to transport storm-water runoff. 
(47)  Storm frequency means the average period of time during which a storm of a given duration and intensity can be expected to be equaled or exceeded. 
(48)  Storm sewer means a sewer that carries storm-water, surface-water, street runoff and other runoff waters, unpolluted drainage or ground-water, but excludes domestic waste water and industrial waste water, and is also called a "storm drain." 
(49)  Storm-water means the excess water running off from the surface of a drainage area during and immediately after a period of rain. It is that portion of the rainfall and resulting surface flow that is in excess of that which can be absorbed through the infiltration capacity of the surface of the basin. 
(50)  Storm-water control facilities and measures means any facility, structure, channel, area or vegetative cover or measure which serves to control storm-water runoff in accordance with the purposes and standards of City regulations. 
(51)  Storm-water runoff means waters from rains falling within a tributary drainage basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels, watercourses or conduits, measured in depth of inches. 
(52)  Storm-water runoff control plan means drawings and written information for a proposed land use or earth change which describe the way in which storm-water runoff will be controlled during and after completion of construction. 
(53)  Storm-water runoff control permit means a signed written approval issued under this chapter authorizing the applicant to engage in specified earth changes. 
(54)  Stream means a river, stream or creek which may or may not be serving as a drain which has definite banks, a bed and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water. 
(55)  Stream bank means the usual boundaries, not the flood boundaries, of a stream channel. 
(56)  Swale means a low-lying grassed area with gradual slopes which transports storm-water either on-site or off-site. 
(57)  Vegetative cover means grasses, shrubs, trees and other vegetation which hold and stabilize soils. 
(58)  Water quality standards means minimum standards established by the State of Michigan for water quality protection. 
(59)  Watercourse means any natural or man-made waterway, drainage-way, drain, river, stream, diversion, ditch, gully, swale or ravine having banks, a bed and a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently flowing. 
(60)  Watershed means a land area, also known as a drainage area, which collects precipitation and contributes runoff to a receiving body of water or point along a watercourse. 
(61)  Wetland means land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, wetland vegetation or aquatic life, and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp or marsh. A wetland will contain a predominance, not just an occurrence, of wetland vegetation, aquatic life or hydric soil. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91. Ord. 634. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1068.04 - Storm-water runoff control permits. 
(a)  Regulated land uses and earth changes. Earth changes and other construction and activity requiring a ground-water protection/storm-water runoff control permit from the City Engineer include the following: 
(1)  Earth changes proposed for any single-family or two-family residential site with one or more of the following characteristics: 
a.  Sites with a slope greater than ten percent (ten feet horizontal to one foot vertical). 
b.  Sites with heavy clay soils (commonly termed "hardpan clay"), and soils classified in hydrologic Group D in the Grand Traverse County Soil Survey. 
(2)  Earth changes for sites located within 100 feet of a protected wetland, stream or other body of water. 
(3)  Earth changes for other sites identified by the City as having a high potential for environmental degradation and/or flooding as a result of soil erosion, storm-water runoff or hazardous waste runoff, on-site or off-site. 
(4)  Earth changes for all multiple-family, commercial or industrial sites, including recreational and public facilities. 
(5)  All new land uses at the site of which 100 kilograms (25 gallons or 220 pounds) or more of hazardous substances are generated or used per month or accumulated at one time. 
(6)  All proposed connections, direct or indirect, to the City's storm drain system. 
(7)  Landscaping and grounds maintenance as may be outlined by the City Engineer are exempt from permit requirements provided that such activities do not violate standards in this chapter. 
(b)  Application submittal. 
(1)  All applications for storm-water runoff control permits shall include three copies of the proposed ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plan, unless more copies are requested by the City Engineer. Copies of the permit application form shall be made available by the City Engineer. 
(2)  Permit applications shall be submitted to the City Engineer. 
(3)  Application for a permit shall be made prior to the start of any earth change or activity requiring a permit, including construction of access roads, driveways, tree and shrub removal or grading. Permit approval shall be given prior to the initiation of any work activity. Any unauthorized work shall be considered a violation of this chapter regardless of any later actions taken toward compliance. Soil test borings, cutting of vegetation for land surveys, percolation tests and normal maintenance shall not be considered a start of work under this chapter. 
(4)  Proposed ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plan facilities shall be included as part of the final site plan requirements per Chapter 1252 of the Planning and Zoning Code. 
(5)  The application review period begins upon receipt of a completed application with all required drawings. 
(c)  Sequential applications. 
(1)  On projects which are so large or complex that a plan encompassing all phases of the project cannot reasonably be prepared prior to initial ground-breaking, application for a permit on successive major incremental earth change activities may be allowed. Requests for sequential applications shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to submittal of a permit application. 
(2)  Approval of sequential applications shall take place in two phases. First, the overall conceptual plan for the entire development shall be submitted for review and approval. Second, detailed plans for sections of the total project may be submitted for review and approval. 
(3)  All permits processed and issued for phases of a project shall be clearly defined as to the nature and extent of work covered. Each phase of the project must be reviewed and permitted prior to construction. 
(d)  Permit approval or disapproval. 
(1)  If the City Engineer determines that the proposed ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plan complies with the standards in this chapter, a permit shall be issued specifying the work approved. If the proposed plan does not comply with the standards in this chapter, the permit request shall be modified or denied. 
(2)  Upon request, the City Engineer shall furnish the applicant or other interested person with a statement, in writing, of the reasons for permit approval or denial. 
(3)  A decision on a permit application will normally be made within seven to 14 days of the time that a completed application and ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plan have been received. The City Engineer shall determine whether the application and control plan submitted with the application provide sufficient information for review purposes. Review of permits may take longer if special engineering reviews are necessary or the development is of a large scale, thereby requiring extra time. 
(e)  Permit expiration or revocation. 
(1)  Permits shall terminate automatically if construction has not commenced within one year of the date of issuance. The permit holder may request a one-year extension if there are valid reasons to support such an extension. 
(2)  Any permit issued by the City Engineer under this chapter may be revoked or suspended after notice for any of the following causes: 
a.  A violation of a condition of the permit. 
b.  A misrepresentation made when obtaining a permit or failure to fully disclose relevant facts in the application or ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plan. A change in a condition that requires a temporary or permanent change in the activity. 
(f)  Penalties for initiating earth change activities without a permit. Any person initiating a land use or earth change activity under this chapter without a valid permit shall be considered in violation of this chapter and subject to fines and other penalties as provided in this chapter. 
(g)  Permits and approvals of other governmental agencies. Approvals under this chapter shall not relieve a property owner of the need to obtain other permits or approvals from Federal, State, county and local agencies. 
(h)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control act. The City Engineer or his or her authorized representative shall be the local enforcing agency responsible for the administration and enforcement of Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (Part 91), 1994 PA 451, as amended, and all rules promulgated thereunder. All such rules are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(i)  Permit fees. Charges for ground-water protection/storm-water runoff control permits shall be determined, from time to time, by resolution of the City Commission. 
(Ord. 342. Passed 3-15-93. Ord. 633. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1068.05 - Ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plan. 
(a)  Generally. A ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plan shall be prepared for any land use or earth change subject to permit requirements. The plan for a given site shall be designed to effectively reduce problems associated with soil erosion, ground-water contamination due to hazardous substances and polluting materials, and to control the quality and quantity of storm-water runoff during and after the completion of construction. 
(1)  Any project and related improvements shall incorporate in its design measures to protect the natural environment, including lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, floodplains, ground-water and steep slopes. 
(2)  Storm-water management practices and drainage facilities shall be designed to maintain the natural retention and storage capacity of any wetland, water body or watercourse, and shall not increase unwanted flooding potential, on-site or off-site. 
(3)  Sites at which hazardous substances and polluting materials are stored, used or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges to the air, surface of the ground, ground-water, lakes, streams, rivers or wetlands. 
(4)  State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill prevention, record-keeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. No discharges to ground-water, including direct and indirect discharges, shall be allowed without required permits and approvals. 
(5)  The location and extent of any known contaminated soils and/or ground water on the site shall be shown on the site plan and shall be considered in the overall protection and control proposal to adequately protect the public health and the environment. 
(b)  One-and two-Family residential site control plan. Unless waived by the City Engineer, a residential site plan will need to show the following: 
(1)  The location of the site, including description, lot dimensions and ordinance-required setbacks. 
(2)  Site characteristics, including utility, building and drive locations, slopes and soil type. 
(3)  Proposed earth change activity and ground-water protection and runoff control measures proposed. 
(4)  If there are severe development limitations in regard to the existing site characteristics, the City Engineer may require that a residential development site plan be prepared by a registered professional engineer or architect licensed to practice in the State of Michigan. 
(c)  Multiple-family, commercial and industrial site control plans. 
(1)  A multiple-family/commercial/industrial site plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or architect licensed to practice in the State of Michigan. 
(2)  In addition to other required information, the submitted site plans shall show the following information: 
a.  A drawing or drawings at a scale sufficient to show all of the required information as may be determined by the City Engineer, including a legal description and site location sketch; predominant land features; and contour intervals and/or sufficient elevations or slope description. 
b.  A soils survey or written description of the soil types of the exposed land area contemplated for the earth change, and the location of the physical limits of each proposed earth change. 
c.  The location of all lakes, streams and protected wetlands partially or completely contained within the boundaries of the site. 
d.  A description and the location of all existing and proposed on-site ground-water protection and storm-water management facilities and measures, including existing public storm drain facilities and proposed method of connection. 
e.  A description and the location of all proposed temporary and permanent soil erosion control facilities and measures, including existing public storm drain facilities and proposed method of connection. 
f.  Storm-water runoff calculations. 
g.  For large sites, a program for the continued maintenance of all ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control facilities and measures, including the designation of the person or agency responsible for the maintenance and financial arrangements. A maintenance agreement shall become a part of any sales or exchange agreement for the land on which permanent soil erosion and storm-water runoff control facilities and measures are required. 
h.  Other information which the City Engineer requires to review the impact of the proposed earth change in relationship to the standards and requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  In addition to the information required to be shown on site plans listed previously, the following additional provisions shall apply to all land uses and facilities, including private and public facilities, which use, store or generate substances or polluting materials in quantities greater than 25 gallons or 220 pounds. 
a.  Listing of types and quantities of hazardous substances and polluting materials which will be used or stored on-site at the facility in quantities greater than 25 gallons or 220 pounds. 
b.  Completion of the "Hazardous Substances Reporting Form for Site Plan Review." 
c.  Location of existing and proposed service facilities and structures, above and below ground, including: 
1.  Areas to be used for the storage, use, loading/unloading, recycling or disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials, including interior and exterior areas. 
2.  Underground storage tank locations. 
3.  Location of floor drains, exterior drains, water wells, dry wells, catch basins, retention/detention areas, sumps and other facilities designed to collect, store or transport storm water or waste water. 
d.  Delineation of areas on the site which are known or suspected to be contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
1068.06 - General standards for approval of ground-water protection and storm-water control plans. 
(a)  The City Engineer shall approve or disapprove storm-water runoff control permit applications and plans in accordance with written guidelines which shall be on file in the Traverse City Engineering Department. 
(b)  All site plans subject to review under the requirement of this chapter shall be designed, constructed and maintained to aid in the protection against the detrimental effects of storm-water quality, incorporating therein best management practices (BMP's), which may include, but are not limited to, detention basins, retention ponds, infiltration basins, wet basins, drainage wells, grass swales, grass swales with check dams, filter strips, catch basins and other storm-water control facilities. 
(c)  All storm-water control plans shall be designed, constructed and maintained to prevent detrimental off-site flooding of downstream properties and of the City storm-water drainage system. 
(d)  The amount of storm-water permitted to discharge from a site to the City's existing storm-sewer system shall be as determined by the City Engineer. 
(e)  Measures required for ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control shall take into consideration natural features, proximity of the site to lakes, streams and protected wetlands, extent of impervious surfaces, potential for soil erosion and flooding and the size of the site. 
(f)  Storm-water conveyance, storage facilities and infiltration facilities shall be designed to provide for non-erosive velocities of storm-water runoff. Alterations to natural drainage patterns shall not create downstream flooding or sedimentation. 
(g)  Sites at which hazardous substances and polluting materials are stored, used or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges to the air, surface of the ground, ground-water, lakes, streams, rivers or wetlands. 
(h)  In lieu of complete on-site storm-water facilities and measures, the use of off-site storm-water facilities and measures may be proposed, together with on-site soil erosion, ground-water protection control and storm-water quality control. 
(i)  General standards specified in this section shall be used in reviewing proposed ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plans for storm-water facilities and measures. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
1068.07 - Maintenance of facilities. 
(a)  All ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control facilities and measures shall be maintained in accordance with applicable permit conditions. 
(b)  The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plan or the permit application submitted to the City Engineer. Options include: 
(1)  The owner of the property. 
(2)  A property owners association or other nonprofit organization, on the condition that provisions for financing necessary maintenance are included in deed restrictions or other contractual agreements. 
(c)  Maintenance agreements shall specify responsibilities for financing maintenance and emergency repairs, including, but not limited to, the procedures specified in Sections 1068.12 and 1068.13. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
1068.08 - Storm-water management easements. 
(a)  Storm-water management easements shall be provided by the property owner, if necessary, for access for facility inspections and maintenance, or for preservation of storm-water runoff conveyance, infiltration and detention areas and facilities, including flood routes, for a major storm event. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in the maintenance agreement signed by the property owner. 
(b)  Storm-water management easements are required for all areas used for off-site storm-water control, unless a waiver is granted by the City Engineer. 
(c)  Easements shall be recorded with the County Register of Deeds prior to the issuance of a permit by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
1068.09 - Compliance assurances. 
(a)  Performance guarantees. 
(1)  Applicants proposing construction projects identified by the City Engineer as having high potential for storm-water related problems may be required to post a cash escrow, letter of credit or other acceptable form of performance security in an amount determined by the City Engineer to assure proper completion of the work as may be approved. 
(2)  Letters of credit, if used as a performance guarantee, shall extend for a minimum of one year with the option of renewal. Letters of credit will be returned to the applicant when the site is certified by the developer or engineer for the project that the site is completely in accordance with the approved site plan requirements as set forth by the City Engineer. 
(b)  Construction certification by registered professional. 
(1)  For any sites that require a professional site plan, a certification statement and plan shall be submitted after ground-water and storm-water runoff control facilities have been installed to affirm that construction has been completed in accordance with the approved ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plan. This certification statement and plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer, or architect licensed to practice in the State of Michigan. 
(2)  If there are changes during the course of construction, the City Engineer may require final "as-built" drawings for final approval of the site work. 
(c)  Certificate of compliance. Upon receipt and approval of the certification letter, the City Engineer shall issue a certificate of compliance to the property owner. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
1068.10 - Inspections. 
(a)  Authorized representatives of the City Engineer may enter at reasonable times upon any property to conduct on-site inspections. Such inspections may take place before, during and after any earth change or other activity for which a permit has been issued. 
(b)  The permit holder shall notify the office of the City Engineer at least 48 hours before starting any earth change or activity for which a permit was issued. 
(c)  If upon inspection existing site conditions are found not to be as stated in the permit or approved ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control plan, the permit will be invalidated and a stop-work order may be issued. No earth-disrupting work shall be undertaken or continued until revised plans have been submitted and a valid permit issued. 
(d)  Requests for revisions must be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer in writing before being put into effect, unless approved by the City Engineer on the site. If this is done, a revised site plan shall be submitted for review and approval. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
1068.11 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notices of violations: administrative adjustment. Whenever the City Engineer finds that any person or property owner has engaged in conduct which violates the requirements of the storm-water runoff control permit or of this chapter, the City Engineer shall serve or cause to be served upon such person or owner a written notice, either personally or by certified mail, stating the nature of the alleged violation. Within ten days of the date of receipt of the notice, said person or owner shall respond personally or in writing to the City Engineer, advising the City Engineer of his or her position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the City Engineer and said person or owner shall meet and confer to discuss the allegations and, where necessary, to establish a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof. 
(b)  Hearings. Where a violation is not corrected by timely compliance by means of an administrative adjustment, the City Engineer may suspend or revoke the permit. A written notice shall be served on the property owner by personal service or by certified mail, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City Engineer regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken and the proposed enforcement action, and directing the property owner to show reasons why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served not less than ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer or authorized representative of the property owner. The City Engineer shall hold a hearing, consider evidence and then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of the property owner. Appeals of such orders may be taken by the property owner to the Circuit Court by filing an action within 21 days after the order being appealed. The Circuit Court shall review such orders on the record to determine if they are supported by material, competent and substantial evidence. If the Court finds such support, the orders shall be affirmed. 
(c)  Judicial proceedings . The City may commence an action to enforce this chapter and any order in the Circuit Court. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91. Ord. 523. Passed 2-19-01.) 
1068.12 - Stop-work orders and emergency actions. 
(a)  If necessary to assure compliance with permit requirements, standards and other provisions of this chapter, the City Engineer may issue a stop-work order for the purpose of preventing or minimizing ground-water contamination, storm-water runoff or other conditions posing imminent and substantial danger to public health, safety, welfare or natural resources. 
(b)  If necessary to protect public safety or natural resources, including lakes, streams, protected wetlands and other receiving bodies of water, the City Engineer may initiate emergency action to abate imminent and substantial danger and risk, subject to the following: 
(1)  Storm-water control measures or facilities may be constructed or maintained by the City at the property owner's expense if the necessary provisions for the correction of a violation are not successfully implemented within ten calendar days after the notice of violation is mailed. 
(2)  All expenses incurred by the City to construct and maintain measures and facilities to bring the site into compliance, including actual attorney fees, shall be reimbursed by the property owner. The City shall have a lien for the expenses incurred. The lien shall have priority over all liens and encumbrances filed or recorded after the date of such expenditure. Except for single-family or multiple-family residential properties, the lien for such expenses shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided through maintenance agreements, the property owner may be held responsible for reimbursing the City for all costs incurred, including actual attorney fees and administrative costs, as a result of emergency action provided, that a finding is made that the property owner violated provisions of this chapter, a permit of this chapter or an approved maintenance agreement. 
(d)  Violations of permit requirements will initially be brought to the attention of the individual in charge of on-site construction activities. Should efforts toward immediate compliance be unsuccessful, a stop-work order may be issued. Said order shall describe the specific alleged violation and the steps deemed necessary to bring the project back into compliance. 
(e)  The stop-work order, when issued, shall require all specified earth change activities to be stopped. 
(f)  If the City Engineer determines that ground-water contamination and/or sedimentation of the waters of this state has or will reasonably occur from a parcel of land in violation of this chapter, then the City Engineer, at his or her determination, may seek to enforce this chapter by notifying the person who owns the land by mail with return receipt requested. The notice shall contain a description of specific control measures which, if implemented by the property owner, would bring the owner into compliance. 
(g)  The persons who own or occupy land subject to this chapter shall implement and maintain ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control measures in conformance with this chapter within ten days after the notice of violation has been given as specified in subsection (f) hereof. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
1068.13 - General requirements; violations. 
(a)  Duty. A person shall not authorize or conduct an earth change or land use which requires a storm-water runoff control permit without first applying for and receiving such a permit. A person shall not authorize or conduct an earth change or activity requiring a permit under this chapter except in conformity with a properly issued permit. 
(b)  Guideline violation. A violation of any guideline, regulation or standard adopted or authorized by this chapter or a violation of any order, notice or permit authorized by this chapter shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the same penalty and remedies as would a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
1068.99 - Penalty. 
(a)  Persons who own or occupy land that is not in compliance with this chapter and who, after notice, refuse to implement and maintain ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control measures and facilities in conformance with these regulations, shall each be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or 90 days in jail, or both, plus the cost of prosecution. 
(b)  Each act of violation and every day upon which any violation shall occur or continues to occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any person found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss, damage and actual attorney fees occasioned by such violation. 
(Ord. 323. Passed 12-16-91.) 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1070 - Video Service Provider Right-of-Way Management 

1070.01 - Purposes. 
(a)  Under the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, Video Service Providers may obtain a franchise to provide Video Services in the City using a standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the Michigan Public Service Commission (MPSC). This form includes the right to use the Public Right-of-Way to provide such service but does not contain right-of-way management and related provisions. 
(b)  Telecommunications providers who obtain such a standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement will usually have a City permit issued pursuant to the Metro Act allowing them to construct and maintain their telecommunications facilities in the Public Right-of-Way. Such Metro Act permits set forth the terms and conditions for such right-of-way usage. Standard forms for such permits were agreed to in a collaborative process between municipalities and providers that was initiated by the MPSC, and such standard forms have since been approved by the legislature and the MPSC. 
(c)  Because telecommunications providers typically provide Video Services over combined video and telecommunications facilities, such Metro Act Permits generally provide adequate public right-of-way protections for the City and the public when such providers are providing Video Services. 
(d)  Other Video Service Providers, in particular new providers or existing cable companies, may not have a Metro Act Permit issued by the City. 
(e)  The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the standardized, uniform franchise agreement require Video Service Providers to comply with all valid and enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of the Public Right-of-Way in the delivery of Video Services. This includes the police powers of the franchising entity, and makes such right-of-way usage subject to the laws of the State of Michigan and the police powers of the franchising entity. 
(f)  The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the standardized, uniform franchise agreement state that franchising entities shall provide Video Service Providers with open, comparable, nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral access to the Public Right-of-Way, and may not discriminate against a Video Service Provider for the authorization or placement of a Video Service or communications network in the Public Right-of-Way. 
(g)  The Michigan Constitution reserves reasonable control of their highways, streets, alleys and public places to local units of government. 
(h)  The purpose of this ordinance is to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare and exercise reasonable control over the Public Right-of-Way by regulating the use and occupation of such rights-of-way by Video Service Providers who have a standardized, uniform franchise but who lack a Metro Act Permit from the City. This ordinance does so by setting forth terms and conditions for such usage and occupation of the public's rights of way from the forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC and approved by the legislature in Section 6(1) of the Metro Act, thus providing open, comparable, nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral access to the Public Right-of-Way and not discriminating against a Video Service Provider for the authorization or placement of a Video Service or communications network in Public Right-of-Way. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.02 - Consistent interpretation. 
    This chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent with the Metro Act and corresponding provisions of the forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC, including applicable MPSC, Metro Authority and court decisions and determinations relating to same. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.03 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply to this chapter, including sections 1070.01 and 1070.02 above. 
(1)  Act means the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, being Act 480 of the Public Acts of 2006, MCL 484.3301 and following, as amended from time to time. 
(2)  City or the city means the City of Traverse City. 
(3)  Claims shall have the meaning set forth in Section 7.1. 
(4)  Facilities means the lines, equipment and other facilities of a Permittee which use or occupy the Public Right-of-Way in the delivery of Video Services in the City. 
(5)  Franchise agreement means the franchise agreement entered into or possessed by a Video Service Provider with the City as required by Section 3(1) of the Act, if it is the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC. 
(6)  Manager means the City Manager or his or her designee. 
(7)  Metro act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, being Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, MCL 484.3101 and following. 
(8)  Metro act permit means a permit issued to use the Public Right-of-Way issued by the City under Chapter 1050 after a provider's application for same. 
(9)  Metro authority shall have the same meaning as "Authority" in the Metro Act. 
(10)  MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act and the Metro Act. 
(11)  Permittee means a Video Service Provider with a currently valid Franchise Agreement but without a currently valid Metro Act Permit. 
a.  Upon applying to the City for and then obtaining a Metro Act Permit from the City, a Video Service Provider is not a Permittee and is no longer required to comply with this ordinance. A Video Service Provider is also not a Permittee and is not required to comply with this ordinance if it and the City enter into a voluntary franchise agreement as described in 1070.11(b). 
(12)  Person means an individual, corporation, association, partnership, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
(13)  Public right-of-way shall have the same meaning as in the Act. 
(14)  Street construction and street resurfacing shall have the meanings set forth in 1070.09(h). 
(15)  Video service shall have the same meaning as in the Act. 
(16)  Video service provider shall have the same meaning as in the Act. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.04 - Applicability to permittees. 
    Compliance, insurance exceptions. All Permittees shall comply with this chapter, except that a permittee need not comply with the insurance provisions of 1070.08(a) through 1070.08(f) below if it is maintaining the insurance required by Section II.J (pertaining to incumbent video providers continuing certain insurance provided under their preceding franchise) of its Franchise Agreement to certain insurance. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.05 - Contacts, maps and plans. 
(a)  Permittee contacts. Permittee shall provide the Manager with the names, addresses and the like for engineering and construction related information for Permittee and its Facilities as follows: 
(1)  The address, e-mail address, phone number and contact person (title or name) at Permittee's local office (in or near the City). 
(2)  If Permittee's engineering drawings, as-built plans and related records for the Facilities will not be located at the preceding local office, the location address, phone number and contact person (title or department) for them. 
(3)  The name, title, address, e-mail address and telephone numbers of Permittee's engineering contact person(s) with responsibility for the design, plans and construction of the Facilities. 
(4)  The address, phone number and contact person (title or department) at Permittee's home office/regional office with responsibility for engineering and construction related aspects of the Facilities. 
(5)  Permittee shall at all times provide Manager with the phone number at which a live representative of Permittee (not voice mail) can be reached 24 hours a day, seven (7) days a week, in the event of a public emergency. 
(6)  Permittee shall notify the City in writing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Franchise Agreement of any changes in the preceding information. 
(b)  Route maps. Within ninety (90) days after the substantial completion of construction of new Facilities in the City, Permittee shall submit route maps showing the location of the Facilities to the City, in the same manner and subject to the same provisions as apply to telecommunications providers under Section 6(7) and 6(8) of the Metro Act, MCL 484.3106(7) and (8). 
(c)  As-built records. Permittee, without expense to the City, shall, upon forty-eight (48) hours' notice, give the City access to all "as-built" maps, records, plans and specifications showing the Facilities or portions thereof in the Public Right-of-Way unless there exists an emergency situation requiring earlier view. Upon request by the City, Permittee shall inform the City as soon as reasonably possible of any changes from previously supplied maps, records, or plans and shall markup maps provided by the City so as to show the location of the Facilities. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.06 - Use of public right-of-way. 
(a)  Overlashing. Permittee shall not allow the wires or any other facilities of a third party to be overlashed to Permittee's Facilities without the City's prior written consent. The City's right to withhold written consent is subject to the authority of the MPSC under Section 361 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, MCL  484.2361. 
(b)  No burden on public right-of-way. Permittee, its contractors, subcontractors, and the Facilities shall not unduly burden or interfere with the present or future use of any of the Public Right-of-Way. Permittee's aerial cables and wires shall be suspended so as to not endanger or injure persons or property in or about the Public Right-of-Way. If the City reasonably determines that any portion of the Facilities constitutes an undue burden or interference, due to changed circumstances, Permittee, at its sole expense, shall modify the Facilities or take such other actions as the City may determine is in the public interest to remove or alleviate the burden, and Permittee shall do so within a reasonable time period. The City shall attempt to require all occupants of a pole or conduit whose facilities are a burden to remove or alleviate the burden concurrently. 
(c)  No priority. This chapter does not establish any priority of use of the Public Right-of-Way by Permittee over any present or future permittees or parties having agreements with the City or franchises for such use. In the event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the Public Right-of-Way, the first priority shall be to the public generally, the second priority to the City, the third priority to the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions in the performance of their various functions, and thereafter as between other permit, agreement or franchise holders, as determined (except as otherwise provided by law) by the City in the exercise of its powers, including the police power and other powers reserved to and conferred on it by the State of Michigan. 
(d)  Restoration of property. Permittee, its contractors and subcontractors shall immediately (subject to seasonal work restrictions) restore, at Permittee's sole expense, in a manner approved by the City, any portion of the Public Right-of-Way that is in any way disturbed, damaged, or injured by the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the Facilities to a reasonably equivalent (or, at Permittee's option, better) condition as that which existed prior to the disturbance. In the event that Permittee, its contractors or subcontractors fail to make such repair within a reasonable time, the City may make the repair and Permittee shall pay the costs the City incurred for such repair. 
(e)  Marking. Permittee shall mark its Facilities installed after the effective date of this ordinance as follows: Aerial portions of the Facilities shall be marked with a marker on Permittee's lines on alternate poles which shall state Permittee's name and provide a toll-free number to call for assistance. Direct buried underground portions of the Facilities shall have: 
(1)  A conducting wire placed in the ground at least several inches above Permittee's cable (if such cable is nonconductive); and 
(2)  At least several inches above that, a continuous colored tape with a statement to the effect that there is buried cable beneath; and 
(3)  Stakes or other appropriate above ground markers with Permittee's name and a toll-free number indicating that there is buried cable below. 
Bored underground portions of the facilities shall have a conducting wire at the same depth as the cable and shall not be required to provide the continuous colored tape. Portions of the Facilities located in conduit, including conduit of others used by Permittee, shall be marked at its entrance into and exit from each manhole and handhole with Permittee's name and a toll-free telephone number. 
(f)  Tree trimming. Permittee may trim trees upon and overhanging the Public Right-of-Way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with the Facilities, consistent with any standards adopted by the City. Permittee shall dispose of all trimmed materials. Permittee shall minimize the trimming of trees to that essential to maintain the integrity of the Facilities. Except in emergencies, all trimming of trees in the Public Right-of-Way shall have the advance approval of Manager. 
(g)  Installation and maintenance. The construction and installation of the Facilities shall be performed pursuant to plans approved by the City. The open cut of any Public Right-of-Way shall be coordinated with the Manager. Permittee shall install and maintain the Facilities in a reasonably safe condition. If the existing poles in the Public Right-of-Way are overburdened or unavailable for Permittee's use, or the facilities of all users of the poles are required to go underground then Permittee shall, at its expense, place such portion of its Facilities underground, unless the City approves an alternate location. Permittee may perform maintenance on the Facilities without prior approval of the City, provided that Permittee shall obtain any and all permits required by the City in the event that any maintenance will disturb or block vehicular traffic or are otherwise required by the City. 
(h)  Pavement cut coordination. Permittee shall coordinate its construction and all other work in the Public Right-of-Way with the City's program for street construction and rebuilding (collectively "Street Construction") and its program for street repaving and resurfacing (except seal coating and patching) (collectively, "Street Resurfacing"). The goals of such coordination shall be to encourage Permittee to conduct all work in the Public Right-of-Way in conjunction with or immediately prior to any Street Construction or Street Resurfacing planned by the City. 
(i)  Compliance with laws. Permittee shall comply with all valid and enforceable federal and state statutes and regulations; and all valid and enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of the Public Right-of-Way, including the police powers of the City; regarding the construction, installation, and maintenance of its Facilities, now in force or which hereafter may be promulgated. Before any installation is commenced, Permittee shall secure all necessary permits, licenses and approvals from the City or other governmental entity as may be required by law, including, without limitation, all utility line permits and highway permits. The City shall not unreasonably delay or deny issuance of any such permits, licenses or approvals. Permittee shall comply in all respects with applicable codes and industry standards, including but not limited to the National Electrical Safety Code (latest edition adopted by MPSC) and the National Electric Code (latest edition). Permittee shall comply with all zoning and land use ordinances and historic preservation ordinances as may exist or may hereafter be amended. This section does not constitute a waiver of Permittee's right to challenge laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations now in force or established in the future. 
(j)  Street vacation. If the City vacates or consents to the vacation of Public Right-of-Way within its jurisdiction, and such vacation necessitates the removal and relocation of Permittee's Facilities in the vacated Public Right-of-Way, Permittee shall consent to the vacation and remove its Facilities at its sole cost and expense when ordered to do so by the City or a court of competent jurisdiction. Permittee shall relocate its Facilities to such alternate route as the City and Permittee mutually agree, applying reasonable engineering standards. 
(k)  Relocation. If the City requests Permittee to relocate, protect, support, disconnect, or remove its Facilities because of street or utility work, or other public projects, Permittee shall relocate, protect, support, disconnect, or remove its Facilities, at its sole cost and expense, including where necessary to such alternate route as the City and Permittee mutually agree, applying reasonable engineering standards. The work shall be completed within a reasonable time period. 
(l)  Public emergency. The City shall have the right to sever, disrupt, dig-up or otherwise destroy Facilities of Permittee if such action is necessary because of a public emergency. If reasonable to do so under the circumstances, the City shall attempt to provide notice to Permittee. Public emergency shall be any condition which poses an immediate threat to life, health, or property caused by any natural or man-made disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, water main breaks, hazardous material spills, etc. Permittee shall be responsible for repair at its sole cost and expense of any of its Facilities damaged pursuant to any such action taken by the City. 
(m)  MISS DIG. If eligible to join, Permittee shall subscribe to and be a member of "MISS DIG," the association of utilities formed pursuant to Act 53 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended, MCL  460.701 et seq., and shall conduct its business in conformance with the statutory provisions and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(n)  Underground relocation. If Permittee has its Facilities on poles of Traverse City Light & Power, Cherryland Electric, Consumers Energy, Detroit Edison or another electric or telecommunications provider, or their successors and assigns, and such electric or telecommunications provider relocates its system underground, then permittee shall relocate its Facilities underground in the same location at Permittee's sole cost and expenses. 
(o)  Identification. All personnel of Permittee and its contractors or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing Permittee's name, their name and photograph. Permittee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of Permittee and its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified as such to the public, such as by a magnetic sign with Permittee's name and telephone number. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.07 - Indemnification. 
(a)  Indemnity. Permittee shall defend, indemnify, protect, and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents, employees, elected and appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions from any and all claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments, decrees, proceedings, and expenses of any nature (collectively "Claims") (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees) arising out of or resulting from the acts or omissions of Permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors, or assigns, but only to the extent such acts or omissions are related to Permittee's use of or installation of Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way and only to the extent of the fault or responsibility of Permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors and assigns. 
(b)  Notice, cooperation. The City shall notify Permittee promptly in writing of any such Claims and the method and means proposed by the City for defending or satisfying any such Claims. The City shall cooperate with Permittee in every reasonable way to facilitate the defense of any such Claims. The City shall consult with Permittee respecting the defense and satisfaction of such Claims, including the selection and direction of legal counsel. 
(c)  Settlement. The City shall not settle any Claim subject to indemnification under the preceding two sections without the advance written consent of Permittee, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. Permittee shall have the right to defend or settle, at its own expense, any Claim against The City for which Permittee is responsible hereunder. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.08 - Insurance. 
(a)  Coverage required. Prior to beginning any construction in or installation of Permittee's Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way, Permittee shall obtain insurance as set forth below and file certificates evidencing same with the City. Such insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect until the end of the term of the Franchise Agreement. In the alternative, Permittee may satisfy this requirement through a program of self-insurance, acceptable to the City, by providing reasonable evidence of its financial resources to the City. The City's acceptance of such self-insurance shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including Completed Operations Liability, Independent Contractors Liability, Contractual Liability coverage, railroad protective coverage and coverage for property damage from perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage, in an amount not less than $5,000,000.00. 
(2)  Liability insurance for sudden and accidental environmental contamination with minimum limits of $500,000.00 and providing coverage for claims discovered within three years after the term of the policy. Pursuant to the 2006 MPSC decision in Case U-14720, Permittee need not comply with the preceding sentence until such time after the effective date of this ordinance that it decides to place any new or existing Facilities underground within the Public Right-of-Way in the City. 
(3)  Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(4)  Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance with statutory limits, and any applicable Federal insurance of a similar nature. 
(5)  The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a combination of underlying (primary) and umbrella policies so long as in combination the limits equal or exceed those stated. If more than one insurance policy is purchased to provide the coverage amounts set forth above, then all policies providing coverage limits excess to the primary policy shall provide drop down coverage to the first dollar of coverage and other contractual obligations of the primary policy, should the primary policy carrier not be able to perform any of its contractual obligations or not be collectible for any of its coverages for any reason during the term of the Franchise Agreement, or (when longer) for as long as coverage could have been available pursuant to the terms and conditions of the primary policy. 
(b)  Additional insured. The City shall be named as an additional insured on all policies (other than worker's compensation and employer's liability). All insurance policies shall provide that they shall not be canceled, modified or not renewed unless the insurance carrier provides thirty (30) days prior written notice to the City. Permittee shall annually provide the City with a certificate of insurance evidencing such coverage. All insurance policies (other than environmental contamination, workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance) shall be written on an occurrence basis and not on a claims made basis. 
(c)  Qualified insurers. All insurance shall be issued by insurance carriers licensed to do business by the State of Michigan or by surplus line carriers on the Michigan Insurance Commission approved list of companies qualified to do business in Michigan. All insurance and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company. 
(d)  Deductibles. If the insurance policies required by this ordinance are written with retainages or deductibles in excess of $50,000, they shall be approved by Manager in advance in writing. Permittee shall indemnify and save harmless the City from and against the payment of any deductible and from the payment of any premium on any insurance policy required to be furnished hereunder. 
(e)  Contractors. Permittee's contractors and subcontractors working in the Public Right-of-Way shall carry in full force and effect commercial general liability, environmental contamination liability, automobile liability and workers' compensation and employer liability insurance which complies with all terms of this Section 1070.08. In the alternative, Permittee, at its expense, may provide such coverages for any or all its contractors or subcontractors (such as by adding them to Permittee's policies). 
(f)  Insurance primary. Permittee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance with respect to the City, its officers, agents, employees, elected and appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions (collectively "them"). Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of them shall be in excess of Permittee's insurance and shall not contribute to it (where "insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of them" includes any contract or agreement providing any type of indemnification or defense obligation provided to, or for the benefit of them, from any source, and includes any self-insurance program or policy, or self-insured retention or deductible by, for or on behalf of them). 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.09 - Performance bond or letter of credit. 
    Municipal Requirement. The City may require Permittee to post a bond (or letter of credit), in the amount provided in Section 15(3) of the Metro Act, as amended [MCL  484.3115(3)]. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.10 - Removal. 
(a)  Removal; underground. As soon as practicable after the term of the Franchise Agreement expires, Permittee or its successors and assigns shall remove any underground cable or other portions of Permittee's Facilities from the Public Right-of-Way which has been installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other opening of the Public Right-of-Way. Permittee shall not remove any underground cable or other portions of the Facilities which requires trenching or other opening of the Public Right-of-Way except with the prior written approval of Manager. All removals shall be at Permittee's sole cost and expense. For purposes of this subsection, "cable" means any wire, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, feed wire or pull wire. 
(b)  Removal; above ground. As soon as practicable after the expiration of the term of a Franchise Agreement, Permittee, or its successor or assigns at its sole cost and expense, shall, unless waived in writing by Manager, remove from the Public Right-of-Way all above ground elements of its Facilities, including but not limited to poles, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and lines attached to or suspended from poles. 
(c)  Schedule. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval by Manager. Unless extended by Manager, removal shall be completed not later than 12 months following the expiration of the term of the Franchise Agreement. Portions of Permittee's Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way that are not removed within such time period shall be deemed abandoned and, at the option of the City exercised by written notice to Permittee at the address provided for in the Franchise Agreement, title to the portions described in such notice shall vest in the City. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.11 - Other items. 
(a)  Duties. Permittees shall faithfully perform all duties required by this ordinance. 
(b)  Different terms. The Act allows local units of government and Video Service Providers to enter into voluntary franchise agreements that include terms and conditions which are different from those required under the Act or which are different from those in the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC. The Metro Act allows municipalities and providers to mutually agree to Metro Act Permit terms differing from those in the standard forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC. Current or prospective Permittees who desire terms different from those in this ordinance, as applied to them, should request such a voluntary franchise agreement or a mutually agreed to Metro Act Permit from the City. 
(c)  Interpretation and severability. The provisions of this ordinance shall be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the public, and should any provision or section of this ordinance be held unconstitutional, invalid, overbroad or otherwise unenforceable, such determination/holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining conditions of this ordinance. If any provision in this ordinance is found to be partially overbroad, unenforceable, or invalid, Permittee and the City may nevertheless enforce such provision to the extent permitted under applicable law. 
(d)  Violations. A Permittee who violates any provision of this ordinance is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to sanctions as established in Ordinance 202.99(c). Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the City in the event of a violation by a Permittee of this ordinance. 
(e)  Authorized officials. The Manager, which includes his or her designee, is hereby designated as the authorized official of the City to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices on a form approved by the City Attorney for violations of this ordinance, as provided by the City's ordinances. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
1070.12 - Repealer. 
    All ordinances, resolutions or rules, parts of ordinances, resolutions or rules inconsistent with the provisions hereof are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. 795. Passed 6-2-08.) 
PART TWELVE - PLANNING CODE 
TITLE TWO - PLANNING 
Chapter 1220 - Planning Commission[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning Commission generally,  160 
State Law reference- County planning commissions, M.C.L.A.  125.101 et seq.; Municipal planning commissions, MCL 125.3801 (Mich. Planning Enabling Act 33 of 2008) 
Cross reference- Enforcement of Subdivision Regulations,  1242.01 

1220.01 - Establishment; powers and duties. 
    There is hereby established in and for the City a Planning Commission which shall have the powers and duties authorized and directed by the City Charter and by Michigan Planning Enabling Act 33 of 2008, as amended (MCL 125.3801 et seq.). 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.121) 
1220.02 - Composition. 
    The membership of the Planning Commission shall include the following persons: 
(1)  One administrative official selected by the Mayor; 
(2)  Two members of the City Commission selected by that body; and 
(3)  Six persons appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Commission. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.122; Ord. 850 Passed 12-21-09) 
1220.03 - Appointments; terms of office. 
    The appointments to the Planning Commission shall be made in the following manner and for the following terms: 
(1)  At the odd-year organizational meeting, the Mayor shall appoint an administrative official, of his or her choosing, as a member of the Planning Commission, who shall serve for a two-year term. 
(2)  At the organizational meeting each year, the City Commission shall nominate and appoint two of its members to the Planning Commission. The members so appointed shall hold office until the organizational meeting of the following year, at which time a new appointment shall be made in a like manner. 
(3)  At the organizational meeting each year, the Mayor, with the approval of the City Commission, shall appoint two persons who shall serve for three-year terms. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.123; Ord. 129. Passed 1-5-82. Ord. 549. Passed 1-21-02. Ord. 613. Passed 10-20-03. Ord. 861. Passed 3-15-10.) 
1220.04 - Removals. 
    Members other than the members selected from the City Commission may, after a public hearing and upon written charges, be removed by the Mayor for misfeasance, nonfeasance, or malfeasance in office. The City Commission may, for like cause, remove the members selected by it. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.124. Ord. 861. Passed 3-15-10. Ord. 928. Passed 11-7-11) 
1220.05 - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies occurring otherwise than through expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor, in the case of members appointed by him or her; by the City Commission, in the case of members selected by it; and by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Commission, in the case of members appointed in that manner. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.125) 
1220.06 - Officers. 
    The Planning Commission shall elect its Chairperson and Secretary from among the appointed members and shall establish and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of each officer shall be one year with eligibility for re-election as set forth in the Planning Commission bylaws. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.126. Ord. 928. Passed 11-7-11.) 
1220.07 - Meetings. 
    The Planning Commission shall hold not less than four regular meetings each year, and by resolution shall determine the time and place of meetings. The business that the Planning Commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the Planning Commission held in compliance with the open meetings act, MCL 15.261 to 15.275. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.127. Ord. 928. Passed 11-7-11.) 
1220.08 - Rules; records. 
    The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business in conformity with Act 33 of the Public Acts of 2008, as amended (M.C.L.A. 125.3801 et seq.) and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a planning commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 to 15.246. 
(1976 Code Sec. 2.128. Ord. 928. Passed 11-7-11.) 
Chapter 1222 - City Plan[2] 
  
There are no sections in Chapter 1222. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross references and any future legislation. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The City of Traverse City Master Plan, prepared by the City, was adopted by the City Commission on August 3, 2009. Copies of such Plan may be obtained from the City Clerk. 
Charter reference- Planning Commission,  160 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Master plan required, MSA 5.2996; Notice of hearing of municipal planning commission re master plan, MCL 125.3831 et seq. 
Cross reference- Supervisory Agency for Urban Redevelopment Corporation,  240.01; Planning Department, Ch. 262; Urban Forest Plan,  1028.04; Planning Commission, Ch. 1220; Street numbering plat,  1470.01 

Chapter 1224 - Grand Traverse Commons Joint Planning Commission[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Agreement Establishing the Grand Traverse Commons Joint Planning Commission (authorized April 30, 2007) 
State Law reference- Joint Municipal Planning Act, M.C.L.A.  125.139 

1224.01 - Formation of the Grand Traverse Commons Planning Commission. 
    The City approves the establishment of a joint Planning Commission pursuant to Public Act 226 of 2003, as amended, and shall enter into and adhere to the agreement establishing the Grand Traverse Commons Joint Planning Commission between the City of Traverse City and the Charter Township of Garfield regarding the formation, composition, and operation of the Grand Traverse Commons Planning Commission, whose jurisdictional area shall be property commonly known as the Grand Traverse Commons. 
(Ord. 722. Passed 4-30-07.) 
1224.02 - Severability. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this chapter shall for any reason be finally adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment is rendered. 
(Ord. 722. Passed 4-30-07.) 
1224.03 - Repeal. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the City of Traverse City inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed so far as they may be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 722. Passed 4-30-07.) 
1224.04 - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall take effect following its adoption and publication pursuant to the procedures outlined in Section 9 of Public Act 226 of 2003 (MCL 125.139). 
(Ord. 722. Passed 4-30-07.) 
TITLE FOUR - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
Chapter 1240 - General Provisions and Definitions[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Approval of plats; street system, MCL  125.3807, MCL  125.3833, MCL  125.3871; Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement; publication of regulations, MCL  125.3871; Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect, MCL  125.3801 et seq.; Certification of city plats, M.C.L.A.  125.51 et seq. 

1240.03 - Short title. 
    This Title Four of Part Twelve-The Planning Code shall be known and may be cited as "the Subdivision Control Ordinance for the City of Traverse City, Michigan" or just "the Subdivision Regulations." 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.011) 
1240.04 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of these Subdivision Regulations are to regulate and control the subdivision of land in the City in order to promote the public health and the general welfare and safety of the community; to require that the land be suitable for building sites; to require certain minimum public improvements; to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with proper relation to major thoroughfares and adjoining subdivisions; to secure the orderly expansion of public facilities; to plan for the provision of adequate recreation areas; to ensure adequate provisions for water, sanitary sewers and drainage; to provide for approvals to be obtained by subdividers prior to the recording and filing of plats; to provide for and regulate the further partitioning of lots in recorded plats; to provide penalties for violations of these Subdivision Regulations; and to repeal any ordinance or part thereof inconsistent with these Subdivision Regulations. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.012) 
1240.05 - Interpretation; conflict of laws. 
    These Subdivision Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare of the City. These Subdivision Regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annual or in any manner interfere with existing regulations of the City or conflict with any statute of the state or County, except that these Subdivision Regulations shall prevail in cases where they impose a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.07) 
1240.06 - Compliance required. 
    The approvals required under these Subdivision Regulations shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvement in the City in a public street, alley, right of way or easement, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the City. All subdivision or project improvements in the City installed in a public street, alley, right-of-way or easement, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the City, shall comply with these Subdivision Regulations or any other related ordinance. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.06) 
1240.07 - Separability. 
    The various parts, sections and clauses of these Subdivision Regulations are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of these Subdivision Regulations shall not be affected thereby. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.11) 
1240.08 - Definitions. 
    All terms as defined in the Subdivision Control Act, being Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended (M.C.L.A. 560.101 et seq.), shall control in these Subdivision Regulations unless indicated to the contrary in this section. Unless otherwise specifically stated, as used in these Subdivision Regulations: 
(1)  As-built plans means revised construction plans with all approved field changes. Copies for the permanent public record shall be on mylar or its approved equal. 
(2)  Block means property abutting one side of the street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or stream, or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of the development or boundary line of the City. 
(3)  Building line or set-back line means a line parallel to a boundary of a lot or parcel, established on such lot or parcel for the purpose of prohibiting construction or projection of a building between such line and the boundary. 
(4)  City engineer means the City Engineer or the City Manager. 
(5)  Comprehensive development plan, master plan or city plan means a unified document of text, charts, graphs and maps, or any combination thereof, designed to portray general long range proposals for the arrangement of land uses, and intended primarily to guide government policy toward achieving orderly and coordinated development of the entire community, and any amendments to such Plan or part thereof duly adopted by the Planning Commission. 
(6)  Crosswalk or pedestrian walkway means a right of way dedicated to the public use, which right of way crosses a block or extends between lots and is intended to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties. 
(7)  Dedication means the intentional appropriation of land by the owner to the public use. 
(8)  Governing body means the City Commission. 
(9)  Greenbelt or buffer park means a strip or parcel of land privately restricted or publicly dedicated as open space located between incompatible uses for the purpose of protecting and enhancing the residential environment. 
(10)  Health department means the Grand Traverse, Leelanau and Benzie District Health Department, also known as the Tri-County Health Department. 
(11)  Improvement means any addition or modification incidental to servicing or furnishing facilities for a subdivision, such as, but not limited to, grading, curb and gutter, paving, driveways, approaches, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, storm and sanitary sewer lines, culverts, bridges, utilities, lagoons, slips, waterways, lakes, bays, canals and other appropriate items, with appurtenant construction. 
(12)  Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
(13)  Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance from the street line to the rear lot line. 
(14)  Lot split means a further partitioning or dividing of a lot in a recorded plat in accordance with these Subdivision Regulations. 
(15)  Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot line measured at the set-back line. 
(16)  Parcel in a recorded plat means a measured portion of a lot or lots in a recorded plat under one ownership. 
(17)  Planning commission means the Planning Commission of the City as established under the City Charter and Michigan Planning Enabling Act 33 of 2008, as amended (MCL 125.3801 et seq.). 
(18)  Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. Specifically: 
a.  Pre-preliminary plat or pre-application sketch means a plan, map or sketch drawing to scale showing the existing features of the site and surroundings and a general layout of the proposed subdivision. Sufficient details to provide an adequate basis for review and to meet the requirements and procedures set forth in these Subdivision Regulations shall be provided. 
b.  Preliminary plat means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision of land, submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
c.  Final plat means a map of all or part of a subdivision prepared by, and the accuracy of which is certified by, a registered civil engineer or land surveyor in accordance with the Subdivision Control Act, being Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended (M.C.L.A. 560.101 et seq.), and these Subdivision Regulations, which map is suitable for recording with the County Register of Deeds. 
(19)  Public utility means any person, firm, corporation, co-partnership, municipal corporation or other public authority providing gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone or telegraph service, cable television service, sewers, transportation or any other service of a similar nature. 
(20)  Right-of-way means land reserved, used or to be used for a street, alley, walkway or public utility, and those properties shown on the plat which are usually public and are dedicated to the use of the public. 
(21)  Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing State, County or Municipal roadway, or any of the foregoing included in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action. "Street" includes the land between the right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavements, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, lawns and other areas within the right-of-way lines. Specifically: 
a.  Arterial street means a street of considerable continuity which is used or may be used primarily for heavy vehicle loads, large volumes of traffic, fast moving traffic or through traffic. 
b.  Collector street means a street used to carry traffic from a minor street to an arterial street, including principal entrance streets to large residential and commercial developments. 
c.  Cul-de-sac means a minor street of short length having one end terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
d.  Marginal access street means a minor street which is parallel and adjacent to an arterial street, which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic and which does not carry substantial volumes of through traffic. 
e.  Minor street means a street which is intended primarily for access to abutting properties, that is, a local street for residential and other local access use. 
(22)  Proprietor means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them who or which may hold any recorded or unrecorded ownership interest in the land. The proprietor is also commonly referred to as the owner, subdivider or developer. 
(23)  Subdivision control act means Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended (M.C.L.A. 560.101 et seq.). 
(24)  Tract in a recorded plat means lots, parcels, or outlots in a recorded plat under common ownership. 
(25)  Zoning ordinance means the City Zoning Code, codified as Title Two of Part Thirteen-The Zoning Code. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.02. Ord. 680. Passed 05-16-05.) 
Chapter 1242 - Administration, Enforcement and Penalty[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Planning Enabling Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801-125.3885; Approval of plats; street system, MCL  125.3807, MCL  125.38.33, MCL  125.3871; Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement; publication of regulations, MCL  125.3871; Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect, MCL  560.101 et seq. (The Land Division Act 288 of 1967); Certification of city plats, M.C.L.A.  125.51 et seq. 

1242.01 - Enforcement by planning commission and city commission. 
    These Subdivision Regulations shall be interpreted and enforced by the Planning Commission and the City Commission pursuant to and under the authority of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act 33 or 2008, as amended (MCL 125.3801 et seq.) and Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended (M.C.L.A. 560.101 et seq.). 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.08) 
1242.02 - Fees. 
(a)  Plan review. Fees for subdividing land shall be in accordance with a schedule recommended by the Planning Commission and adopted by the City Commission, as published and amended from time to time. 
(b)  Construction inspection. Prior to the approval of the City for the proprietor to proceed with the installation of required utilities, a deposit in the amount of four percent of the contract costs of the utilities proposed for construction shall be received to guarantee any construction inspection expense of the City. Upon completion of the project, actual expenses shall be itemized and accounted for, based on payroll cost plus 35 percent. The excess, if any, shall be returned to the depositor, and if the deposit is insufficient to cover the expenses, the depositor will be billed for the deficiency. (1976 Code Sec. 15.09) 
(c)  Final plat approval. The final plat approval fee shall be determined by resolution of the City Commission. 
1242.03 - Variances. 
    The City Commission may authorize a variance from these Subdivision Regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the City Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings as required in this section, the City Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land, the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the City Commission finds that: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of these Subdivision Regulations would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land; 
(2)  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; and 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which such property is situated. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.13) 
1242.99 - Penalty. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. The subdivision or use of land in violation of these Subdivision Regulations is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and any court of competent jurisdiction may order such nuisance abated. Any person so violating these Subdivision Regulations shall be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.10) 
Chapter 1244 - Subdivision Procedures[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Planning Enabling Act 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3801-125.3885); Approval of plats; street system, MCL  125.3807, MCL  125.3833, MCL  125.3871; Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement; publication of regulations, MCL  125.3871; Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect, MCL  MCL  125.3801 et seq. (The Land Division Act 288 of 1967); Certification of city plats, M.C.L.A.  125.51 et seq. 

1244.01 - Pre-application sketch. 
(a)  Unless waived in writing by the City Engineer, the proprietor shall submit ten copies of a sketch of a proposed subdivision to the City Clerk. The sketch plan shall show the entire development scheme of the subdivision in a schematic form, including the area for immediate development. The existing conditions and characteristics of the land and all pertinent features therein and adjacent to the site shall be noted. The general layout of streets, alleys, blocks and lots and any general area set aside for public open space shall be noted. The scale shall not be less than one inch equals 100 feet. 
(b)  A letter or report from the proprietor's engineer or surveyor concerning the general feasibility of the land for subdividing shall be submitted if required by the City. 
(c)  The City Clerk shall promptly transmit copies of the preliminary plat to affected City administrative officials. 
(d)  The Planning Commission and City administration will review the plans with the proprietor or his or her agent. If requested, the Commission shall inform the proprietor or his or her agent of the policies of the City regarding the type of development proposed. Appropriate comments and suggestions concerning the proposed development scheme will be discussed. In the event of a disagreement regarding the design and layout, the proprietor shall be requested to revise his or her plans according to the recommendations of the Commission. 
(e)  When the pre-preliminary sketch is satisfactory to the Commission, the proprietor may submit his or her preliminary plat. Acceptance of the sketch does not ensure acceptance of the preliminary plat. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.031) 
1244.02 - Tentative approval of preliminary plats. 
(a)  Information and data. The following shall be shown on the preliminary plat or submitted with it: 
(1)  The proposed name of the subdivision by which it shall be legally and commonly known. The name shall not closely approximate or duplicate any other subdivision on record in the City or in its immediate vicinity. 
(2)  A description of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision acceptable to the City Engineer; 
(3)  The name and address of the proprietor; and the name, address, registration number and official seal impression on the preliminary plat of the engineer or surveyor who designed the preliminary plat. The scale shall be not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet. A north arrow shall be shown. Total acreage within the subdivision shall be indicated. 
(4)  Drawings indicating the existing and proposed contours at intervals not to exceed two feet, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Elevations shall be based on City datum, USC and GS datum. Other engineering data as may be required by the City related to street crossings, sewer elevations, water elevations and similar conditions shall be submitted. 
(5)  The location of flood plain areas, rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, County drains, lagoons, slips, waterways, bays, canals and artificial impondments, either existing or proposed, within or adjacent to the area to be platted; 
(6)  The layout of all proposed lots with approximate dimensions and lot numbers. All lots shall be designated by consecutive numbers. Building set-back lines, parallel to proposed streets, shall show the pertinent dimensions. 
(7)  Existing water mains, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, power lines, telephone lines or other existing facilities, together with any ditches, culverts or natural watercourses, including data on general sizes, types and elevations of such existing utilities which are within or adjacent to the area to be subdivided; 
(8)  Preliminary engineering plans and general descriptions and drawings showing proposed improvements. The engineering plans shall contain enough information and detail to enable the City to make a preliminary determination as to the conformity of the proposed improvements to applicable City requirements. 
(9)  A map of the entire area scheduled for development, if the proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent development; 
(10)  The location of section lines, City limit lines and existing previously platted lots within the area to be platted and in areas immediately adjacent thereto. Existing streets, alleys, easements, railroads, utility right of ways, parks, public open spaces, buildings, structures and other existing improvements shall be shown. 
(11)  The existing land use and zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjacent properties and intersecting boundaries thereof; and tax numbers of adjacent unplatted parcels or lot numbers if the adjacent land is subdivided; 
(12)  The layout of all proposed streets, alleys and easements showing general courses, widths, lengths and proposed street names; 
(13)  A statement of the intended uses of the proposed plat, such as residential single-family, two-family, multiple housing, commercial, industrial or recreation; 
(14)  A general description of any site proposed for parks, playgrounds or schools, or of any parcel of land within the subdivision intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use or set aside for use by the property owners within the subdivision; 
(15)  A description of all land owned by the proprietor adjacent to the land in the preliminary plat, together with a statement of present plans for the development of that adjacent land; and 
(16)  A description of the type of residential buildings and the number of dwelling units contemplated, if specifically requested by the City. In addition, the proprietor shall furnish a draft of his or her proposed protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, whereby he or she proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(b)  Authority of planning commission. 
(1)  Application. The proprietor shall submit one brown line sepia and ten copies of the preliminary plat, and one original and ten copies of the documents containing all of the information required by subsection a. hereof, to the City Clerk at least 24 calendar days before the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which the request for tentative approval of the preliminary plat is to be first considered. 
(2)  Action. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat and accompanying information and shall review the same for compliance with law and recommendations of the City. 
b.  The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall publicly advertise such hearing in the official newspaper of the City and shall send notice thereof by mail to all owners of land immediately adjoining or within 300 feet of the property proposed to be platted. The time and place of the meeting of the Commission to consider such preliminary plat and accompanying information shall be given. 
c.  The Commission may, immediately following the public hearing, but within 60 days after the preliminary plat is first submitted to it, unless the proprietor agrees to an extension, in writing, grant tentative approval, grant tentative approval subject to certain modifications and/or written conditions or disapprove the proposed plat. Otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved. A certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Commission on demand. 
d.  If the plat is approved with modifications and/or conditions by the Commission, the reasons therefor shall be specified in writing. In approving a plat, with or without modifications or conditions, the Commission may grant variances from these Subdivision Regulations, but only in accordance with Section 1242.03, and must state its reasons therefor in writing. 
e.  If approved conditionally, the conditions and reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. For any conditional approval requiring a change in the plat, the Planning Commission may require the proprietor to submit a revised preliminary plat to the City Commission. 
f.  If disapproved, the reasons for that action shall be stated in writing. The Planning Commission shall, in writing, recommend such modifications as would render the plat acceptable to the Commission. 
g.  One copy of the preliminary plat as acted on by the Commission, signed by its Secretary and noting the action taken shall be retained in its records. One signed copy shall be delivered to the proprietor. 
h.  Tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission shall be effective for one year. Following such approval, the general terms and conditions of the approval shall not be changed. However, if there is a change in the zoning classification of the land contained within a proposed plat, any approval given shall be null and void. No zoning change within the proposed plat shall be considered unless such change is consented to by the proprietor, in writing, and filed with the City. 
i.  A resolution containing the action of the Planning Commission, together with five copies of the plat and accompanying documents, shall be forwarded to the City Commission for consideration of tentative approval of the preliminary plat. 
(c)  Authority of city commission. 
(1)  Within 30 days from the date of the action of the Planning Commission, unless the proprietor agrees to an extension, in writing, the City Commission shall tentatively approve, tentatively approve subject to certain modifications and/or written conditions, or disapprove the proposed plat. Any approval shall be effective for one year. After such approval, the general terms and conditions of that approval shall not be changed. The City Commission may, but need not, hold a public hearing on the proposed preliminary plat. 
(2)  No installation or construction of any improvement shall be made before final approval of the preliminary plat by the City Commission, and then only after the engineering plans have been approved by the City Engineer. 
(3)  If approved conditionally, all conditions must be met prior to any consideration by the City Commission for final preliminary plat approval. 
(4)  If a preliminary plat is disapproved at the tentative approval stage by the City Commission, it shall not be again considered by the City Commission until it has been again considered and acted upon by the Planning Commission. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.032) 
1244.03 - Final approval of preliminary plats. 
(a)  The proprietor shall submit to the City Clerk: 
(1)  Written approval of the preliminary plat by all authorities whose approval is required under Sections 112 through 119 of the 1967 Subdivision Control Act, being Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended (M.C.L.A. 560.112 through 560.119). 
(2)  A written statement from the City Treasurer that there are no special assessments or ad valorem taxes outstanding against such property; 
(3)  Written approval of the preliminary plat by all public utility companies proposed to service the area to be subdivided; and 
(4)  Copies of the plat bearing the written approval of such authorities, boards and utility companies as may be designated by the City. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the information set forth in subsection (a) hereof, the City Commission shall, at its next regular meeting or within 20 days, grant preliminary plat approval if the proprietor has met all the conditions, if any, of tentative approval. The City Commission shall instruct the City Clerk to notify the proprietor, in writing, of approval or rejection. If the plat is rejected, the reasons for such action shall also be noted. The proprietor may revise such rejected plat and resubmit the same to the City Commission at a time within one year from the granting of tentative approval by the City Commission. 
(c)  Final approval of the preliminary plat under this section shall confer upon the proprietor, for two years from the date of approval, the conditional right that any variance or other general term or condition under which approval was granted will not be changed. The two-year period may be extended by the City Commission if applied for by the proprietor in writing. Written notices of the extension shall be sent by the City Commission to other approving authorities. Failure on the part of the proprietor to proceed in accordance with these Subdivision Regulations with final plat procedures within the period specified shall result in automatic withdrawal of the approval of the preliminary plat. In order to regain such approval, the proprietor must again apply and precede through the pre-application sketch and preliminary plat stages in accordance with this chapter. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.033) 
1244.04 - Approval of final plats. 
(a)  The proprietor shall submit the final plat to the City Clerk. 
(b)  The final plat shall comply with the Subdivision Control Act. 
(c)  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, except that it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposes to record and develop at the time. 
(d)  The proprietor shall submit to the City Clerk, as evidence of title, an abstract of title certified to date with the written opinion of an attorney at law thereon, or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance or copy thereof, for examination in order to ascertain whether or not the proper parties have signed the plat. 
(e)  The final plat shall be accompanied by one set of the approved, proposed construction plans and specifications for improvements and the necessary surety. However, if improvements have been satisfactorily completed and accepted by the City, as-built plans and any other plans as may be required by the City shall be submitted. 
(f)  The City shall review the final plat for conformity with the preliminary plat and may prepare a set of recommendations to be submitted to the Planning Commission. 
(g)  The Planning Commission shall examine the final plat and shall approve the plat, with or without modifications or conditions, or shall reject it. If the final plat is approved with modifications and/or conditions, the Commission shall specify, in writing, the reasons therefor. In approving a plat, the Commission may grant variances from these Subdivision Regulations, but only in accordance with the standards set out in Section 1242.03, and must state its reasons therefor in writing. If the final plat is rejected, the grounds for rejection, including citation to the applicable regulation, shall be stated on the record of the Commission. The Planning Commission shall transmit a written report of its action to the City Commission. 
(h)  No final plat shall be approved by the City Commission without the prior approval of the Planning Commission. 
The City Commission shall approve the final plat, with or without modifications or conditions, or shall reject it, within 20 days after the filing with the City Clerk of the written report of the Planning Commission. 
Rejected plats may be referred back to the Planning Commission for further study and review and required correction. 
One mylar copy and three paper prints of the final plat shall be filed by the proprietor with the City Clerk, and the proprietor shall deposit such sums of money as the City Commission may require under these Subdivision Regulations or other ordinances. Upon approval by the City Commission, the City Clerk shall sign the plat attesting to such action. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.034) 
1244.05 - Land division. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Boundary adjustment means a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels that results in no new buildable lots or creates fewer buildable lots than originally platted. 
(2)  For all other terms in this section, the definitions contained in Section 1240.06 of the Codified Ordinances and the State Land Division Act, PA 288 of 1967, as amended by PA 591 of 1996 shall apply. In the event that Section 1240.06 and the Land Division Act contain a definition for the same term, the provisions of Section 1240.06 shall control to the extent permitted by law. 
(b)  Consent. Notwithstanding anything contained in the ordinances of the City to the contrary, no building permit shall be issued for any construction on any lot, outlot or other parcel, which lot, outlot or other parcel has been divided or has had its boundary adjusted, or for any construction on a lot, comprised in whole or in part of such a divided or boundary adjusted lot, outlot or parcel, unless and until the City consents, in writing, to such division or boundary adjustment. 
(c)  Application. An application for a division or boundary adjustment of any tract, lot, outlot or parcel of land signed by the owner thereof, shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such application shall be made on a form prescribed by the City and obtainable from the office of the City Clerk. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  A survey drawn to scale in a manner and form prescribed by the application. 
(2)  Certification that boundary corner monuments have been or will be placed. 
(3)  A complete and accurate legal description of each proposed lot or parcel created by the land division or boundary adjustment. 
(4)  An application fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Commission. 
(5)  A memo from the City Treasurer indicating that there are no due and unpaid City taxes or special assessments on all of the tracts, lots, parcels, or outlots involved. 
(6)  If the proposed division is of an unplatted tract, parcel or parcels, the history and specifications of any previous division of land of which the proposed division was a part sufficient to establish that the parcel to be divided was lawfully in existence as of March 31, 1997, the effective date of the State Land Division Act. 
(7)  A legal, recorded instrument demonstrating proof of ownership of the subject tract, lot, outlet or parcel of land. 
(d)  Lot or tract in a recorded plat. The City Manager may permit the division of a lot or tract in a recorded plat or a boundary adjustment following: 
(1)  The City Planning Director's certification that the resulting parcels comply with all minimum lot requirements contained in the Zoning Ordinance, including, but not limited to lot size, lot dimensions, street frontage, driveway spacing, zoning setbacks, water frontage and number of lots on a single street right-of-way pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  The City Engineer's certification that each resulting parcel that is a development site has adequate easements for public utilities from the parcel to existing public utility facilities and the resulting parcels proposed to be created by the proposed land division are accessible. 
(3)  The City Assessor's certification that the resulting parcels created by the proposed land division complies with all standards of the State Land Division Act, PA 288 of 1967, as amended by PA 591 of 1996. 
(e)  Unplatted parcels. Pursuant to the Land Division Act, the City Manager shall permit a division of an unplatted tract or unplatted parcels within 45 days of the filing of a completed application following: 
(1)  The City Planning Director's certification that the resulting parcels comply with all minimum lot requirements contained in the Zoning Ordinance including, but not limited to, lot size, lot dimensions, street frontage, driveway spacing, zoning setbacks, water frontage and number of lots on a single street right-of-way pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  The City Engineer's certification that each resulting parcel that is a development site has adequate easements for public utilities from the parcel to existing public utility facilities and the resulting parcels proposed to be created by the proposed land division are accessible. 
(3)  The City Assessor's certification that the resulting parcels created by the proposed land division complies with all standards of the State Land Division Act, PA 288 of 1967, as amended by PA 591 of 1996. 
(f)  Unusual or unique circumstances. Where there are exceptional topographic, physical conditions, or other unusual or unique circumstances as determined by the City's Planning Director associated with a tract proposed to be divided, a division resulting in parcels that do not satisfy the minimum lot size requirements of the Zoning Ordinance may only be approved by resolution of the City Commission after consideration by the Planning Commission following a determination that the proposed division would allow the development of the land in such a manner as to be compatible with the surrounding land use and development and would not be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this section and the Zoning Ordinance. The City Commission may deny, approve or approve with conditions such requests after notice and a hearing, which conditions may include if the proposed division would result in a not buildable parcel, the City Commission may require the applicant to execute and record a deed restriction with the County Register of Deeds designating the parcel as "not buildable." Any such parcel shall also be designated as "not buildable" in the municipal records, and shall not thereafter be the subject of a request to the Zoning Board of Appeals for variance relief from the applicable lot and area requirements, and shall not be developed with any building or above ground structure. 
(g)  Effect of approval. Approval of a land division or boundary adjustment under this section does not grant approval for any specific uses of a parcel of property nor is it a determination that the resulting parcels comply with other ordinances or regulations. A decision approving a land division is effective for 90 days, after which it shall be considered revoked unless within such period a document is recorded with the County Register of Deeds office and filed with the City Assessor accomplishing the approved land division or transfer. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.035; Ord. 71. Passed 9-5-78. Ord. 609. Passed 8-4-03. Ord. 681. Passed 5-16-05.) 
Chapter 1246 - Design Standards[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Planning Enabling Act 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3801-125.3885); Approval of plats; street system, MCL  125.3807, MCL  125.3833, MCL  125.3871; Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement; publication of regulations, MCL  125.3871; Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect, MCL  560.101 et seq. (The Land Division Act 288 of 1976); Certification of city plats, M.C.L.A.  125.51 et seq. 

1246.01 - Streets, crosswalks and pedestrian walkways. 
    The standards set forth in this section shall be considered the minimum standards for streets, roads, crosswalks and pedestrian walkways. 
(a)  Location and arrangement. 
(1)  Generally. The subdivision of land for the dedication of land for streets, highways and alleys shall conform to the Major Street Plan as adopted by the Planning Commission. 
(2)  Local or minor streets. Local or minor streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic. Nevertheless, dead-end streets are prohibited, except those designed as cul-de-sacs and those required for future access to adjacent, unplatted properties. Temporary turnaround arrangements for stubbed dead-end streets to unplatted properties may be required. 
(3)  Continuations and extensions. The arrangement of streets shall provide for continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into the new subdivision, unless otherwise approved. Streets shall be arranged with respect to topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and reasonable gradients. 
(4)  Alleys. Alleys shall not be permitted in plats in areas intended for single or two-family residential development. Alleys may be provided in commercial subdivisions. Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited. 
(5)  Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial street, the City may require a marginal access street approximately parallel to the arterial street or such other treatment as it deems necessary for adequate protection for residential properties and local access, and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(6)  Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sac streets shall not extend more than 700 feet from the centerline of the nearest intersecting street. Special consideration shall be given to longer cul-de-sacs under unfavorable topographical conditions or other unusual circumstances. Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate with an adequate turnaround with a minimum right-of-way diameter of 120 feet. 
(7)  Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where unusual circumstances make it essential to the reasonable development of a tract in conformity with these Subdivision Regulations and where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street is provided. Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half street or partial street, the other part of the street shall be dedicated within the plat. 
(8)  Curvelinear pattern. In an attempt to provide a more pleasing appearance and an attractive vista, and to discourage excessive vehicular speeds, residential streets should be curvelinear. 
(9)  Conformity to city plan. All proposed plats shall be in general conformity with the City's street plan and the City Plan. 
(b)  Specifications. 
(1)  Right-of-way widths. 
a.  Right-of-way widths shall conform to the adopted major street plan and shall not be less than the following: 
Arterial streets       86 feet to 120 feet 
Collector streets       66 feet to 86 feet 
Local streets       66 feet 
Cul-de-sac streets       66 feet and 120 feet diameter 
Alleys       33 feet 
Pedestrian crosswalks       10 feet 
b.  If a subdivision abuts or contains an existing right of way of inadequate width, the City may require that the proprietor dedicate an additional right of way for the widening of the right of way. 
c.  The City may require a right-of-way width greater than that provided for in this paragraph to ensure public safety with regard to subdivision access, traffic circulation and parking in the subdivision. 
d.  Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains a railroad right of way, a parallel street bordering on or parallel to the railroad right of way shall be provided to serve as an interceptor street for minor streets as determined by the City. Between the street and the railroad there shall be a strip of land, of a width not less than the depth of one lot, which strip of land may be used in residential districts as a park, but may be used for business or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. 
(2)  Gradients. Local streets shall have minimum and maximum grades of 0.3 percent and 8.0 percent respectively, and collector and arterial streets shall have minimum and maximum grades of 0.4 percent and 5.0 percent respectively. However, such gradient standards may be modified in individual cases by the City. 
(3)  Curvature. The minimum horizontal centerline radii of curved local streets shall be 200 feet. Greater radii may be required for collector or principal streets having through traffic. A minimum tangent of 75 feet shall be introduced between reversed curves of streets of 66 feet of right-of-way. Greater tangent widths may be required based on the functional classification of the street. 
(4)  Multiple intersections. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets are prohibited. Curved streets intersecting with major thoroughfares and collector streets shall do so with a tangent section of centerline not less than 50 feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the major or collector street. 
(5)  Horizontal alignment. The centerline of the pavement shall coincide with the centerline of the right-of-way, except for irregular right-of-way widths or as otherwise allowed by the City. 
(c)  Angle of intersections. Streets shall intersect at 90 degrees or as closely thereto as feasible, but in no case at less than 80 degrees. However, such standard may be modified in individual cases by the City. 
(d)  Site distances. A subdivision street which intersects with a primary highway must make provision for adequate and safe site distances. 
(e)  Centerline offsets. Street jogs at intersections shall be avoided. Where such jogs are unavoidable, street centerlines shall be offset by a distance of 150 feet or more. 
(f)  Crosswalks and pedestrian walkways. Right-of-ways for crosswalks and pedestrian walkways shall be required where necessary to obtain convenient pedestrian circulation, and shall extend through the blocks in question, unless otherwise allowed by the City. The City may require the proprietor to pave and fence the crosswalk area. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.041) 
1246.02 - Easements. 
    Easements shall be provided along front lot lines and along-side and rear lot lines when necessary for utilities and/or drainage. The total width on any given lot shall not be less than ten feet along the front lot line. Rear easements shall be seven and one-half feet wide or a total of 15 feet for adjoining lots. An easement of varying width, adjusted to the needs of the public, shall be provided as may be required along waterfronts. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.042) 
1246.03 - Blocks. 
    A block shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots, except where lots back onto an arterial street, natural feature, railroad, subdivision boundary or barrier of a similar nature. Block length shall be not less than 500 feet nor greater than 1,320 feet, centerline to centerline. The width of a block shall normally be equal to the total depth of the two tiers of lots and shall not be less than 200 feet unless unusual conditions exist. Blocks intended for purposes other than residential shall be designed to provide adequate provisions for off-street parking and loading in accordance with the Zoning Code. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.043) 
1246.04 - Lots. 
(a)  Lot size, width, depth and area shall not be less than the particular district requirements for building sites or lots in the zoning district as contained in the Zoning Code. Outlots are accepted from this subsection. 
(b)  Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles to the straight street and radial to curved streets. 
(c)  The depth of a lot generally shall not exceed three times the width as measured at the building line. 
(d)  Corner lots in residential plats shall have sufficient extra width to permit appropriate building setbacks for both front and side streets. Corner lots in residential plats, the rear yards of which lots abut rear yards, shall have a minimum width of 70 feet. All corner lots in residential plats, the rear yards of which lots abut a side yard, shall have a minimum width of 80 feet. 
(e)  If a proposed subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, shopping center, industrial property or other high intensity use, the City may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage or such other treatment as may be necessary to protect residential properties and to afford separation from and reduction of traffic hazards and nuisances. Such requirements may include landscaped easements and extra depths in lots. 
(f)  All lots shall front upon a dedicated public or private street or an approved place or way. All lots in a residential plat shall have frontage of not less than 40 feet on at least one street or approved place or way, unless otherwise allowed by the City. 
(g)  Where parcels or lands are subdivided into unusually large lots or tracts, the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to allow for resubdividing into smaller parcels in a logical fashion. 
(h)  Lots shall be so arranged as to not be cut by a City boundary line. 
(i)  Business or commercial lots shall have a width of not less than fifty feet. Lot areas shall be sufficient as to provide for off-street parking and loading in accordance with the Zoning Code. 
(j)  Lots fronting on arterial streets shall have a depth of not less than 125 feet. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.044) 
1246.05 - Flood plains. 
    Land subject to flooding or inundation by storm water shall be clearly shown on the final plat. Such land shall not be platted for residential purposes or for uses that may, in the judgment of the City, increase the danger to health, life or property or increase the flood hazard. Such land within a plat shall be set aside for other uses, such as parks or open spaces. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.045) 
1246.06 - Natural features. 
    The natural features and character of land must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features, such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar community assets, that will add attractiveness and value to the property if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be required. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.046) 
Chapter 1248 - Improvements[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments for public improvements, Ch. X; Ch. 232 
State Law reference- Michigan Planning Enabling Act 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3801-125.3885); Approval of plats; street system, MCL  125.3807, MCL  125.3833, MCL  125.3871; Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement; publication of regulations, MCL  125.3871; Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect, MCL  560.101 et seq. (The Land Division Act 288 of 1967); Certification of city plats, M.C.L.A.  125.51 et seq. 
Cross reference- Improvement guarantees,  1252.02 

1248.01 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to establish and define the public improvements which must be constructed by the proprietor, or for the construction of which a bond must be posted, as conditions for final plat approval; to outline the procedures and responsibilities of the proprietor and the various public officials and agencies concerned with the administration, design, construction and financing of public facilities; and to establish procedures for assuring compliance with these requirements. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.051) 
1248.02 - Responsibility for preparation of plans. 
    The proprietor of every proposed plat shall have prepared, by a registered engineer, a complete set of construction plans, including profiles, cross sections, specifications and other supporting data, for the public streets, utilities and other facilities required by these Subdivision Regulations. Such construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which have been approved with the preliminary plat. All construction plans shall be prepared in general accordance with City standards and specifications and shall be approved prior to final plat approval. All costs for preparation of the necessary plans shall be paid by the proprietor. 
(1976 Code Sec.15.052) 
1248.03 - Construction required prior to final plat approval. 
    When construction has been completed at the time of filing the final plat, one complete copy of acceptable as-built plans of each required public improvement shall be filed with the City Clerk before approval of the final plat is given. Other requirements and procedures in the submittal of final plats shall be as provided in Chapter 1244. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.053) 
1248.04 - Surety; minimum standards. 
    In order to promote healthful, clean and desirable living conditions, the proprietor shall install the site improvements described in this chapter, or shall, prior to approval of the final plat, deposit with the City Clerk cash, a certified check or an irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the City, or a surety bond acceptable to the City and executed by a reputable insurance company authorized to do business in the State, all in a sufficient amount and form to permit the completion by the City of all contemplated improvements within 20 months, if the developer fails to satisfactorily complete such improvements. The City reserves the right to demand a specific type of surety and to reject all others. All costs for the improvements required by this chapter shall be borne by the developer. The special assessment district regulations of the City shall not be applicable for these improvements unless otherwise provided by the City Commission. Prior to the acceptance by the City of the improvements, a two-year maintenance and guarantee bond in an amount set by and in a form acceptable to the City shall be posted by the proprietor. 
    Improvements set forth under this chapter are the minimum acceptable, and other improvements may be required by the City. Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with standards and requirements established herein and/or such standards, specifications or details as may from time to time be established by ordinance or published or adopted by the City. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.054) 
1248.05 - Sanitary sewers. 
    The location and design of all trunk lines, lateral sanitary sewers and other necessary appurtenances, such as pumping stations, shall be first reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and all public agencies having jurisdiction. All work shall be carried out under the direct supervision of the proprietor's registered professional engineer. The proprietor shall not enter into any agreement with any adjacent property owner, which agreement requires him or her to provide such owner with sewer services, without prior approval of the City Commission. The installation of a sanitary sewer shall be required if a usable trunk sewer is located within 1,000 feet of any boundary of the proposed plat. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.054) 
1248.06 - Water. 
    The location and design of water mains, the installation of fire hydrants and other necessary appurtenances shall first be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and all public agencies having jurisdiction as to suitability. All work shall be carried out under the direct supervision of the proprietor's registered professional engineer. The proprietor shall not enter into any agreement with any adjacent property owner, which agreement requires him or her to provide such owner with water service, without prior approval of the City Commission. The installation of water mains and their connections with the City system shall be required in all new subdivisions. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.054) 
1248.07 - Street signs. 
    Street signs shall be of the same type and design as those in general use within the community. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.054) 
1248.08 - Storm drainage. 
    A storm drainage system shall include all necessary storm sewer pipe, street and yard drainage inlets and catch basins, manholes, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances necessary for the adequate drainage of the subdivision, unless otherwise provided by the City. If the City Commission decides that the curb and gutter streets and/or storm sewerage systems are not desirable in the proposed subdivision, it shall direct the proprietor to install, at a minimum, a 24 foot wide bituminous mat and adequate ditches. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.054) 
1248.09 - Street pavement; width. 
    All minor or local access streets shall be a minimum of 32 feet in width, face of curb to face of curb. Streets shall be paved with bituminous concrete and have reinforced concrete curb and gutter, or as approved by the City Engineer. Collector streets shall be a minimum of 36 feet in width, face of curb to face of curb. All alleys shall be paved and 20 feet in width. If the City Commission decides that curb and gutter streets and/or storm sewerage systems are not desirable in the proposed subdivision, it shall direct the proprietor to install, at a minimum, a 24 foot wide bituminous mat and adequate ditches. Plans for enclosed storm sewers and/or open ditches, curb and gutter and/or mats shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and all public agencies having jurisdiction before construction is begun. All work shall be carried out under the direct supervision of the proprietor's registered engineer. Previously dedicated but unimproved street right of ways, or existing streets not improved as required by this chapter for new streets, which streets or right of ways abut or are contained in the proposed plat, shall be improved with paving and curb and gutter, or as directed by the City Commission. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.054) 
1248.10 - Trees. 
    The City Commission may require that not more than one tree per lot be planted by the proprietor within a City right of way and that the proprietor maintain such tree for at least one year from the time of planting. Such trees shall be of a variety and size as specified by the City. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.054) 
1248.11 - Sidewalks. 
    The City may require the construction of sidewalks. If so required, they shall be five feet wide, constructed of concrete and located 18 inches from the property line on each side of the roadway, and shall, at the ends of blocks, extend to the roadway. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.054) 
1248.12 - Underground utilities. 
    All public utility facilities in residential subdivisions, exclusive of main supply lines and necessary surface facilities, shall be placed underground within utility easements provided by the proprietor for this purpose, or in dedicated public streets or ways, and shall be planned so as not to be in conflict with other underground utilities. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.055) 
1248.13 - Inspections. 
    In order to help ensure construction in accordance with approved plans and specifications, all improvements herein mentioned may be inspected by the Engineering Department of the City. In addition, the proprietor's registered engineer shall provide a signed statement that all facilities were installed in accordance with the approved plan, or such other assurances as may be acceptable to the City Engineer. The City may require that all work and inspection, or portions thereof, be carried out under the supervision of the City Engineer. In such cases, the proprietor's engineer is relieved of the responsibility. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.056) 
1248.14 - Acceptance. 
    No streets, water facilities, sanitary sewer facilities or storm drainage systems required by this chapter shall be considered part of the public system, accepted for maintenance purposes or become operative and functional as a part of the public system until the improvement is accepted by the City. 
(1976 Code Sec. 15.057) 
PART THIRTEEN - ZONING CODE 
TITLE TWO - ZONING CODE 
Chapter 1320 - General Provisions and Definitions[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507; Use of Land and Development as Conditioning to Rezoning, MCL  125.3405 
Cross reference- Application of Zoning Code to signs,  1476.15 

1320.01 - Title. 
    This Title Two of Part Thirteen-The Planning and Zoning Code, shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance" or the "Zoning Code." 
1320.02 - Purpose. 
    This Zoning Code is enacted for the public health, safety and welfare. 
1320.03 - Interpretation; conflict of laws. 
    This Zoning Code is the minimum requirement for promoting the public health, safety and general welfare. If it imposes more restrictions than state law or other City ordinances, the provisions of this Zoning Code shall govern. If the State Housing Law (MCL 124.401 et seq; MSA 5.2771, et seq) or the Airport Zoning Act (MCL 259.431, et seq; MSA 5.3475) or other statutes or ordinances have stricter regulations, the provisions of the statute or other ordinance shall govern. This Zoning Code is not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties. Section titles or headings and any entire section entitled "Purpose" shall be interpretive aids only and shall not be construed to impose any substantive or procedural requirement. 
1320.04 - Changes and amendments. 
(a)  Procedure. The City Commission, on its own motion or on petition, may amend or repeal zoning boundaries or regulations after submitting them to the Planning Commission for its recommendation, report and public hearing. The City Commission may also hold a public hearing with the notice it deems advisable. A hearing before the Planning Commission shall be granted a person interested at the time of its public hearing. The procedure for the Planning Commission public hearing shall be as follows: 
(1)  At least 15 days notice of the public hearing shall be given in an official newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
(2)  At least 15 days notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be mailed to each airport manager, electric, gas, pipeline, telephone, telecommunications provider, public utility company and to each railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the districts affected that registers its name and mailing address with the City Clerk for the purpose of receiving the notice. An affidavit of mailing shall be maintained. 
(3)  After the ordinance and maps have first been approved by the City Commission, if an individual property or several adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, notice of the proposed rezoning and hearing shall be given at least 15 days before the hearing to: 
a.  The owners of the property in question, unless 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning: and all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, unless 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning; and 
b.  All persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, unless 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning; and 
c.  At least 1 occupant of each dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different persons within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. Where a single structure contains more than 4 dwelling units or distinct spatial areas, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure with a request to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. The occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. Where the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification unless 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning. 
(b)  Notice. The notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the proposed zoning; 
(2)  A description of the subject property including a listing of all existing street addresses within the property where they exist, unless 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning; 
(3)  The time and place of the public hearing; and 
(4)  When and where written comments will be received. 
(c)  Protest. If a protest of the proposed amendment is presented to the City Commission at or before final action on the amendment and it is properly signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included in the proposed change, excluding publicly owned land, or by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of and included within an area extending out 100 feet from any point on the boundary of land included in the proposed change, excluding publicly owned land, then such amendment shall be passed only upon 5 affirmative votes of the City Commission. 
(d)  Hearing request. The City Commission shall grant a hearing on a proposed ordinance provision to a property owner who requests a hearing by certified mail, addressed to the City Clerk. 
(e)  Publication. Following the adoption of a zoning ordinance or amendment by the City Commission, a notice of adoption shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City within 15 days after adoption. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  In the case of a newly adopted zoning ordinance, the following statement: "A zoning ordinance regulating the development and use of land has been adopted by the City Commission of the City of Traverse City;" 
(2)  In the case of an amendment to an existing ordinance, either a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment, including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment; 
(3)  The effective date of the ordinance; 
(4)  The place and time where a copy of the ordinance may be purchased or inspected. 
(f)  Court decree. An amendment for the purpose of conforming a provision of the Zoning Ordinance to a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction may be adopted by the City Commission and the notice of the adopted amendment published without referring the amendment to the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 718. Passed 2-5-07. Ord. 749. Passed 5-21-07.) 
1320.05 - Application of code; compliance required. 
    Except as otherwise allowed by this Zoning Code: 
(1)  No building or structure shall be built, rebuilt, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally altered, and no building or land shall be used, except for a use allowed in that district. 
(2)  No building or structure shall be built, rebuilt, converted, enlarged, or structurally altered except in conformity with the height, setback, bulk and other dimensional limits for that district. 
(3)  No land shall be cleared, no building or structure shall be built or rebuilt, converted, enlarged or structurally altered, and no parking area built or enlarged except after applying for and receiving a land use permit. 
(4)  No building shall be built or increased in area except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of the district in which such building is located unless it receives a special land use permit or planned unit development permit or parking waiver that changes these regulations. 
(5)  The minimum setbacks, parking spaces and other open spaces, including lot area per dwelling, required by this Zoning Code for any building hereafter built or structurally altered, shall not be encroached upon or considered as parking, setback, open space or lot area requirement for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced beyond the district requirements of this Zoning Code. 
(6)  No setback or lot shall be reduced in dimensions or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein except as a result of governmental action. Lots created after the effective date of this Zoning Code shall meet at least the minimum requirements of this Code. 
(7)  No lot, once established or improved with a building or structure shall be divided unless each lot resulting from the division conforms with all of the requirements of this Code. 
(8)  Conditional rezoning. 
a.  Purpose. It is the intent of this Section to provide a process by which an applicant seeking a rezoning of land may propose a Conditional Zoning Offer, with conditions and commitments attached thereto, as part of the application for a requested rezoning pursuant to MCL 125.3405. These provisions shall be in accord with the provisions of the Zoning Act. 
b.  Zoning district. An applicant requesting a rezoning may offer a Conditional Zoning Offer, as defined in this section. The required application and process shall be the same as for rezoning requests, except as modified by the requirements of this section. 
c.  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section. 
1.  Conditional rezoning offer means conditions voluntarily proposed by a landowner for the use and development of land in exchange for the rezoning of the land. These conditions shall constitute requirements for, and in connection with, the development or use of the property approved under a Zoning Agreement. 
2.  Zoning agreement means a written agreement offered by the landowner and approved and executed by the landowner and the City and recorded with the Register of Deeds in the county where the property covered by the Zoning Agreement is located, incorporating the Conditional Rezoning Offer along with any requirements necessary to implement the Conditional Rezoning Offer. When necessary, the Zoning Agreement shall also include and incorporate, by reference, a Site Plan that illustrates the implementation of the Conditional Rezoning Offer. This Site Plan and Zoning Agreement shall not replace the requirement for a Site Plan as provided by the Zoning Ordinance. 
d.  Eligibility. 
1.  A landowner may submit a proposed Conditional Rezoning Offer and Zoning Agreement with an application for a rezoning or at any time during the rezoning process. 
2.  To be eligible, an applicant shall propose a Zoning District for the parcel at issue to be rezoned to and voluntarily offer use and development conditions for the affected parcel to be set forth in a Zoning Agreement, which are equally or more restrictive than the regulations that would otherwise apply under the proposed Zoning District. 
e.  Conditional zoning offer. 
1.  The Conditional Rezoning Offer shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship or benefit to the property in question. 
2.  The Conditional Rezoning Offer may not offer uses or developments of greater intensity or density, or that are not permitted in the proposed rezoned Zoning District. 
3.  Any use or development proposed that would require a variance from height, area, setback or similar dimensional requirements in the Zoning Chapter will not be allowed unless and until a variance is granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 1324. 
4.  Any use or development proposed that would require approval of a Special Land Use or Site Plan Review will not be allowed unless approved as required by the Zoning Ordinance prior to establishment or commencement of development of the use. 
5.  The Conditional Rezoning Offer may be amended during the process of rezoning consideration provided that any amended or additional conditions are offered voluntarily by the landowner. A landowner may withdraw part of or amend its Conditional Zoning Offer any time prior to the final rezoning action of the City Commission by amendment of the application and Zoning Agreement. If such withdrawal or amendment occurs following the Planning Commission's public hearing on the original rezoning request, the amended application shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a new public hearing. 
6.  A landowner may entirely withdraw its Conditional Rezoning Offer at any time prior to the adoption of the rezoning and Zoning Agreement by the City Commission. 
f.  Zoning agreement. The Zoning Agreement shall incorporate the Conditional Rezoning Offer and shall include additional terms as necessary to implement the Zoning Agreement. In addition, the Zoning Agreement shall include the following: 
1.  That the Zoning Agreement and the Conditional Rezoning Offer were proposed voluntarily by the landowner, and that the City relied upon and granted the rezoning request in consideration of the Zoning Agreement and the Conditional Rezoning Offer. 
2.  That the Zoning Agreement and its terms and conditions are authorized by all applicable state and federal law and that the Zoning Agreement is valid. 
3.  That the property shall be developed or used in a manner that conforms to the requirements of the rezoned Zoning District and the Zoning Agreement. 
4.  That the Zoning Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the landowner and the City, and their respective heirs, successors, assigns, receivers or transferees. 
5.  That, if the rezoning becomes void under this section, no development shall take place and no permits shall be issued unless and until a new Zoning District classification for the property has been established or a new rezoning been approved. 
6.  That each of the requirements and conditions in the Zoning Agreement are necessary and reasonably related and roughly proportional in nature and extent to the impact created by the uses or activities authorized in the Zoning Agreement. 
7.  That no part of the Zoning Agreement shall permit any activity, use, or condition that would otherwise be prohibited in the Zoning District to which the property is rezoned. 
8.  The Zoning Agreement shall also contain a provision authorizing and providing a fund for the City to maintain proposed privately owned common areas within the development in the event that the property owner(s) fail(s) to timely perform necessary maintenance. 
g.  Application procedure. 
1.  An application for Conditional Rezoning shall include a Conditional Rezoning Offer, the proposed Zoning Agreement in a recordable format acceptable to the City, and any plans necessary to illustrate the Conditional Rezoning Offer. The Planning Director shall determine the adequacy of any submitted plan and may request additional detail if deemed necessary to properly demonstrate the extent of the proposed offer(s). 
2.  The application may be amended during the process of consideration, provided that any amended or additional Conditional Rezoning Offers are proposed and entered voluntarily by the applicant. 
3.  The Zoning Agreement shall be reviewed by the City Attorney prior to the required Planning Commission public hearing to confirm that the Zoning Agreement is in a form acceptable for recording with the Register of Deeds in the county in which the property covered by the Zoning Agreement is located. 
h.  Review procedures. 
1.  Application completeness. Upon submittal of a completed application in the proper form, the Planning Director shall assign the application a public hearing date and time. 
2.  Official review. The Planning Director shall circulate site plans to the relevant agencies or officials for comments as to the proposed development's conformance to all applicable standards and requirements and whether approval of the application is recommended. 
3.  Planning commission review. The Planning Commission shall undertake a study of the proposed rezoning and set the matter for a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Act and the Planning Commission Rules of Procedure for consideration of any rezoning request. 
4.  Review standards. The Planning Commission shall consider whether the proposed Zoning Agreement and Conditional Rezoning offer meet the standards in MCL 125.3201(1). 
5.  Recommendation to city commission. The Planning Commission may recommend approval or denial of the Conditional Rezoning and Zoning Agreement. 
6.  City commission decision. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendations, the City Commission shall approve or deny the Conditional Rezoning and Zoning Agreement. 
i.  Implementation and effective date. 
1.  Upon adoption of a rezoning and Zoning Agreement, notice of adoption shall be published in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Act. 
2.  The Zoning Map shall be amended to specify the Zoning District to which the property is rezoned, plus the letter "A" to indicate that the property is subject to a Zoning Agreement. The City Clerk shall maintain a listing of all properties subject to Zoning Agreements and shall provide copies of the Agreements upon request. 
3.  The applicant shall record the approved Zoning Agreement with the Register of Deeds in the county in which the property covered by the Zoning Agreement lies within 30 business days following approval by the City Commission. Evidence of recording shall be provided to the City Clerk within 45 business days of approval by the City Commission. 
4.  The rezoning and Zoning Agreement shall commence and be in full force 31 calendar days after the date the City Commission adopted the amendment and authorized the Agreement, unless otherwise provided by the City Commission. 
5.  The use and development of the property(ies) shall conform to all of the requirements regulating use and development within the new Zoning District and the requirements of the Zoning Agreement. In the event of a conflict, the Zoning Agreement's requirements shall prevail. 
6.  Prior to development, any other applicable zoning approval or other approval requirement imposed by this chapter or other City ordinances shall be met. 
j.  Duration of approval. 
1.  Unless extended by the City Commission for good cause, the Rezoning and Zoning Agreement shall expire and be void and of no effect 2 years after adoption of the Conditional Rezoning and Zoning Agreement, unless the development set forth in the Zoning Agreement is at least 75 percent completed, and after 36 months if not 100 percent completed. Completion percentages shall be determined in the sole discretion of the Planning Director, subject to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
2.  Should the Rezoning and Zoning Agreement expire, all development on the subject property shall cease, and no further development shall be permitted. Until action satisfactory to the City is taken to bring the property into compliance with the Zoning Agreement, the City may withhold or, following notice and an opportunity to be heard, revoke permits and certificates, in addition to or in lieu of any other lawful action to achieve compliance. 
3.  Notwithstanding the above, if the property owner applies in writing for an extension of the Zoning Agreement at least 60 days prior to the expiration date, the City Commission may, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, grant an extension of up to 1 year. The extension may be granted if the property owner is able to demonstrate that the reasons for the extension were reasonably beyond his or her control and that the project has a reasonable expectation of proceeding. No further extensions shall be granted. 
4.  Nothing in the Zoning Agreement, nor any statement or other provision shall prohibit the City from rezoning all or any portion of the property that is part of the Agreement to another Zoning District. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and the Zoning Act. 
k.  Continuation of approval. 
1.  Provided that all development or use of the property in question is in compliance with the Zoning Agreement, a use or development authorized thereunder may continue indefinitely. 
2.  Failure to comply with the Zoning Agreement at any time after approval shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and may constitute a breach of the Zoning Agreement, and further use of the property may be subject to legal remedies available to the City, including the Zoning Agreement becoming void. 
l.  Reversion or rezoning. 
1.  If the Zoning Agreement becomes void as provided in this Section, then the land shall revert to the former Zoning District, as required by the Zoning Act. The reversion process shall be initiated by the Planning Commission pursuant to the rezoning procedure set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act. 
2.  Upon reversion, the City Clerk shall record with the Register of Deeds in the county in which the property covered by the Zoning Agreement liesa notice that the Zoning Agreement is no longer in effect. 
(Ord. 905. Passed 2-7-11. Ord. 922. Passed 8-15-11) 
1320.06 - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Zoning Code is declared invalid by a court, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Zoning Code or any part other than the part declared to be invalid. 
1320.07 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Abutting means a lot or parcel which shares a common border with the subject lot or parcel. 
    Accessory building means a building or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building and located on the same lot as and spatially separated from the principal building. 
    Accessory dwelling unit means a smaller, secondary home on the same lot as a principal dwelling. Accessory dwelling units are independently habitable and provide the basic requirements of shelter, heating, cooking and sanitation. There are 2 types of accessory dwelling units: 
(1)  Accessory dwelling in an accessory building (examples include converted garages or new construction). 
(2)  Accessory dwelling that is attached or part of the principal dwelling (examples include converted living space, attached garages, basements or attics; additions; or a combination thereof). 
    Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot as the principal use. 
    Adult foster care family home means a private residence with the approved capacity to receive not more than 6 adults who shall be provided foster care for 5 or more days a week and for 2 or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home state licensee shall be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
    Adult foster care small group home means a state licensed adult foster care facility with the approved capacity for not more than 12 adult residents to be provided foster care. 
    Affordable housing means housing units for eligible low-income households where the occupant is paying no more than 30 percent of gross income for housing costs. 
    Aggrieved person means a person who has suffered a substantial damage from a zoning decision not in common to other property owners similarly situated, and who has actively opposed the decision in question. 
    Airport terminal means the main passenger location of an airport and includes all office, hotel and retail uses commonly occurring at such locations. 
    Alley means a way which functions primarily as a service corridor and provides access to properties abutting thereon. "Alley" does not mean "street." 
    Alteration means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy; any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or wholly below finished grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement, as defined herein, shall not be counted as a story (see Figure 1-1). A cellar is a basement. 
    Berm means a constructed mound of earth rising to an elevation above the adjacent ground level of the site where located which contributes to the visual screening of the area behind the berm. 
    Block means a unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Block, face. "Face block" means that portion of a block or tract of land facing the same side of a single street and lying between the closest intersecting streets. 
    Boat house means an enclosed or partially enclosed structure designed for the use and storage of private watercraft and marine equipment. 
    Boat livery means any structure, site or tract of land utilized for the storage, servicing, docking or rental of watercraft for a fee. 
    Brew pub means a facility as defined such by the State of Michigan. 
    Building means any structure designed or built for the enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building, height of. See "height of building." 
    Building, principal. "Principal building" means a building within which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot upon which it is located. 
    Cemetery means property, including crematories, mausoleums, and/or columbariums, used or intended to be used solely for the perpetual interment of deceased human beings or household pets. 
    Clinic means an establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians or dentists or similar professions. 
    Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, science, literature, politics, agriculture or similar activities, but not operated for profit and open only to members and not the public. 
    Cluster means a development design technique that concentrates building on a portion of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space and preservation of environmentally sensitive features. 
    Communication antenna means a device, dish or array used to transmit or receive telecommunications signals mounted on a communication tower, building or structure that is greater than 1 square meter in a residential district or 2 square meters in a non-residential district. Antenna does not include federally-licensed amateur radio station, television or radio receive-only antennas or antennas used solely for personal use. Communication antennas are not "essential services," public utilities or private utilities. 
    Communication tower or tower means any structure that is primarily designed and constructed for the purpose of supporting 1 or more antennas for telecommunications, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. Communication towers are not "essential services," public utilities or private utilities. 
    Community garden means a parcel gardened collectively by a group of people. 
    Convenience store means a retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet. 
    Country club. See "golf course." 
    Crematories means a building or structure, or room or space in a building or structure, for the cremation of deceased persons or deceased household pets. 
    Critical root zone means a circular area surrounding a tree, the radius of which is measured outward from the trunk of a tree 1 foot for each 1 inch of diameter at breast height. The critical root zone shall also extend to a depth of 4 feet below the natural surface ground level. 
    Cultural facilities means facilities for activities for the preservation and enhancement for the cultural well-being of the community. 
    Development means all structures and other modifications of the natural landscape above and below ground or water on a particular site. 
    Diameter at breast height means the diameter of a tree trunk in inches measured by diameter at 4.5 feet above the ground. 
    District means a section of the City for which the zoning regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, setbacks and the intensity of use are uniform. 
    Drive-in means an establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
    Drive-through means an establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive service or obtain goods intended to be consumed off-premises. 
    Dripline means an imaginary vertical line extending downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
    Driveway means a means of access for vehicles from a street, approved alley, across a lot or parcel to a parking or loading area, garage, dwelling or other structure or area on the same lot. 
    Driveway, service means a point of access solely for the use of vehicles designed to load and unload trash receptacles 3 cubic yards or more in size. 
    Dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used exclusively for residential purposes and containing 1 or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, multiple family. "Multiple family dwelling" means a building or portion thereof containing 3 or more dwelling units and designed for or occupied as the home of 3 or more families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, single-family. "Single-family dwelling" means a detached building containing 1 dwelling unit and designed for or occupied by only 1 family. 
    Dwelling, two-family. "Two-family dwelling" means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by 2 families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit means 1 or more rooms with bathroom and principal kitchen facilities designed as a self-contained unit for occupancy by 1 family for living, cooking and sleeping purposes. The existence of a food preparation area (such as a sink and appliances to heat and refrigerate food) within a room or rooms shall be evidence of the existence of a dwelling unit. 
    Eligible household means a household meeting the income criteria included in Chapter 1376, with income determined in a manner consistent with determinations of lower-income households and area median income under Section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended (Section 8 Housing Program). 
    Eligible housing nonprofit means a 501(c)3 nonprofit housing organization with the means and capacity to guarantee and enforce long-term affordability of affordable housing units meeting the requirements of Chapter 1376. 
    Emergency shelter means a facility operated by a governmental or nonprofit agency where supportive services and shelter are offered to homeless persons. 
    Erected means built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises required for the building. Excavations, fill, drainage and the like, shall be considered a part of erection when done in conjunction with a structure. 
    Essential services means the installation, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or governmental agencies of underground, surface or overhead telephone, electrical, gas, steam, fuel, or water distribution systems, collections, supply or disposal systems, streets, alleys, sidewalks, or trails, including pavement, traffic control devices, signs, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, padmount transformers, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories in connection therewith which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or governmental agencies for the general public health, safety, convenience or welfare. "Essential services" do not include communication antennas and communication towers. 
    Essential service-structures. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or governmental agencies of structures not in the right-of-way over 800 cubic feet in area including, but not limited to, towers, transmission and subtransmission facilities, or buildings related to essential services in all districts. 
    Facade means the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view. 
    Family means 1 or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth or marriage, as distinguished from persons occupying a boarding house, lodging house or hotel. 
    Fence means a constructed barrier made of wood, metal, stone, brick or any manufactured materials erected for the enclosure of yard areas. 
    Flood plain, 100-year. "100-year flood plain" means the lowland areas adjoining inland and coastal waters which are identified on Floodway Maps produced by FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) and which are estimated to have a 1 percent chance of flooding in a given year. 
    Floor area . See "a gross floor area." 
    Frontage means the total continuous width of the front lot line. 
    Golf course/country club means any golf course, public or private, where the game of golf is played, including accessory uses and buildings customary thereto, but excluding golf driving ranges and miniature golf courses as a principal use. 
    Grade means: 
(1)  For buildings having walls adjoining 1 street only : the elevation of the public sidewalk, top of curb, or centerline of the street right-of-way, whichever is closest to the building, where a building wall adjoins a street. 
(2)  For buildings having walls adjoining more than 1 street : the average elevation of the sidewalks, curbs or centerlines of streets, whichever is closest to the building walls adjoining the streets. 
(3)  For buildings having no wall adjoining the street : the average of the lowest and highest ground surface elevations in an area within 6 feet of the foundation line of a building or structure. Any building or structure wall within 35 feet of a public or private street shall be considered as adjoining the street. (See Figure 1-2.) 
    Greenbelt means a strip of land of definite width and location upon which existing vegetation is preserved or an area is reserved for the planting of living plant materials to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip in carrying out the requirements of this Code. 
    Grocery store means a retail establishment primarily selling prepackaged and perishable food as well as other convenience and household goods. 
    Gross floor area (GFA) means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or structure from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating 2 buildings, but excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than 6 feet. 
    Guest night means an adult who occupies a room in a tourist home overnight. (i.e. An adult guest occupying a room in a tourist home for 4 nights has stayed for 4 guest nights.) 
    Height of building means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point on a mansard or flat roof or to the median height between the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. (See Figure 1-3). 
    Home occupation means an accessory use of a dwelling unit for business purposes. 
    Host, tourist home, means the owner resides in the tourist home overnight. 
    Impervious surface means any material which prevents, impedes or slows infiltration or absorption of storm water directly into the ground at the rate of absorption of vegetation bearing soils, including building, asphalt, concrete, gravel and other surfaces. 
    Impervious surface ratio means the area of impervious surface less those areas used exclusively for pedestrian circulation or outdoor recreational facilities divided by the gross site area. 
    Kennel means any lot or premises used for the sale, boarding, or breeding of dogs, cats or other household pets or the keeping of 5 or more dogs or cats in any combination over the age of 6 months. 
    Land clearing means: 
(1)  The clearing of over 8,000 square feet of vegetation from any site, or 
(2)  The removal of more than 20 trees more than 6 inches in diameter at breast height within 50 feet of a public or private street or river. 
Mowing, trimming or pruning of vegetation to maintain it in a healthy, viable condition is not considered land clearing. 
    Landing area means a landing pad, area, strip, deck or building roof used to launch or receive aircraft, including, but not limited to, power-driven winged or delta-winged aircraft, gliders, balloons and helicopters. 
    Landscaping means some combination of planted canopy trees, vines, ground cover, flowers or turf so long as a minimum of 80 percent of the landscape area is covered by living plant material. Planted trees shall be a least 21/2 inches caliper and shall comply with the species requirements set forth in the City's approved Tree List . In addition, the combination or design may include rock ground cover, earth mounds, and such structural features as fountains, pools, art works, screens, walls, fences and benches. 
    Laundromat means a business that provides home-type washing, drying and/or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises or operated for the benefit of retail customers who bring in and call for laundry. 
    Lodging facility means a commercial establishment with 1 or more buildings whose primary use is to provide temporary overnight accommodations within individual guest rooms or suites to the general public for compensation. Accessory uses may include eating places, meeting rooms and other similar uses. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Zoning Code, including 1 principal building together with accessory buildings, open spaces and parking areas required by this Zoning Code, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved private street. The word "lot includes the words "plot," "tract" or "parcel." 
    Lot, corner. "Corner lot" means a lot which has at least 2 contiguous sides abutting on and at the intersection of 2 or more streets. 
    Lot of record means a lot whose existence, location and dimensions have been legally recorded or registered in a deed or on a plat. 
    Lot, through. "Through lot" means an interior lot having frontage on 2 more or less parallel streets. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front setback line. 
    Manufacturing means the production of articles for use from raw or prepared materials by giving these materials new forms, qualities, properties or combinations, whether by hand labor or machine. 
    Market, municipal. "Municipal market" means a publicly owned and operated building or space where vendors offer a wide range of different products from open stalls. 
    Marina means a commercial mooring, berthing, or docking facility for watercraft with or without provisions for launching, haulout, servicing, fueling or sales of accessory supplies. 
    Medical marihuana facility means a location at which a person is licensed to operate under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., and a marihuana facility license under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City and operates as a medical marihuana grower, medical marihuana processor, medical marihuana secure transporter, medical marihuana provisioning center, or a medical marihuana safety compliance facility. 
    Medical marihuana grower means a use where a person holding a state operating license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., and a marihuana facility license under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages medical marihuana for sale to a processor or provisioning center. 
    Medical marihuana provisioning center means a use where a person holding a state license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., and a marihuana facility license under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City purchases medical marihuana from a medical marihuana grower or medical marihuana processor and commercially sells, supplies, or provides medical marihuana to registered qualifying patients as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26241 et seq., directly or through the registered qualifying patients' registered primary caregiver. Medical marihuana provisioning center includes any property where medical marihuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers. A residential location used by a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver through the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26241 et seq., is not a medical marihuana provisioning center. 
    Medical marihuana processor means a use where a person holding a state license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., and a marihuana facility license under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City purchases medical marihuana from a medical marihuana grower and extracts resin from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a medical marihuana provisioning center. 
    Medical marihuana safety compliance facility means a use where a person holding a state operating license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., and a marihuana facility license under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City takes medical marihuana from a marihuana facility or receives medical marihuana from a registered primary caregiver, tests the medical marihuana for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the medical marihuana to the marihuana facility. 
    Medical marihuana secure transporter means a use where a person holding a state license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., and a marihuana facility license under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City stores medical marihuana and transports medical marihuana between medical marihuana facilities for a fee. 
    Microbrewery means a facility as defined as such by the State of Michigan. 
    Non-conforming use means a lawful use of land that does not comply with the use regulations for its zoning district but which complied with applicable regulations at the time the use was established. 
    Nursing home. See "residential care and treatment facility." 
    Open space, common. "Common open space" means land within or related to a development, not individually owned that is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents and their guests of the development and may include such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate. 
    Ordinary high water mark means the line between upland and bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is marked distinctly from the upland and is identified along Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake at an elevation defined by the US Army Corps of Engineers. The Boardman River ordinary high water mark is identified as the line between upland and bottomland that persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil, and the vegetation. 
    Owner means any person having an ownership interest in a premises as shown on the latest Traverse City tax records. 
    Parcel . See a "lot." 
    Parking area means any public or private area, under or outside of a building or structure, designed and used for parking motor vehicles, including parking lots, driveways and legally designated areas of public streets. 
    Parking area, commercial. "Commercial parking area" means a tract of land which is used for the storage of motor vehicles, which is not accessory to any other use on the same or any other lot and which contains parking space rented to the general public or reserved for individuals by the hour, day, week or month. 
    Parking area, off-street. "Off-street parking area" means a land surface or facility providing vehicular parking spaces off of a street together with drives and maneuvering lanes so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Parking area, private. "Private parking area" means a parking area for the exclusive use of the owners, tenants, lessees, or occupants of the lot on which the parking area is located or their customers, employees, or whomever else they permit to use the parking area. 
    Parking area, public. "Public parking area" means a publicly owned or controlled parking area available to the public, with or without payment of a fee. 
    Parking space means an area of land provided for vehicles exclusive of drives, aisles, or entrances giving access thereto, which is fully accessible for parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Parking structure means a building or structure consisting of more than 1 level and used to store motor vehicles. 
    Pavement. "Pavement" and "paved" mean permanent and completely covered with concrete, a bituminous surface, brick or other surface approved by the Planning Director. 
    Pedestrian scale means design and construction considerations based upon the scale of a human being which imbue occupants and users of the built environment with a sense of comfort and security. 
    Person means a corporation, association, partnership, trust, firm or similar activity as well as an individual. 
    Place of worship means a building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, together with all accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose. 
    Planning director means the head of the City Planning and Zoning Department or the designee of that person. 
    Plat means a map of a subdivision of and recorded with the Register of Deeds pursuant to state statute 
    Primary residence means a housing unit in which an owner or lessee resides for the majority of the year and provides proof of primary residence evidence acceptable to the City Clerk. 
    Principal use means the main use of land or structures as distinguished from a secondary or accessory use. 
    Public utility means any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public; gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telephone, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    R-District means a residence district, namely an RC, R-1a, R-1b, R-2, R-9, R-15, and R-29 district. 
    Recreational facilities means buildings, or grounds, excluding amusement parks, where a variety of sport or exercise activities are offered. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle primarily designed and used as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel purposes including a vehicle having its own motor power or a vehicle mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. 
    Residential care and treatment facility means a facility providing: 
(1)  Services, programs and temporary shelter for residents who are undergoing alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation; 
(2)  Temporary emergency shelter and services for battered individuals and their children in a residential structure. 
    Restaurant, family means an establishment where food and drink are prepared and served to seated customers. Customer turnover rates are typically less than 1 hour. Generally, these establishments serve breakfast, lunch, and dinner and sometimes are open 24 hours a day. It may include cafeteria-style facilities. 
    Restaurant, fast food means an establishment where food and drink are served to customers at a counter. Such establishments may or may not have seating facilities. Generally, food and drink is ordered and taken to be consumed outside the restaurant building. 
    Restaurant, fine means an establishment where food and drink are prepared and served. Customer turnover rates are typically 1 hour or longer. Such establishments serve dinner but generally do not serve breakfast and may or may not serve lunch or brunch. 
    Right-of-way means a public or private street, alley or easement permanently established for the passage of persons or vehicles. 
    Rooming house means a residential building where rooms or suites of rooms are rented where the renters use common facilities, such as hallways and bathrooms. A rooming house shall not include lodging facilities, apartment houses, 2 and multi-family dwellings or fraternity and sorority houses. 
    School means an educational institution under the sponsorship of a private or public agency providing elementary or secondary curriculum, and accredited or licensed by the State of Michigan; but excluding profit-making private trade or commercial schools. 
    Screen means a structure providing enclosure and a visual barrier between the area enclosed and the adjacent property. A screen may also be non-structured, consisting of shrubs or other growing materials. 
    Screen, opaque means a masonry wall, fence sections, earthen berm, evergreen hedge or a combination of these elements which completely interrupt visual contact and provide spatial separation. 
    Setback means the distance required between a lot line and a building wall. 
    Setback, front. A front setback means the minimum required distance, extending the full lot width, between the principal building and the front lot line. 
    Setback, rear. A rear setback means the minimum required distance, extending the full lot width, between the principal and accessory buildings and the lot line opposite the front line. 
    Setback, side. A side setback means the minimum required distance, extending from the front setback to the rear setback, between the principal and accessory building and the side lot line. 
    Site diagram means a drawing, drawn to scale, showing the location of buildings and structures on a lot, as well as driveways, curb cuts, alleys, streets, easements and utilities. See Appendix 1, Figure 1-4. 
    Site plan means a plan showing all salient features of a proposed development, so that it may be evaluated in order to determine whether it meets the provisions of this Code. 
    Stop work order means an administrative order which directs a person not to continue, or not to allow the continuation of an activity which is in violation of this Code. 
    Street means any public way, such as a public street, avenue or boulevard, at least 16 feet wide. Street does not mean "alley." See also "Private street." 
    Street, access. "Access street" means a street or alley designed primarily to provide access to properties. 
    Street, arterial. "Arterial street" means a street designed to carry high traffic volumes through the community. 
    Street, collector. "Collector street" means a street designed to carry moderately high traffic volumes from arterial and access streets. 
    Street, private. "Private street" means an officially approved thoroughfare, other than a public street or alley, permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structural alterations means any change in a building requiring a building permit. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the ground or an attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but not limited to, freestanding signs, billboards, back stops for tennis courts and pergolas. 
    Tourist home, high intensity means a single-family dwelling that is a primary residence which is owned and hosted in residence by the owner renting out not more than three (3) rooms for compensation, limited to not more than two (2) adults per room, to persons who do not stay for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days for 85 or greater guest nights per year. 
    Tourist home, low intensity means a single-family dwelling that is a primary residence which is owned and hosted in residence by the owner renting out not more than two (2) rooms for compensation, limited to not more than two (2) adults per room, to persons who do not stay for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days for no greater than 84 guest nights per year. 
    Townhouse means a multiple dwelling in which each dwelling unit shares a common wall with at least 1 other dwelling unit and in which each dwelling unit has living space on the ground floor and has a separate ground-floor entrance. 
    Trailer means any enclosure used for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirtings, and which has been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or devices for transporting the enclosure from place to place. "Trailer" includes motor homes, travel trailers and camper vans. 
    Transit center means a fixed location where passengers interchange from 1 route or vehicle to another that has significant infrastructure such as a waiting room, benches, restrooms, sales outlet, ticket or pass vending machines and other services. 
    Transitional housing means a facility which is operated by a government or a nonprofit agency providing interim sleeping and bath accommodations; interim eating and cooking facilities; and professional services to assist individuals or families in locating permanent housing. 
    Treelawn means the area of public right-of-way lying between the curb line of a curbed street or developed travelway of a noncurbed street and the nearest private property line substantially parallel to said street. 
    Trip end means the total of all motor vehicle trips entering plus all motor vehicle trips leaving a designated land use or building over a given period of time. 
    Vacation home rental means a commercial use of a dwelling where the dwelling is rented or sold for any term less than 30 consecutive days. 
    Yard means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code. 
    Yard, front. "Front yard" means all land extending across the width of a property and lying between the building line and the front lot line. 
    Yard, rear. "Rear yard" means all land extending across the width of the property and lying between the building and the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side. "Side yard" means all land lying between a principal building and the side lot lines and extending from the front to the rear of the principal building. 
    Zoning Code means Part 13, Title One of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Traverse City and includes the text of this Zoning Code as well as all maps, tables, graphics, schedules as included or attached as enacted or subsequently amended. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 557. Passed 2-4-02. Ord. 565. Passed 6-3-02. Ord. 630. Passed 3-15-04. Ord. 672. Passed 03-21-05. Ord. 723. Passed 3-19-07. Ord. 781. Passed 2-4-08. Ord. 773. Passed 3-17-08. Ord. 787. Passed 3-17-08. Ord. 820. Passed 1-05-09. Ord. 827. Passed 2-02-09. Ord. 843. Passed 8-3-09. Ord. 873. Passed 8-16-10. Ord. 892. Passed 12-6-10. Ord. 902. Passed 2-7-11. Ord. 998. Passed 7-7-14. Ord. 1010. Passed 9-2-14. Ord. 1021. Passed 4-6-15. Ord. 1025. Passed 9-8-15; Ord. No. 1058 . Passed 8-7-17; Ord. 1065 . Passed 2-5-18; Ord. No. 1070 . Passed 4-2-18; Ord. 1081 , Passed 9-4-18; Ord. 1084 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19; Ord. No. 1089 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
1320.08 - Standard industrial classification. 
    The Standard Industrial Classification Manual 1987, Office of Management and Budget, United States Government, has been relied upon by the drafters of this Code for identification of and classification of economic activities. When questions of interpretation arise the Standard Industrial Classification Manual 1987 may be relied upon as an aid. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1320.09 - Rules of construction. 
    This chapter should be liberally construed to give effect to its purpose and the purposes of the Zoning Enabling Act. If a definition is not provided, common dictionary definitions may be referred to as interpretive aids. Words used in the present tense include the future tense and the singular includes the plural unless the context clearly indicated the contrary. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1320.10 - Uses not mentioned. 
    When a use is not expressly mentioned in this Zoning Code, the Planning Director shall make an interpretation as to what district or districts should accommodate the use. The decision shall be based on the intent of each district, similar uses mentioned in a district, and recognized rules of interpretation. The Planning Directors decision shall be appealable to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1320.11 - Temporary buildings. 
    Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district during the period that the construction work is in progress, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon the completion of the construction work. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1320.12 - Recreational vehicles, houseboats and trailers. 
    Recreational vehicles, houseboats and trailers shall not be used for living purposes in any district other than in a licensed trailer park. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1320.13 - Tents or portable buildings. 
    The use and occupancy of a tent or portable building for the purpose of general living quarters is not permitted in any zoning district. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1320.14 - Excavation. 
    The extraction of sand, gravel, or other raw materials at or below grade and the processing of raw materials extracted upon the premises in all districts is allowed subject to the following: 
(1)  The land to be excavated shall consist of not less than 10 contiguous acres. 
(2)  Mining operations are not likely to create a nuisance or interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of surrounding land. 
(3)  It shall be demonstrated by independent professional affidavit that all operations will comply with City noise ordinances. 
(4)  Dust, smoke or similar airborne particles shall not leave the property in amounts or degrees greater than from allowable uses in the same district. 
(5)  All operations and excavations shall be protected against trespass by fences and other suitable means. Truck traffic to and from the site shall be limited to Monday through Friday and shall not be earlier than 9:00 a.m. or later than 5:00 p.m. 
(6)  All operations and excavations shall be set back at least 100 feet from the property line and 200 feet from any abutting body of water or R-district. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
Chapter 1322 - Administration, Enforcement and Penalty[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City zoning ordinances; public hearing, notice; report of Planning Commission; amendment; vote required, MCL  125.3401; Board of Zoning Appeals, MCL  125.3601 et seq.; Violations; nuisance per se; abatement, MCL  125.3407 
Cross reference- Board of Zoning Appeals, Ch. 1324; Amendments,  1320.04; Appeals,  1324.04; 1324.05(b); Variances,  1324.05(d) 

1322.01 - Land use permits. 
(a)  Permit required. A land use permit is required before a building or structure is built, rebuilt, converted, enlarged, demolished or structurally altered when such activity requires a building permit and before land clearing (as defined in this Code). A land use permit is also required before a parking area is constructed, reconstructed or enlarged. Interior structural alterations for one- or two-family dwellings that do not result in a change in use or an expansion of a non-conforming use do not require land use permits. 
(b)  Foundation only approval prohibited. In no case shall a land use permit be issued for the construction of foundations only. 
(c)  Application forms. The Planning Director shall have application forms for a land use permits available at the office of the Planning Director. 
(d)  Site plans. All land use permit applications shall be accompanied by an accurate site plan or diagram complying with the requirements of this Code. 
(e)  Survey. When requested by the Planning Director, all dimensions shown on the site plan relating to the locations and size of the lot shall be based on an actual survey and the lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started. 
(f)  Records. The original copy of such applications and site plans shall be kept by the Planning Director and a copy shall be kept at the site at all times during construction. 
(g)  Fees. Land use permit application fees shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. A special fee may be required for any project which may, in the discretion of the Planning Director or Planning Commission, create an identifiable and potentially negative impact on public infrastructure or services or upon adjacent properties and because of which, professional input is desired before a decision to approve, deny or approve with conditions is made. The Planning Director may require and hold such fee in escrow to be used when the professional services must be paid. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. Unless the land use permit states differently, a permit expires after 24 months from the date of granting such permit if the activity is not at least 75 percent completed, and after 36 months if not 100 percent completed. Completion percentages shall be determined in the sole discretion of the Planning Director, subject to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(i)  Revocation. The Planning Director may revoke any land use permit for failure to comply with any provisions of this Code, the application or permit or for a material error, false statement or misrepresentation made in the application. The owner or owner's agent shall be notified of such revocation in writing. Upon such revocation, all further construction activities and new use of the site shall cease, other than for the purpose of correcting the violation. The Planning Director may suspend any land use permit if there are reasonable grounds for revocation and may issue a stop work order to halt all construction activities and land use pending a decision on revoking the permit. 
(j)  Relation to non-conforming uses. It is not necessary for an owner of a legal nonconforming structure or use to obtain a land use permit in order to maintain its legal, nonconforming status. However, no Class I non-conforming use shall be changed or extended until a land use permit has been issued by the Planning Director. In such cases the permit shall state specifically how the nonconforming use differs from the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 594. Passed 1-06-03. Ord. 810. Passed 9-2-08. Ord. 812. Passed 10-6-08.) 
1322.02 - Improvement guarantees. 
(a)  Required. To ensure compliance with this Zoning Code and any condition imposed hereunder, the City Commission, the Planning Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Planning Director may require that a guarantee covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with a project for which zoning approval is sought be deposited with the City Treasurer to ensure faithful completion of the improvements. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  Guarantee or improvement guarantee means a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond in such form as determined by the City Attorney. 
(2)  Improvements means those features and actions associated with a project, that are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval to protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, parking, screening and drainage. "Improvements" does not include the entire project which is the subject of zoning approval. 
(c)  Deposit. The guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. The City may not require deposit of the guarantee before the date upon which the City is prepared to issue the permit. 
(d)  Rebate. The Planning Director shall establish written procedures under which a cash deposit, in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements, is rebated as work progresses. Such procedures shall be on file in the office of the Planning Director. The Planning Director may amend such procedures, but such amendments shall not affect any guarantee previously deposited with the City, except upon mutual agreement of the Planning Director, the person obtaining the permit to which the guarantee applies and the person making the guarantee. 
1322.03 - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Required. Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy and use of a new building or of a structurally altered building; 
(2)  Change in the use of an existing building to a use of a different zoning classification; 
(3)  Occupancy and use of vacant land; 
(4)  Change in the use of land to a use of a different zoning classification; and 
(5)  Change in the use of a nonconforming use. 
No such occupancy, use or change of use shall take place until a certificate of occupancy therefor has been issued. 
(b)  Temporary certificates. Pending the issuance of a final certificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building Inspector. Temporary certificates shall be effective no more than 6 months during the completion of construction or alterations. A temporary certificate shall not be construed as altering the respective rights, duties or obligations of the owner or the City relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by this Zoning Code. Temporary certificates shall not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately ensure the safety of occupants. If a temporary certificate expires and a final certificate is not issued, the building or land shall not be occupied. 
(c)  Final certificates. Final certificates of occupancy shall be issued if there has been compliance with all provisions of this Zoning Code and all other applicable health, safety and welfare requirements. 
(d)  Land. Certificates of occupancy for the use of vacant land or for a change in the character of the use of land shall be applied for before such land is occupied or used. 
(e)  Statement and record. A certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of the building or land complies with this Zoning Code. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file. 
1322.04 - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Administration. The Planning Director shall designate an individual to act as Zoning Administrator. The administration and enforcement of this Code shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  Appearance tickets. The Zoning Administrator or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to a violation of this Zoning Code pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCL 764.9c(2); MSA 28.868(3)(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
1322.05 - Fees and deposits. 
    At the time of a request for any zoning approval, an applicant shall pay to the City Treasurer a fee as determined by resolution of the City Commission. The fee shall cover the approximate cost of the procedure. In addition to any established fees, the applicant shall deposit such sum as is determined necessary by the Planning Director to cover any extraordinary costs in processing the application. 
1322.06 - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of the Zoning Code is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
1322.07 - Declaration of nuisances. 
    Buildings and structures built, altered, razed or converted, or uses carried on, in violation of this Zoning Code, are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. Any court of competent jurisdiction may order such nuisance abated, and the owner or agent in charge of the building or land may be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se. A person may not assert that a use is a nonconforming use or vested right, by way of defense to any Code enforcement action or otherwise until that person has exhausted all administrative remedies for determination of a non-conforming use. 
1322.99 - Penalty. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be subject to the civil infraction sanctions, injunctive relief, nuisance abatement, surcharges and equitable remedies as provided in the Traverse City Code of Ordinances or as otherwise available under the law, as well as any damages resulting from such violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
Chapter 1324 - Board of Zoning Appeals[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Board of Zoning Appeals, MCL  125.3601 et seq.; Meetings of the Board; freedom of information, MCL  125.3304, MCL  125.3701; Review by Circuit Courts; appeals to Supreme Court; procedure, MCL  125.3604-125.3607; Actions for review; proper and necessary parties; notice; failure to appear, MCL  125.3307, MCL  125.3402, MCL  125.3501-125.3503, MCL  125.3603, 125.3604 
Cross reference- Authority re nonconforming uses,  1370.03; Construction Board of Appeals, Ch. 1442 

1324.01 - Establishment. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals is established in accordance with Article VI of Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006. The Board shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided by state law and this Zoning Code such that the intent of this Zoning Code is observed and the health, safety and welfare of the public is secured. 
(Ord. 719. Passed 2 5 07.) 
1324.02 - Composition; terms of office. 
(a)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of 9 members appointed by the City Commission for terms of 3 years. Terms shall be overlapping to provide for the appointment of an equal number of members each year. A successor member must be appointed within 1 month following the expiration of the previous term. At least 1 member shall also be a member of the Planning Commission. 
(b)  The City Commission shall also appoint 2 alternate members for terms of 3 years each. An alternate member may be called by the Chairperson of the Board, the Planning Director or the Zoning Administrator to sit as a regular member of the Board in the absence of a regular member if: 
(1)  A regular member is unable to attend a regularly scheduled meeting; or 
(2)  A regular member has abstained from a decision for reason of conflict of interest. 
(3)  The alternate member having been appointed shall serve on an appeal until a final decision has been made. Such alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the Board. Absence, inability to attend or abstention because of a conflict of interest may be established by communication of a Board member at least 24 hours prior to the regularly scheduled Board meeting. 
(Ord. 719. Passed 2 5 07.) 
1324.03 - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all meetings shall be open to the public. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a public record of its proceedings showing the action of the Board and the vote of each member upon each question considered. The presence of 5 members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum and a majority vote of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant in the case of a variance, exception or interpretation, except that the concurring vote of 2/3 of the members shall be necessary to grant a variance from uses of land permitted by this Zoning Code. 
1324.04 - Rules of procedure. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals shall follow such procedures as are established by statute, ordinance and resolution of the Board. 
(Ord. 719. Passed 2 5 07. Ord. 811. Passed 9-2-08. Ord. 989. Passed 2-18-14) 
1324.05 - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Generally. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property or make any change in the terms of intent of this Zoning Code. The Board shall have the power to act on those matters where this Zoning Code provides for an appeal, interpretation, variance or exception. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have the power to vary a standard for a Planned Unit Development or a Special Land Use Permit. 
(b)  Appeals. The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative official or body charged with the enforcement of this Zoning Code. 
(c)  Interpretations. Upon application by a City official or person interested in a specific affected parcel of land, when other administrative appeals have been exhausted, the Board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Interpret this Zoning Code in such a way as to carry out its intent and purpose; 
(2)  Determine the precise location of a zoning district and special area boundaries; 
(3)  Classify a use which is not specifically mentioned, determine the district within which the use is permitted and determine the necessary parking to support the use; and 
(4)  Determine the off street parking and loading space requirements of this Zoning Code. 
(d)  Variances. The Board shall have the power to authorize specific variances or departures from this Zoning Code, if all of the basic conditions are satisfied, and if there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this Zoning Code. A variance from the dimensional requirements of this Zoning Code may only be granted if it is determined that all basic conditions have been satisfied and that there is a practical difficulty in carrying out the requirement. A variance from the use requirements of this Zoning Code may only be granted if it is determined that all basic conditions have been satisfied and that there is an unnecessary hardship created by those use restrictions. 
(1)  Basic conditions. Any variance granted from this Zoning Code shall meet the following basic conditions: 
a.  The spirit of this Zoning Code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
b.  There is no substantial adverse effect upon property values in the immediate vicinity or in the district in which the property of the applicant is located. 
c.  The difficulty or hardship relating to the property is not so general or recurrent in nature that the formulation of a general regulation for such conditions is preferable. 
d.  The practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships are unique to the property under consideration and not to the general neighborhood, and shall apply only to property that is under the control of the applicant. 
e.  It shall be necessary for the preservation of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same zoning district. 
f.  There is a clear showing of an unnecessary hardship in that the property as a whole cannot reasonably be put to a use authorized by this Zoning Code. 
g.  The alleged hardship or difficulty is not solely economic, and is based on the reasonable use of a particular parcel of land. 
h.  It may be denied where the alleged practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships resulted from an act of the applicant, or a person in privity or concert with the applicant. 
(2)  Practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships. In order to determine if there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships which prevent carrying out the strict letter of this Zoning Code the following shall apply: 
a.  Dimensional variance. A practical difficulty shall exist where there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or physical conditions, such as narrowness, shallowness, shape or topography of the property involved, that do not generally apply to other property or uses in the same zoning district. 
b.  Use variance. An unnecessary hardship shall exist where the lot considered in combination with other land owned by the applicant adjacent thereto has no reasonable value as zoned. 
(e)  Exceptions. The Board shall have the power to grant the following exceptions: 
(1)  Extend a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot of record in single ownership at the time of adoption of this Zoning Code (July 6, 1999); 
(2)  Interpret or apply this Zoning Code where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the District Map. 
(3)  Permit the alteration or enlargement of an existing building associated with a Class 1 nonconforming use, or permit the increase in intensity of use of a Class nonconforming use, where: 
a.  The change will not unreasonably delay future probability of compliance with this Zoning Code. 
b.  There will be greater compliance with this Zoning Code or, in the alternative, with the Building Code or other applicable ordinances if the change is permitted, and such compliance is the maximum which can be reasonably expected. The change will not detract from any historical or unique architectural qualities of the building. 
c.  The change will not be detrimental to or tend to alter the character of the neighborhood. 
(4)  Permit a change in use of a Class 1 nonconforming use to another nonconforming use which is more nearly conforming to the use restrictions of this Zoning Code. After a change in use has been permitted, the use shall not be changed back to the former nonconforming use or to any less conforming use. Such a change in use may be permitted only where: 
a.  The change in use will not unreasonably delay future probability of compliance with this Zoning Code. 
b.  There will be greater compliance with this Zoning Code if the change is permitted, and such compliance is the maximum which can reasonably be expected. 
c.  The change will not be detrimental to the neighborhood or tend to alter the character of the neighborhood. 
1324.06 - Time limitations of orders. 
(a)  Building alterations. An order of the Board of Zoning Appeals permitting the erection or alteration of a building is valid for no longer than 1 year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(b)  Uses. An order of the Board permitting the use of a building or premises is valid for no longer than 1 year unless such use is established within such period. However, where such permitted use is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and if such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(c)  Modification. Time limits established by this section may be lengthened or shortened by the Board as a condition imposed under the standards for conditions set forth in this Zoning Code. 
(d)  Expiration. In addition to any expiration provision contained in an order itself, an order of the Board of Zoning Appeals may be declared by the Zoning Administrator to be expired where there has been a change in a material circumstance or fact upon which the order was issued, such as, but not limited to, destruction of a building or natural feature, vacation of a street or a change in topography. Before so declaring an order expired, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the landowner and if requested shall conduct a hearing with notice and procedures as practical. 
1324.07 - Court review. 
(a)  Circuit court review. A decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final. However, any party having a substantial interest affected by an order, determination or decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal to the Circuit Court if made to the Court within 30 days after the Zoning Board of Appeals certifies its decision in writing signed by the Chairperson or within 21 days after the Board of Zoning Appeals approves the minutes of its decision, or upon grant by the Court of leave to appeal. 
(b)  Standards for review. The Circuit Court shall review the record and decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals to insure that the decision: 
(1)  Complies with the constitution and the laws of the state; 
(2)  Is based upon proper procedure; 
(3)  Is supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the record; 
(4)  Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by law to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(c)  Inadequate record. If the Court finds the record of the Board of Zoning Appeals inadequate to make the review required, or that additional evidence exists which is material and with good reason was not presented to the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Court shall order further proceedings before the Board of Zoning Appeals on conditions which the Court considered proper. The Board of Zoning Appeals may modify its findings and decision as a result of the new proceedings, or may affirm its original decision. The supplementary record and decision shall be filed with the court. The court may affirm, reverse or modify the decision. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7 6 99. Ord. 655. Passed 11/1/04. Ord. 717. Passed 2-5-07. Ord. 808. Passed 8-4-08.) 
Chapter 1326 - Districts, Boundaries and Zoning Map[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 

1326.01 - Designation of districts. 
    The City is divided into the following zoning districts: 
OS - Open Space District 
RC - Residential Conservation District 
R-1a & R-1b - Single-Family Dwelling Districts 
R-2 - Two-Family Dwelling District 
R-9, R-15 & R-29 - Multiple Family Dwelling Districts 
HR - Hotel Resort District 
C-1 - Office Service District 
C-2 - Neighborhood Center District 
C-3 - Community Center District 
C-4 - Regional Center District 
D - Development Districts 
T - Transportation District 
GP - Government/Public District 
PR - Planned Redevelopment District 
I - Industrial District 
NMC-1 & NMC-2 - Northwestern Michigan College Districts 
H-1 & H-2 - Hospital Districts 
1326.02 - Zoning map. 
    The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map adopted by the City Commission designated as the Zoning Map. Such Map is filed in the office of the City Clerk. The Zoning Map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby declared to be a part of this Zoning Code and shall have the same force and effect as if the Zoning Map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein. 
1326.03 - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts, as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules apply: 
(1)  If districts are bounded approximately by street, private street or alley lines, the centerline of the street, private street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. 
(2)  If the district boundaries are not indicated and if the property is now or later divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the nearest lot lines. 
(3)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map. 
1326.04 - Zoning of streets, alleys and railroad corridors. 
    Streets, alleys and railroad corridors shall be zoned the same as the adjacent land is zoned to the centerline. In addition, they may be used for customary and incidental transportation purposes including commercial transportation such as taxicabs. 
1326.05 - Zoning of vacated streets. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action, the zoning district adjoining the side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the new property line resulting from such vacation. All area included in the vacation shall thereafter be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended district. 
1326.06 - Zoning of water areas. 
    All areas in the City which are under water and not shown as included within any district shall be subject to all of the regulations of the district which immediately adjoins the water area. If the water area adjoins 2 or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend to the center of the water area. 
1326.07 - Zoning of annexed land. 
    The zoning of annexed land is governed by state statute. MCL 117.4(i)(3); MSA 5.2082. 
1326.08 - Categories within zoning districts. 
    Any building or structure built, rebuilt, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally altered shall be used only for a use allowed in the district in which the building or structure is located. In order to insure all possible benefits and protection for the zoning districts in this Code, the land uses have been classified into 3 categories: 
(1)  Uses permitted by right. The primary uses and structures specified for which the zoning district has been established. 
(2)  Uses permitted by special use permit. Uses and structures which have been generally accepted as reasonably compatible with the primary uses and structures within the zoning district, but could present potential injurious effects upon the primary uses and structures within the zoning district and therefore require special consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and to the community as a whole. 
(3)  Uses permitted by planned unit development. Uses and structures, compatible with the primary uses and structures within the zoning district, and which are provided a heightened degree of flexibility in site development standards to encourage mixed uses, open space preservation, and preservation of natural resources or energy conservation. 
1326.09 - Incorporating uses allowed. 
    When the regulations of a zoning district incorporate the uses allowed in a different zoning district, only those uses listed in the section entitled "Uses Allowed" are incorporated and not any of those uses allowed by special land use permit or any other special zoning permission. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
Chapter 1328 - OS - Open Space District[5] 
    The Open Space (OS) District is for the purpose of accommodating natural or park-like settings including parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, wetlands, floodplains, natural areas and cultural buildings, often linked with pedestrian and bicycle paths. 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs in residential districts,  1476.06, 1476.10 and 1476.27 

1328.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Open Space District, with buildings less than 3,000 square feet in gross floor area: 
  Airport clear zones; 
  Athletic fields; 
  Boat houses; 
  Boat liveries; 
  Cultural facilities; 
  Community Gardens; 
  Essential services without buildings; 
  Golf Courses; 
  Marinas; 
  Outdoor public swimming pools; 
  Parks; 
  Playgrounds; 
  Recreational Facilities; and 
  Theaters in municipality owned buildings built prior to 2013. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 842. Passed 8-3-09. Ord. 972. Passed 6-3-13) 
1328.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Open Space District if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  New buildings 3,000 square feet or larger in gross floor area for allowed uses; 
  Essential services buildings. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 972. Passed 6-3-13) 
1328.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 20 feet No minimum. Not applicable. 20% maximum.  
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
1328.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
Building: No new building or building addition shall be erected closer to the street than average setback of the buildings within 200 feet on either side. Where there are no buildings, the minimum setback is 30 feet. 
Parking area: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: 
One side: 10 feet 
Aggregate: 20 feet 
Parking area: If contiguous to an R-district, a minimum of 10 feet. Otherwise, 5 feet. If shared parking is developed, these setbacks would affect only the perimeter of the combined parcels. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 30 feet 
Parking area: 5 feet 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots shall have a front setback on each street. 
(e)  Water setbacks: Except for bathhouses and buildings which need to be on or in close proximity to the water (such as harbormaster offices, marina fueling facilities and boathouses), building shall be set back 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25 feet from ordinary high water mark of the Boardman River. Where the dock line is establishing by City ordinance, the setback shall be measures inland from the dock line. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 502. Passed 5-15-00.) 
1328.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into the required setbacks are allowed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
1328.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: Maximum 45 feet 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and clock towers may be erected to a height not exceeding twice the height of the attached building. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord 724. Passed 3-19-07.) 
1328.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall be located no closer than 5 feet from any side or rear property line. A boat house up to 250 feet in gross floor area may be built to the water's edge. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
1328.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas shall be considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
Chapter 1330 - RC - Residential Conservation District[6] 
    The Residential Conservation (RC) District is for the purpose of classifying property susceptible to erosion or flooding for clustered, low density development in the least sensitive portions of such property. 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs in residential districts, ch. 1476 

1330.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Residential Conservation District: 
  OS district uses, with buildings less than 3,000 square feet gross floor area; 
  R-1a and R-1b district uses; 
  Clustered single-family dwellings; 
  Home occupations subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A home occupation shall be conducted within the dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner of the occupation, or in a building accessory to such dwelling. 
(2)  All business activity and storage shall take place within the interior of the dwelling and/or accessory building. 
(3)  No alteration to the exterior of the residential dwelling, accessory building or yard that alters the residential character of the premises is permissible. 
(4)  The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic beyond 8 trip ends per day. 
(5)  Only off street parking facilities customary for a residential use and located on the premises may be used. 
(6)  No vehicles used in the conduct of the occupation may be parked, kept or otherwise be present on the premises, other than such as are customarily used for domestic or household purposes. 
(7)  Home occupations shall be conducted solely by persons residing at the residence, and no more than 2 such persons shall be employed in the home occupation. 
(8)  Any sign identifying the occupation must conform to the regulations of Traverse City Code Chapter 1476, Signs. 
(9)  No sale or rental of goods is allowed on the premises, except as secondary and incidental to the furnishing of a service. 
(10)  Instruction in crafts and fine arts are recognized as allowable home occupations if they meet the above conditions. 
(11)  The use shall not generate noise, vibration or odors detectible beyond the property line. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99; Ord. 650. Passed 8-16-04; Ord. 874. Passed 8-16-10; Ord. No. 1089 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
1330.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Residential Conservation District if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Adult foster care small group home; 
  Buildings 3,000 square feet or larger gross floor area for OS District uses; 
  Essential services buildings; 
  Temporary accessory dwelling units. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7 6 99. Ord. 893. Passed 12-6-10.) 
1330.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 20 feet No minimum. 4.4 dwelling units/acre 20% maximum  
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1330.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
Building: No new building or building addition shall be erected closer to the street than the average setback of the buildings within 200 feet on either side. Where there are no buildings, minimum setback is 25 feet. 
Parking area: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: 
One side: 10 feet. (No setback if adjacent to RC district). 
Aggregate: 20 feet. (No setback if adjacent to RC district). 
Parking area: The setback is minimum of 10 feet if contiguous to an R district. Otherwise, the setbacks is 5 feet. If shared parking is developed, these setbacks would affect only the perimeter of the combined parcels. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 30 feet 
Parking area: 5 feet 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots shall have a front setback on each street. 
(e)  Water setbacks: 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25 feet from the ordinary high water mark of Boardman River. Where the dock line is established by City ordinance, it shall be measured inland from the dock line. 
(f)  Storage of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle or equipment shall be limited to the rear yard only. Storage shall mean parking the vehicle or equipment in an area unused for the purpose for which it was designed for a period of 30 consecutive days or more. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1330.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into the required setbacks are allowed except: 
(1)  Eaves, chimneys, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 18 inches are permitted to extend within the setbacks. 
(2)  Terraces, patios, decks, uncovered and unenclosed porches and other ornamental features which do not extend more than 30 inches above grade at the nearest side property line may project into a required side setback provided these projections are no closer than 2 feet from the subject side property line. 
(3)  An unenclosed balcony, porch or deck may project into a front or rear setback for a distance not exceeding 10 feet. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1330.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: Maximum 45 feet 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and clock towers may be erected to a height not exceeding twice the height of the attached building. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7 6 99. Ord 725. Passed 3-19-07.) 
1330.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall: 
(1)  Only be permitted in the rear yard. 

(2)  Not exceed 25 feet or the height of the principal building(s), whichever is less. 
(3)  Not be closer than 4 feet to any side or rear property line. A boat house up to 250 square feet in gross floor area may be built to the waters edge. 
(4)  Have a total gross floor area of all accessory buildings on the lot no greater than 65 percent of the gross floor area of the principal building(s). 
(5)  Be constructed using materials and features similar to the principal building(s) if the accessory building exceeds 200 square feet in gross floor area. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 542. Passed 8-20-01. Ord. 637. Passed 4-5-04.) 
1330.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Driveways for residential lots must access from a publicly maintained alley if available. Other requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
Chapter 1332 - R-1a and R-1b - Single-Family Dwelling Districts[7] 
    The Single-Family Dwelling-Large Lot (R-1a) District is for the purpose of primarily accommodating conventional single family dwellings. 
    The Single-Family Dwelling-Small Lot (R-1b) district is for the purpose of accommodating single-family dwellings on small lots. 
    Clustering (e.g. single-family attached, zero-lot-line detached dwellings) may be allowed in either district on larger parcels within the designated density guidelines as a means to protect sensitive soils and provide usable open space. 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs in residential districts, Ch. 1476 

1332.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Single-Family districts: 
  Accessory Dwelling Units. 
(1)  The intent of the allowed use of accessory dwelling units is to: 
(a)  Preserve and maintain the character of predominately single-family residential neighborhoods while broadening housing choices. 
(b)  Require owner-occupancy to provide the necessary on-site supervision that enhances maintenance and the preservation of the character of the City's single-family neighborhoods. 
(c)  Prevent disruption in the stability of the single-family neighborhoods, speculation and absentee ownership. 
(d)  Diversify housing options and create more affordable housing within existing single-family neighborhoods. 
(e)  Enhance neighborhood stability by providing extra income that potentially could allow homeowners to live in their houses longer and maintain their property better. 
(f)  Provide homeowners with a means of accommodating extended families, companionship, security, or services through tenants in either the accessory dwelling unit or principal dwelling. 
(g)  Will be placed in a manner to provide thoughtful consideration of landscaping, screening and window placement to protect the privacy of neighbors. 
(2)  Accessory dwelling units are an allowed use provided they meet the following requirements: 
(a)  The existing site and use are substantially in compliance with this Zoning Code. 
(b)  There shall be a maximum limit of 15 newly registered accessory dwelling units per calendar year. 
(c)  Only 1 accessory dwelling unit per parcel is allowed with a maximum of 2 dwellings per parcel. 
(d)  The accessory dwelling unit is clearly incidental to the principal dwelling unit and the structures' exterior appear to be single-family. 
(e)  Location of entrances. Only 1 entrance may be located on the faade of the primary dwelling facing the street, unless the primary dwelling contained additional entrances before the accessory dwelling unit was created. An exception to this regulation is entrances that do not have access from the ground such as entrances from balconies or decks. 
(f)  Exterior stairs. Fire escapes for access to an upper level accessory dwelling shall not be located on the front of the primary dwelling. Interior stair floor area will not count in the size calculation of the accessory dwelling unit. 
(g)  Individual site plans, floor plans, elevation drawings, building plans for the proposed accessory dwelling unit shall be submitted with the application for a land use permit. If exterior modifications are made after a land use permit is issued, revisions must be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(h)  The accessory dwelling unit incorporated in the principal dwelling may be no more than 800 square feet or the size of the principal dwelling, whichever is less. A unit in an accessory building may not exceed 800 square feet and must meet all the requirements of Section 1332.07. 
(i)  At least 1 owner of record shall occupy either the primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit. The owner occupant shall meet the requirements for a principal residence tax exemption. 
(j)  The accessory dwelling unit shall obtain a registration from the City Clerk annually. 
i.  An owner desiring an accessory dwelling unit on their property is required to make written application to register with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall provide forms for applications. 
The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, the information requested on the application, including: 
(1)  The applicant's name, telephone number, address of present place of residence, length of residence at such address; 
(2)  Affidavit verifying applicant applies consent and understands that accessory dwelling units are subject to the conditions contained in this Ordinance section, in addition to conditions contained elsewhere in these Codified Ordinances. 
ii.  A registration obtained under this section shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for obtaining any other permit, license or authorization required by another ordinance, statute or administrative rule. 
iii.  Administration and enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator per Section 1322.04. 
iv.  Complaints. If a written complaint is made alleging that an accessory dwelling unit has violated any provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly forward the written complaint to the accessory dwelling unit owner together with a notice that an investigation will be made as to the truth of the complaint. The accessory dwelling unit owner may respond to the complaint and present evidence and respond to evidence produced by the investigation. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the accessory dwelling unit is in violation, the City may enforce these provisions by any means available under the law. 
v.  Penalty per Section 202.99. 
vi.  Fee. A non-refundable registration fee shall be established by the City Commission. 
(k)  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be leased for a period of less than 3 months at a time. Upon request of the City, the owner of record shall provide a lease agreement evidencing the length of the lease. 
(l)  Each registered Accessory Dwelling Unit is subject to annual administrative review by the City. Registrant shall provide additional information as requested by the City. 
(m)  An accessory dwelling unit shall be prohibited if the parcel has a licensed Tourist Home. 
  Adult foster care family home; 
  Athletic fields; 
  Boat houses if they are an accessory use, if they are designed for housing a boat, if provisions are made for routing of any boardwalk, and if proper state and federal permits are obtained; 
  Child care organization, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended, associated with a school or place of worship; 
  Community Gardens; 
  Dwellings, single-family; 
  Essential services; 
  Family child care home, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended; 
  Golf courses; 
  Group child care home, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All necessary licenses are obtained and maintained. Expiration or revocation of a license automatically terminates the land use permit and a change in the licensee requires a land use permit renewal. 
(2)  The lot is not located within 150 feet of another lot devoted to such use. The distances required shall be measured along any private or public street. 
(3)  A fenced outside recreation area shall be located on premise where it will most effectively shield neighboring properties from noise and visual disruptions. Play equipment shall not be placed streetward of the principal structure unless specifically allowed by the Planning Commission for unique circumstance. 
(4)  The use does not exceed 16 hours of operation during a 24-hour period. 
(5)  No additional parking is required for the Group Day Care Home provided on-street parking is allowed adjacent to the property. If on-street parking is not allowed, 2 parking spaces shall be provided on premise. 
(6)  A Group child care home requires the issuance of a Land Use Permit. As part of the application, a site plan shall be submitted showing the designated outside play area, primary drop off/pick up entrance and parking spaces. 
  Home occupations subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A home occupation shall be conducted within the dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner of the occupation, or in a building accessory to such dwelling. 
(2)  All business activity and storage shall take place within the interior of the dwelling and/or accessory building. 
(3)  No alteration to the exterior of the residential dwelling, accessory building or yard that alters the residential character of the premises is permissible. 
(4)  The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic beyond 8 trip-ends per day. 
(5)  Only off-street parking facilities customary for a residential use and located on the premises may be used. 
(6)  No vehicles used in the conduct of the occupation may be parked, kept or otherwise be present on the premises, other than such as are customarily used for domestic or household purposes. 
(7)  Home occupations shall be conducted solely by persons residing at the residence, and no more than 2 such persons shall be employed in the home occupation. 
(8)  Any sign identifying the occupation must conform to the regulations of Traverse City Code Chapter 1476, Signs. 
(9)  No sale or rental of goods is allowed on the premises, except as secondary and incidental to the furnishing of a service. 
(10)  Instruction in crafts and fine arts are recognized as allowable home occupations if they meet the above conditions. 
(11)  The use shall not generate noise, vibration or odors detectible beyond the property line. 
  Playgrounds; 
  Tourist homes meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Rooms utilized for sleeping shall be part of the primary residential structure and shall not be specifically constructed or remodeled for rental purposes. 
(2)  There are two levels of tourist homes and are separated based on intensity: 
a.  A high intensity tourist home may rent up to 3 rooms for compensation, limited to not more than 2 adults per room, to persons who do not stay for more than 14 consecutive days for 85 or greater guest nights per year. A high intensity tourist home shall not be closer than 1,000 feet to another licensed high intensity tourist home or another tourist home licensed before January 22, 2019. 
b.  A low intensity tourist home may rent not more than 2 rooms for compensation, limited to not more than 2 adults per room, to persons who do not stay for more than 14 consecutive days for no greater than 84 guest nights per year. 
(3)  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character. 
(4)  There shall be no separate or additional kitchen facility for the guests. 
(5)  Off-street parking shall be provided as required by this Zoning Code and shall be developed in such a manner that the residential character of the property is preserved. For each tourist home bedroom, one off-street parking space is required. 
(6)  A site plan is approved according to the Zoning Code. Certain site plan information may be waived at the discretion of the Planning Director. 
(7)  A City tourist home license is maintained. 
(8)  A tourist home shall be an incidental and secondary use of a dwelling unit for business purposes. The intent of this provision is to ensure compatibility of such business use with other permitted uses of the residential districts and with the residential character of the neighborhoods involved, and to ensure that tourist homes are clearly secondary and incidental uses of residential buildings. 
(9)  A tourist home shall be prohibited if the parcel is a registered accessory dwelling unit. 
(10)  A person who violates any provision of this use is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. The fine for any unlawful tourist home violation shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. Each day on which any violation of the use continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 649. Passed 8-16-04. Ord. 842. Passed 8-3-09. Ord. 875. Passed 8-16-10. Ord. 895. Passed 12-6-10. Ord. 1020. Passed 4-6-15; Ord. 1065 . Passed 2-5-18; Ord. 1076 , Passed 7-2-18; Ord No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19; Ord. No. 1089 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
1332.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the single-family districts if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this chapter: 
  Adult foster care small group home; 
  Clustered single-family dwellings; 
  Conversions of one-family dwellings to two-family dwellings; 
  Essential services buildings; 
  Places of worship; 
  Schools; 
  Temporary accessory dwelling units. 
(Ord. 895. Passed 12-6-10; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18) 
1332.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface R-1a: 90 feet 9,000 sq. feet Not applicable 30% maximum R-1b: 35/45 feet 1 5,000 sq. feet Not applicable 45% maximum  
1 The minimum lot width for parcels located north or east of the US31/M-72, east of Milliken Drive and south of Eastern Ave are 45 feet. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 621. Passed 2-2-04. Ord. 916. Passed 6-6-11. Ord. 956. Passed 1-7-13) 
1332.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 

Building: 
R-1a: 25 feet minimum. 
R-1b: Within 4 feet of the average setback of principal buildings on the same face block, but no closer than 6 feet from the front property line. 
Parking area: 
R-1a: 3 feet minimum. 
R-1b: 3 feet minimum. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: One side Aggregate R-1a: 8 feet 20 feet R-1b: 6 feet* 14 feet  
*35% of a building side wall may be located no closer than 4 feet from the side property line. 
Parking area: 2 feet 
(c)  Rear setbacks (minimum): 
Building: R-1a:    30 feet   R-1b:    25 feet 
Parking area: None. 
(d)  Through lots and corner lots having a frontage on 2 streets shall provide the required front setback on both streets. 
(e)  Water setbacks: 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25 feet from the ordinary high water mark of Boardman River. Where the dock line is established by City ordinance, it shall be measured inland from the dock line. 
(f)  Storage of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle or equipment is limited to the rear yard only. Storage shall mean parking the vehicle or equipment in an area unused for the purpose for which it was designed for a period of 30 consecutive days or more. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 757. Passed 7-2-07.) 
1332.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into the required setbacks are allowed except: 
(1)  Eaves, chimneys, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 18 inches are permitted to extend within the setbacks. 
(2)  Terraces, patios, decks, uncovered and unenclosed porches and other ornamental features which do not extend more than 30 inches above grade at the nearest side property line may project into a required side setback provided these projections are no closer than 2 feet from the subject side property line. 
(3)  An unenclosed balcony, porch or deck may project into a rear setback for a distance not exceeding 10 feet. 
(4)  An unenclosed balcony or porch may project into a front setback not more than 8 feet from the exterior building line, but not closer than 6 feet from the front property line. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1332.06 - Building height. 

(a)  Building height (both districts): 
Maximum 35 feet. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and clock towers may be erected to a height not exceeding twice the height of the attached building. 
Parapet walls may be used to screen existing equipment may be erected if the wall extends extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 726. Passed 3-19-07.) 
1332.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall: 

(1)  Only be permitted in the rear yard except accessory buildings may be located streetward on lots on navigable water and may be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. 
(2)  Not exceed 25 feet or the height of the principal building, whichever is less. 
(3)  Not be closer than 4 feet to any side or rear property line. A boat house up to 250 square feet in gross floor area may be built to the water's edge. 
(4)  Have a total gross floor area of all accessory buildings on the lot shall not exceed the greater than of 75 percent of the gross floor area of the principal building or 484 square feet. 
(5)  Accessory buildings over 200 square feet in gross floor area, shall be constructed using building materials, design elements and roof pitches substantially similar to the exterior of the principal building. 
(6)  For parcels on corner lots, except in the Boardman and Central Neighborhood Historic Districts, an accessory building can be connected to the principal building provided the connector is no longer than 10 feet in length, no taller than 15 feet in height, and the area of the connector does not exceed 100 square feet. The connector area shall be applied to the gross floor area of the accessory building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 542. Passed 8-20-01. Ord. 554. Passed 2-4-02. Ord. 637. Passed 4-5-04. Ord. 1020. Passed 4-6-15; Ord. No. 1053 . Passed 6-5-17; Ord. 1065 . Passed 2-5-18; Ord. 1082 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
1332.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Minimum parking space requirements for single-family dwellings are 1 per dwelling unit. 
    Additional requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. 
    Any residential building or driveway constructed after the effective date of this zoning code which has access to a maintained alley shall not have access to a street nor shall a parking area be located in the front yard. 
    For parcels having alley access, the parking of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle is limited to the rear yard. 
    Any parking area for single- or two-family residential use shall, at a minimum, be surfaced and the area clearly defined with gravel, crushed stone, concrete, asphalt, brick or equal material, and be maintained substantially free of dust, mud and standing water. 
    Parking for motor vehicles shall occur only on a surface permitted by this code. 
    In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 758. Passed 7-2-07.) 
1332.09 - Special requirements. 
    To preserve and reinforce the development patterns of the single-family dwelling district the following special requirements shall apply: 
(1)  In the Boardman and Central Neighborhood Historic Districts, attached garages for parcels with alley access shall be prohibited. 
(2)  In the Boardman and Central Neighborhood Historic Districts, the distance betwe en dwellings and accessory buildings greater than 200 square feet that have alley access shall not be less than 30 feet. The 30-foot separation between dwellings and accessory buildings can be reduced to 20 feet if it is determined to be impractical by the Planning Director. 
(Ord. 974. Passed 7-1-13) 
Chapter 1334 - R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District[8] 
    The Two-Family Dwelling (R-2) District is for the purpose of allowing two-family dwellings designed to be architecturally compatible with surrounding housing. 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
State Law reference- Signs in residential districts,  1476.06, 1476.10 and 1476.27 

1334.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Two-Family Dwelling District: 
  Accessory dwelling units are an allowed use provided they meet the following requirements: 
(a)  The existing site and use are substantially in compliance with this Zoning Code. 
(b)  Only 1 accessory dwelling unit per parcel is allowed with a maximum of 2 dwellings per parcel. 
(c)  The accessory dwelling unit is clearly incidental to the principal dwelling unit and the structures' exterior appear to be single-family. 
(d)  Location of entrances. Only 1 entrance may be located on the faade of the primary dwelling facing the street, unless the primary dwelling contained additional entrances before the accessory dwelling unit was created. An exception to this regulation is entrances that do not have access from the ground such as entrances from balconies or decks. 
(e)  Exterior stairs. Fire escapes for access to an upper level accessory dwelling shall not be located on the front of the primary dwelling. Interior stair floor area will not count in the size calculation of the accessory dwelling unit. 
(f)  Individual site plans, floor plans, elevation drawings, building plans for the proposed accessory dwelling unit shall be submitted with the application for a land use permit. If exterior modifications are made after a land use permit is issued, revisions must be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(g)  The accessory dwelling unit incorporated in the principal dwelling may be no more than 800 square feet or the size of the principal dwelling, whichever is less. A unit in an accessory building may not exceed 800 square feet and must meet all the requirements of Section 1334.07. 
(h)  At least 1 owner of record shall occupy either the primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit. The owner occupant shall meet the requirements for a principal residence tax exemption. 
(i)  The accessory dwelling unit shall obtain a registration from the City Clerk annually. 
i.  An owner desiring an accessory dwelling unit on their property is required to make written application to register with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall provide forms for applications. 
The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, the information requested on the application, including: 
(1)  The applicant's name, telephone number, address of present place of residence, length of residence at such address; 
(2)  Affidavit verifying applicant applies consent and understands that accessory dwelling units are subject to the conditions contained in this Ordinance section, in addition to conditions contained elsewhere in these Codified Ordinances. 
ii.  A registration obtained under this section shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for obtaining any other permit, license or authorization required by another ordinance, statute or administrative rule. 
iii.  Administration and enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator per Section 1322.04. 
iv.  Complaints. If a written complaint is made alleging that an accessory dwelling unit has violated any provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly forward the written complaint to the accessory dwelling unit owner together with a notice that an investigation will be made as to the truth of the complaint. The accessory dwelling unit owner may respond to the complaint and present evidence and respond to evidence produced by the investigation. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the accessory dwelling unit is in violation, the City may enforce these provisions by any means available under the law. 
v.  Penalty per Section 202.99. 
vi.  Fee. A non-refundable registration fee shall be established by the City Commission. 
(j)  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be leased for a period of less than 3 months at a time. Upon request of the City, the owner of record shall provide a lease agreement evidencing the length of the lease. 
(k)  Each registered Accessory Dwelling Unit is subject to annual administrative review by the City. Registrant shall provide additional information as requested by the City. 
(l)  An accessory dwelling unit shall be prohibited if the parcel has a licensed Tourist Home. 
  Adult foster care family home; 
  Art galleries in non-residential buildings built prior to 1950, provided they are located on an arterial or collector street and provided the building is not expanded other than for barrier free access requirements; 
  Athletic fields; 
  Boat houses if they are an accessory use, if they are designed for housing a boat, if provisions are made for routing of any boardwalk, and if proper state and federal permits are obtained; 
  Child care organization, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended, associated with a school or place of worship; 
  Community Gardens; 
  Dwellings, single-family; 
  Dwellings, two-family; 
  Dwellings, multiple family, in non-residential buildings built prior to 1950, provided they are located on an arterial or collector street and provided the building is not expanded other than for barrier free access requirements; 
  Essential services; 
  Family child care home, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended; 
  Golf courses; 
  Group child care home, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All necessary licenses are obtained and maintained. Expiration or revocation of a license automatically terminates the land use permit and a change in the licensee requires a land use permit renewal. 
(2)  The lot is not located within 150 feet of another lot devoted to such use. The distances required shall be measured along any private or public street. 
(3)  A fenced outside recreation area shall be located on premise where it will most effectively shield neighboring properties from noise and visual disruptions. Play equipment shall not be placed streetward of the principal structure unless specifically allowed by the Planning Commission for unique circumstance. 
(4)  The use does not exceed 16 hours of operation during a 24-hour period. 
(5)  No additional parking is required for the Group Day Care Home provided on-street parking is allowed adjacent to the property. If on-street parking is not allowed, 2 parking spaces shall be provided on premise. 
(6)  A Group child care home requires the issuance of a Land Use Permit. As part of the application, a site plan shall be submitted showing the designated outside play area, primary drop off/pick up entrance and parking spaces. 
  Home occupations subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A home occupation shall be conducted within the dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner of the occupation, or in a building accessory to such dwelling. 
(2)  All business activity and storage shall take place within the interior of the dwelling and/or accessory building. 
(3)  No alteration to the exterior of the residential dwelling, accessory building or yard that alters the residential character of the premises is permissible. 
(4)  The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic beyond 8 trip-ends per day. 
(5)  Only off-street parking facilities customary for a residential use and located on the premises may be used. 
(6)  No vehicles used in the conduct of the occupation may be parked, kept or otherwise be present on the premises, other than such as are customarily used for domestic or household purposes. 
(7)  Home occupations shall be conducted solely by persons residing at the residence, and no more than 2 such persons shall be employed in the home occupation. 
(8)  No sign, display or device identifying the occupation may be used. 
(9)  No sale or rental of goods is allowed on the premises, except as secondary and incidental to the furnishing of a service. 
(10)  Instruction in crafts and fine arts are recognized as allowable home occupations if they meet the above conditions. 
(11)  The use shall not generate noise, vibration or odors detectible beyond the property line. 
  Offices in nonresidential buildings built prior to 1950, provided they are located on an arterial or collector street and provided the building is not expanded except as necessary to meet barrier free access requirements. 
  Tourist homes meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Rooms utilized for sleeping shall be part of the primary residential structure and shall not be specifically constructed or remodeled for rental purposes. 
(2)  There are 2 levels of tourist homes and are separated based on intensity: 
a.  A high intensity tourist home may rent up to 3 rooms for compensation, limited to not more than 2 adults per room, to persons who do not stay for more than 14 consecutive days for 85 or greater guest nights per year. A high intensity tourist home shall not be closer than 1,000 feet to another licensed high intensity tourist home or another tourist home licensed before January 22, 2019. 
b.  A low intensity tourist home may rent not more than 2 rooms for compensation, limited to not more than 2 adults per room, to persons who do not stay for more than 14 consecutive days for no greater than 84 guest nights per year. 
(3)  The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character. 
(4)  There shall be no separate or additional kitchen facility for the guests. 
(5)  Off-street parking shall be provided as required by this Zoning Code and shall be developed in such a manner that the residential character of the property is preserved. For each tourist home bedroom, one off-street parking space is required. 
(6)  A site plan is approved according to the Zoning Code. Certain site plan information may be waived at the discretion of the Planning Director. 
(7)  A City tourist home license is maintained. 
(8)  A tourist home shall be an incidental and secondary use of a dwelling unit for business purposes. The intent of this provision is to ensure compatibility of such business use with other permitted uses of the residential districts and with the residential character of the neighborhoods involved, and to ensure that tourist homes are clearly secondary and incidental uses of residential buildings. 
(9)  A tourist home shall be prohibited if the parcel is a registered accessory dwelling unit. 
(10)  A person who violates any provision of this use is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. The fine for any unlawful Tourist Home violation shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. Each day on which any violation of the use continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
  Other similar uses as approved by the Planning Commission provided: 
(1)  The uses are located on an arterial or collector street. 
(2)  The uses are in a non-residential building built prior to 1950 and the building is not expanded except as necessary to meet barrier-free access requirements. 
(3)  The uses will not generate excessive noise, lighting, fumes or other nuisances. 
(Ord. 693. Passed 12-19-05. Ord. 746. Passed 5-21-07. Ord. 842. Passed 8-3-09. Ord. 876. Passed 8-16-10. Ord. 894. Passed 12-6-10; Ord. 1066 . Passed 2-5-18; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18; Ord No. 1087 , Passed 1-22-19; Ord. No. 1089 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
1334.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Two-Family Dwelling District if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this chapter: 
  Adult foster care small group home; 
  Clustered single-family dwellings; 
  Essential services buildings; 
  Places of worship; 
  Schools. 
(Ord. 894. Passed 12-6-10; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18) 
1334.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 35 feet 4,000 sq. feet Not applicable 45% maximum  
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 555. Passed 2-4-02. Ord. 621. Passed 2-2-04. Ord. 750. Passed 5-21-07. Ord. 884. Passed 11-1-10.) 
1334.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 

Building: Within 4 feet of the average setback of principal buildings on the same face block but no closer that 6 feet from the front property line. 

Parking area: 3 feet minimum. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: 
One Side: 6 feet 
Aggregate: 14 feet 35 percent of a side building wall may be located no closer than 4 feet from the side property line. 
Parking area: 2 feet 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 25 feet 
Parking area: None 
(d)  Corner and through lots shall have a front setback on each street. 
(e)  Water setbacks: 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the Boardman River. Where the dock line is established by City ordinance, it shall be measured inland from the dock line. 
(f)  Storage of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle or equipment is limited to the rear yard only. Storage means parking the vehicle or equipment in an area unused for the purpose for which it was designed for a period of 30 consecutive days or more. 
(Ord. 759. Passed 7-2-07.) 
1334.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into required setbacks are allowed except: 
(1)  Eaves, chimneys, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 18 inches are permitted to extend within the setback. 
(2)  Terraces, patios, decks, uncovered and unenclosed porches and other ornamental features which do not extend more than 30 inches above grade at the nearest side property line may project into a required side setback provided these projections are no closer than 2 feet from the subject side property line. 
(3)  An unenclosed balcony or porch may project into a front setback not more than 8 feet from the exterior building line, but not closer than 6 feet from the front right-of-way line. 
1334.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: Maximum 35 feet. 

(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and clock towers may be erected to a height not exceeding twice the height of the attached building. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 727. Passed 3-19-07.) 
1334.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall: 
(1)  Only be permitted in the rear yard, except accessory buildings may be located streetward on lots on navigable water and may be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. 

(2)  Not exceed 25 feet or the height of the principal building(s) at the median point, whichever is less. 
(3)  Not be closer than 4 feet to any side or rear property line. A boat house up to 250 square feet in gross floor area may be built to the water's edge. 
(4)  Have a total gross floor area of all accessory buildings on the lot shall not exceed the greater of 75 percent of the gross floor area of the principal building(s) or 484 square feet. 
(5)  Accessory buildings over 200 square feet in gross floor area, shall be constructed using building materials, design elements and roof pitches substantially similar to the exterior of the principal building. 
(6)  For parcels on corner lots, except in the Boardman and Central Neighborhood Historic Districts, an accessory building can be connected to the principal building provided the connector is no longer than 10 feet in length, no taller than 15 feet in height, and the area of the connector does not exceed 100 square feet. The connector area shall be applied to the gross floor area of the accessory building. 
(Ord. 542. Passed 8-20-01. Ord. 554. Passed 2-4-02. Ord. 637. Passed 4-5-04; Ord. No. 1053 . Passed 6-5-17; Ord. 1066 . Passed 2-5-18; Ord. 1082 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
1334.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Minimum parking space requirements are 1 per dwelling unit. 
    Additional requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. 
    Any residential building or driveway constructed after the effective date of this zoning code which has access to a maintained alley shall not have access to a street nor shall a parking area be located in the front yard. 
    For parcels having alley access, the parking of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle is limited to the rear yard. 
    Any parking area for single- or two-family residential use shall, at a minimum, be surfaced and the area clearly defined with gravel, crushed stone, concrete, asphalt, brick or equal material, and be maintained substantially free of dust, mud and standing water. 
    Parking for motor vehicles shall occur only on a surface permitted by this code. 
    Athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas shall be considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 760. Passed 7-2-07.) 
1334.09 - Special requirements. 
    To preserve and reinforce the development patterns of the Two-Family Dwelling District the following special requirements shall apply: 
(1)  In the Boardman and Central Neighborhood Historic Districts, attached garages for parcels with alley access shall be prohibited. 
(2)  In the Boardman and Central Neighborhood Historic Districts, the distance between dwellings and accessory buildings greater than 200 square feet that have alley access shall not be less than 30 feet. The 30 foot separation between dwellings and accessory buildings can be reduced to 20 feet if it is determined to be impractical by the Planning Director. 
(Ord. 975. Passed 7-1-13) 
Chapter 1336 - R-9, R-15 and R-29 Multiple-Family Dwelling Districts[9] 
    These Multiple-Family Dwelling districts allow for multiple family uses in varying densities, have pedestrian scale and are located in close proximity to major activity and employment centers, on transit routes, or in transitional areas. 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
State Law reference- Signs in residential districts,  1476.06, 1476.10 and 1476.27 

1336.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the multiple-family districts: 
  Accessory dwelling units are an allowed use provided they meet the following requirements: 
(a)  The existing site and use are substantially in compliance with this Zoning Code. 
(b)  Only 1 accessory dwelling unit per parcel is allowed with a maximum of 2 dwellings per parcel. 
(c)  The accessory dwelling unit is clearly incidental to the principal dwelling unit and the structures' exterior appear to be single-family. 
(d)  Location of entrances. Only 1 entrance may be located on the faade of the primary dwelling facing the street, unless the primary dwelling contained additional entrances before the accessory dwelling unit was created. An exception to this regulation is entrances that do not have access from the ground such as entrances from balconies or decks. 
(e)  Exterior stairs. Fire escapes for access to an upper level accessory dwelling shall not be located on the front of the primary dwelling. Interior stair floor area will not count in the size calculation of the accessory dwelling unit. 
(f)  Individual site plans, floor plans, elevation drawings, building plans for the proposed accessory dwelling unit shall be submitted with the application for a land use permit. If exterior modifications are made after a land use permit is issued, revisions must be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(g)  The accessory dwelling unit incorporated in the principal dwelling may be no more than 800 square feet or the size of the principal dwelling, whichever is less. A unit in an accessory building may not exceed 800 square feet and must meet all the requirements of Section 1334.07. 
(h)  At least 1 owner of record shall occupy either the primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit. The owner occupant shall meet the requirements for a principal residence tax exemption. 
(i)  The accessory dwelling unit shall obtain a registration from the City Clerk annually. 
i.  An owner desiring an accessory dwelling unit on their property is required to make written application to register with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall provide forms for applications. 
The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, the information requested on the application, including: 
(1)  The applicant's name, telephone number, address of present place of residence, length of residence at such address; 
(2)  Affidavit verifying applicant applies consent and understands that accessory dwelling units are subject to the conditions contained in this Ordinance section, in addition to conditions contained elsewhere in these Codified Ordinances. 
ii.  A registration obtained under this section shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for obtaining any other permit, license or authorization required by another ordinance, statute or administrative rule. 
iii.  Administration and enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator per Section 1322.04. 
iv.  Complaints. If a written complaint is made alleging that an accessory dwelling unit has violated any provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly forward the written complaint to the accessory dwelling unit owner together with a notice that an investigation will be made as to the truth of the complaint. The accessory dwelling unit owner may respond to the complaint and present evidence and respond to evidence produced by the investigation. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the accessory dwelling unit is in violation, the City may enforce these provisions by any means available under the law. 
v.  Penalty per Section 202.99. 
vi.  Fee. A non-refundable registration fee shall be established by the City Commission. 
(j)  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be leased for a period of less than 3 months at a time. Upon request of the City, the owner of record shall provide a lease agreement evidencing the length of the lease. 
(k)  Each registered Accessory Dwelling Unit is subject to annual administrative review by the City. Registrant shall provide additional information as requested by the City. 
(l)  An accessory dwelling unit shall be prohibited if the parcel has a licensed Tourist Home. 
  Adult foster care family home and small group home; 
  Art galleries in non-residential buildings built prior to October 16, 2003, provided they are located on an arterial or collector street and provided the building is not expanded other than for barrier free access requirements; 
  Athletic fields; 
  Boat houses if they are an accessory use, if they are designed for housing a boat, if provisions are made for routing of any boardwalk, and if proper state and federal permits are obtained; 
  Coffee houses and family or fine food restaurants in non-residential buildings built prior to October 16, 2003, provided they are located on an arterial or collector street and provided the building is not expanded other than for barrier free access requirements; 
  Child care organization, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended, associated with a school or place of worship; 
  Community Gardens; 
  Dwellings, single-family; 
  Dwellings, two-family; 
  Dwellings, multiple family; 
  Essential services; 
  Family child care home, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended; 
  Golf courses; 
  Group child care home, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All necessary licenses are obtained and maintained. Expiration or revocation of a license automatically terminates the land use permit and a change in the licensee requires a land use permit renewal. 
(2)  The lot is not located within 150 feet of another lot devoted to such use. The distances required shall be measured along any private or public street. 
(3)  A fenced outside recreation area shall be located on premise where it will most effectively shield neighboring properties from noise and visual disruptions. Play equipment shall not be placed streetward of the principal structure unless specifically allowed by the Planning Commission for unique circumstance. 
(4)  The use does not exceed 16 hours of operation during a 24-hour period. 
(5)  No additional parking is required for the Group Day Care Home provided on-street parking is allowed adjacent to the property. If on-street parking is not allowed, 2 parking spaces shall be provided on premise. 
(6)  A Group child care home requires the issuance of a Land Use Permit. As part of the application, a site plan shall be submitted showing the designated outside play area, primary drop off/pick up entrance and parking spaces. 
  Home occupations subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A home occupation shall be conducted within the dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner of the occupation, or in a building accessory to such dwelling. 
(2)  All business activity and storage shall take place within the interior of the dwelling and/or accessory building. 
(3)  No alteration to the exterior of the residential dwelling, accessory building or yard that alters the residential character of the premises is permissible. 
(4)  The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic beyond 8 trip-ends per day. 
(5)  Only off-street parking facilities customary for a residential use and located on the premises may be used. 
(6)  No vehicles used in the conduct of the occupation may be parked, kept or otherwise be present on the premises, other than such as are customarily used for domestic or household purposes. 
(7)  Home occupations shall be conducted solely by persons residing at the residence and no more than 2 such persons shall be employed in the home occupation. If the residence is located on an arterial or collector street, 1 non-resident employee at 1 time is also allowed in addition to 2 resident employees. 
(8)  Any sign identifying the occupation must conform to the regulations of the Traverse City Code Chapter 1476, Signs. 
(9)  No sale or rental of goods is allowed on the premises, except as secondary and incidental to the furnishing of a service. 
(10)  Instruction in crafts and fine arts are recognized as allowable home occupations if they meet the above conditions. 
(11)  The use shall not generate noise, vibration or odors detectible beyond the property line. 
  Offices in nonresidential buildings built prior to (the date of this ordinance) provided they are located on an arterial or collector street and provided the building is not expanded except as necessary to meet barrier free access requirements; 
  Parks; 
  Playgrounds; 
  Private clubs, lodges, fraternities or sororities, if located on an arterial or collector street; 
  Rooming houses; 
  Tourist homes maintaining a City tourist home license; 
  Other similar uses as approved by the Planning Commission if such uses will generate similar traffic and parking, are compatible with adjacent land uses, and will not generate excessive noise, lighting, fumes or other nuisances. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 611. Passed 10-6-03. Ord. 693. Passed 12-19-05. Ord. 842. Passed 8-3-09. Ord. 877. Passed 8-16-10. Ord. 896. Passed 12-6-10; Ord. 1064 . Passed 2-5-18; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18; Ord. No. 1089 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
1336.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the multiple family districts if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Essential services buildings; 
  Places of worship; 
  Residential care and treatment facilities; 
  Schools; 
  Theaters, live, and performance art centers. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 676. Passed 05-02-05; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18) 
1336.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface R-9: 50 feet 7,500 sq. feet 9/dwelling unit/acre 35% maximum R-15: 50 feet 7,500 sq. feet 15/dwelling unit/acre 40% maximum R-29: 50 feet 7,500 sq. feet 29 dwelling unit/acre 50% maximum  
1336.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 

Building: Within 4 feet of the average setback of principal buildings on the same side of the street in the same face block, but no closer than 6 feet from the front property line. 
Parking area: To the side or rear of the principal building and set back a distance at least equal to the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: 
One side: 6 feet 
Aggregate: 14 feet; for structures above grade on lots or tracts of land on Grand Traverse Bay, the side setback is the greater of 30 percent of the lot width or 14 feet. 
Parking area: If contiguous to an R-district, a minimum of 10 feet. Otherwise, 5 feet. If shared parking is developed, these setbacks would affect only the perimeter of the combined parcels. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 25 feet 
Parking area: 5 feet, except 20 feet if abutting, adjacent to or across an alley from an R-District. 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots shall have a front setback on each street. 
(e)  Water setbacks: 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25 feet from the ordinary high water mark of Boardman River. Where the dock line is established by City ordinance, it shall be measured inland from the dock line. 
(f)  Storage of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle or equipment is limited to the rear yard only. Storage means parking the vehicle or equipment in an area unused for the purpose for which it was designed for a period of 30 consecutive days or more. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1336.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into required setbacks are allowed except: 
(1)  Eaves, chimneys, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 18 inches are permitted to extend within the setbacks. 
(2)  Terraces, patios, decks, uncovered and unenclosed porches and other ornamental features which do not extend more than 30 inches above grade at the nearest side property line may project into a required side setback provided these projections are no closer than 2 feet from the subject side property line. 
(3)  An unenclosed balcony, porch or deck may project into a rear setback for a distance not exceeding 10 feet. 
(4)  An unenclosed balcony or porch may project into a front setback not more than 8 feet from the exterior building line, but not closer than 6 feet from the front right-of-way line. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1336.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: Maximum 40 feet. 

(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and towers may be erected to a height not exceeding twice the height of the attached building. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates the exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 728. Passed 3-19-07.) 
1336.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    The following are requirements for accessory buildings in the multiple family districts: 
(1)  In order to minimize visibility from public or private street, accessory buildings shall be screened by the principal building(s), the site topography or other natural features of the property. 
(2)  Accessory buildings shall not exceed 20 feet in height. 
(3)  Accessory buildings shall be located no closer than 5 feet to any side or rear property line, except a boat house up to 250 square feet gross floor area may be built to the water's edge. 
(4)  Accessory buildings over 200 square feet in gross floor area, shall be constructed using building materials, design elements and roof pitches substantially similar to the principal building(s). 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 526. Passed 3-19-01. Ord. 637. Passed 4-5-04.) 
1336.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Minimum parking space requirements for single-family dwellings are 1 per dwelling unit. Additional requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. 
    Any residential building or driveway constructed after the effective date of this zoning code which has access to a maintained alley shall not have access to a street nor shall a parking area be located in the front yard. 
    For parcels having alley access, the parking of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle is limited to the rear yard. 
    Any parking area for single- or two-family residential use shall, at a minimum, be surfaced and the area clearly defined with gravel, crushed stone, concrete, asphalt, brick or equal material, and be maintained substantially free of dust, mud and standing water. 
    Parking for motor vehicles shall occur only on a surface permitted by this Code. 
    In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 761. Passed 7-2-07.) 
1336.09 - Special requirements. 
    To preserve and reinforce the development patterns of the Multiple Family Dwelling District the following special requirements shall apply: 
(1)  In the Boardman and Central Neighborhood Historic Districts, attached garages for parcels with alley access shall be prohibited. 
(2)  In the Boardman and Central Neighborhood Historic Districts, the distance between dwellings and accessory buildings greater than 200 square feet that have alley access shall not be less than 30 feet. The 30 foot separation between dwellings and accessory buildings can be reduced to 20 feet if it is determined to be impractical by the Planning Director. 
(Ord. 976. Passed 7-1-13) 
Chapter 1338 - HR - Hotel Resort District[10] 
    The Hotel Resort (HR) District is for the purpose of accommodating tourist-related land uses along the major routes near tourist attractions. It is important that motor vehicle access be limited and land uses are compatible with peak traffic flows. Uses for these zones include multi-family housing, lodging facilities, accessory offices, and limited uses that are functionally integrated as part of the development. 
(Ord. 782. Passed 2-4-08.) 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL  125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Motels, Ch. 836 

1338.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Hotel Resort District: 
  R-29 District uses; 
  Child care organizations, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended; 
  Lodging facilities; 
  Medical marihuana provisioning center meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The medical marihuana facility and use shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City, and the rules promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  The Medical Marihuana Provisioning Center shall not be in operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(3)  Except for Medical Marihuana Processors as set forth in this section, no other medical marihuana facilities use shall occur on the parcel; 
(4)  Except for parents or guardians of a qualifying patient and the person holding a license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City or staff of the medical marihuana facility, persons other than a qualifying patient or primary caregiver shall be not permitted within the medical marihuana provisioning center when medical marihuana is being transferred; 
(5)  No use or consumption of marihuana shall be allowed at the medical marihuana facility; 
(6)  The medical marihuana facility shall not be used by a physician to conduct a medical examination or issue a medical certification document for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying patient registry identification card under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act; 
(7)  A qualifying patient under the age of 18 shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian and notice of such shall be conspicuously posted; 
(8)  A medical marihuana provisioning center shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school; 
(9)  An owner or operator of a medical marihuana provisioning center shall not have been convicted of a felony involving controlled substances within the last 10 years; 
(10)  The medical marihuana provisioning center shall have at all times a valid and current operating license issued by the State and the City of Traverse City under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City; 
(11)  All activities of a medical marihuana provisioning center shall be conducted within the building; 
(12)  The smell of marihuana shall not be detectable outside of the portion of any structure where marihuana is present. 
  Offices, and retail shops provided the total floor area of the business or business within a building does not exceed 6,000 square feet in gross floor area on 1 level; 
  Restaurants, family or fine, banquet or meeting rooms, but not drive-ins or drive-throughs and not exceeding 6,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
  Drinking places without entertainment, up to 6,000 square feet gross floor area; 
  Drinking places with entertainment if not adjacent to, abutting or across an alley from a residential district. 
  Vacation home rentals maintaining a City Vacation Home Rental license. 
  Veterinary services, without outdoor runs. 
  Recreational facilities. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 492. Passed 4-17-00. Ord. 623. Passed 3-15-04. Ord. 782. Passed 2-4-08. Ord. 788. Passed 3-17-08. Ord. 844. Passed 8-3-09. Ord. 1010. Passed 9-2-14; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18; Ord. 1084 , Passed 12-3-18.) 
1338.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Hotel Resort District if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Essential services buildings. 
  Residential care and treatment facilities. 
  Transitional housing. 
  Communication towers and emergency shelters. 
  Wind Energy Building-Mount. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 709 . Passed 10-2-06. Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12. Ord. 1001. Passed 7-7-14) 
1338.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 50 feet 7,500 sq. feet 44/rooms/acre 70% maximum  
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 489. Passed 4-17-00. Ord. 624. Passed 3-15-04. Ord. 885. Passed 11-1-10.) 
1338.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
Building: The minimum setback is the lesser of 8 feet or the average setback of principal buildings on the same face block on the same side of the street. The maximum setback is 25 feet. 
Parking area: To the side or rear of the principal building and set back a distance at least equal to the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: None, except a minimum ten-foot side setback is required on the side adjoining a residential district. For structures above grade on lots or tracts of land on Grand Traverse Bay, the setback is the greater of 30 percent of the lot width or the number listed above. 
Parking area: Minimum of 10 feet if adjacent to an R-district. Otherwise, 5 feet. If shared parking is developed, these setbacks would affect only the perimeter of the combined parcels. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 5 feet, except a minimum 20-foot rear setback is required if adjacent to or across an alley from a residential district. 
Parking area: 5 feet; 20 feet if abutting, adjacent to or across an alley from an R-District. 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots shall have a front setback on both streets. 
(e)  Water setbacks: 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25 feet from the ordinary high water mark of Boardman River. Where the dock line is established by City ordinance, it shall be measured inland from the dock line. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord 490. Passed 4-17-00. Ord. 625. Passed 3-15-04. Ord. 716. Passed 1-2-07.) 
1338.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into the required setbacks are allowed except: 
(1)  Eaves, chimneys, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 18 inches are permitted to extend within the setbacks. 
(2)  Terraces, patios, decks, uncovered and unenclosed porches and other ornamental features which do not extend more than 30 inches above grade at the nearest side property line may project into a required side setback provided these projections are no closer than 2 feet from the subject side property line. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 626. Passed 3-15-04.) 
1338.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: Maximum 45 feet. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and clock towers may be erected to a height not exceeding twice the height of the attached building. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 491. Passed 4-17-00. Ord. 628. Passed 3-15-04. Ord. 729. Passed 3-19-07. Ord. 993. Passed 6-2-14) 
1338.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall: 
(1)  Only be permitted in the rear yard, except a pool equipment structure may be located in a front or side yard, and except accessory buildings may be located streetward on lots on navigable water and may be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots; 
(2)  Be located no closer than 5 feet to any side or rear property line. A boat house up to 250 square feet gross floor area may be built to the water's edge. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 554. Passed 2-4-02.) 
1338.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
    Any residential building or driveway constructed after the effective date of this zoning code which has access to a maintained alley shall not have access to a street nor shall a parking area be located in the front yard. 
    For parcels having alley access, the parking of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle is limited to the rear yard. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 762. Passed 7-2-07.) 
1338.09 - Special requirements. 
    The following are additional requirements for hotel, motel and restaurant uses: 
(1)  Mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view using the same materials used for the building walls or material which is approved by the Planning Director as visually compatible with the building. 
(2)  The main entry door of the principal building must face the street. 
(3)  Window openings in the principal building must constitute a minimum of 40 percent of the area of the first story street wall facing any public street unless the building is solely for residential use. 
(4)  Window glazing shall be recessed from the outside of all walls. 
(5)  Vertical building modulation shall be used to add variety and interest and to make a large building appear to be an aggregation of smaller units. Relief from a continuous street-facing wall may be achieved with wall offsets in combination with pilasters, corbeling or other permanent architectural elements, however, offsets in any wall shall not be less than 8 inches from the subject plane. 
(6)  All buildings that front the street, except for parking structures, accessory and utility buildings and buildings that are intended and designed to be exclusively developed for residential use shall have a minimum height of 15 feet measured from the street level entrance level to the next finished level or roof structure. The Planning Director may grant a first floor building height exception if it has been clearly demonstrated that such provision is unnecessary or that such requirements would create a practical difficulty, as contrasted merely granting an advantage or convenience. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 627. Passed 3-15-04. Ord. 993. Passed 6-2-14) 
Chapter 1340 - C-1 Office Service District[11] 
    The Office Service (C-1) District is for the purpose of accommodating residentially scaled commercial buildings. A variety of low intensity uses designed to integrate with adjacent residential areas. Uses permitted generally generate low to moderate trips. Existing residential structures are intended to be preserved and adaptively reused without substantially altering the appearance of building exteriors. New structures, signs and lighting should be sensitive and respectful to adjacent residential properties. 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL  125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 1476 

1340.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Office Service District: 
  R-29 District uses; 
  Art galleries; 
  Business services; 
  Child care organizations, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended; 
  Educational services, except schools; 
  Engineering, accounting, research, management and related services except testing and laboratory services; 
  Finance, insurance and real estate services; 
  Funeral services, excepting crematories; 
  Health services except hospitals; 
  Legal services; 
  Mailing services; 
  Medical equipment sales and rentals; 
  Membership organizations; 
  Offices; 
  Personal services, including walk-in laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations, but laundry cleaning and garment services are not allowed and without drive-throughs; 
  Places of worship; 
  Public administration, except correctional institutions; 
  Repair services - watch, clock and jewelry; 
  Repair services - reupholstery and furniture; 
  Security services exclusive of sales and installation; 
  Social services; 
  Vacation home rentals maintaining a City Vacation Home Rental License; 
  Veterinary services, without outdoor runs. 
(Ord. 788. Passed 3-17-08. Ord. 844. Passed 8-3-09. Ord. 954. Passed 10-1-12; Ord. No. 1059 . Passed 8-7-17; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18) 
1340.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Office Service District if a Special Land Use Permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Communication towers. 
  Essential services buildings. 
  Residential care and treatment facilities. 
  Schools. 
  Transitional housing and emergency shelters. 
  Wind Energy Building-Mount. 
(Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12. Ord. 1002. Passed 7-7-14) 
1340.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width(min.) Lot area(min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 20 feet 3,750 sq. ft. N/A 60% maximum  
(Ord. 886. Passed 11-1-10.) 
1340.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 

Building: The lesser of 8 feet or the average setback of principal buildings on the same face block. 
Parking area: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks: 
Building: 
Each side: None, except a minimum ten-foot side setback is required on any side adjoining an R-District. 
Parking area: 5 feet, except a ten-foot side setback is required on any side adjoining an R-District. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 5 feet, except a 20 foot rear setback is required on portion abutting or across an alley from an R-district. 
Parking area: 5 feet, except a 20 foot rear setback is required for any parking area abutting, adjacent to or across an alley from an R-district. 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots shall have a front setback on each street. 
(e)  Water setbacks: 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25 feet from the ordinary high water mark of Boardman River. Where the dock line is established by City ordinance, it shall be measured inland from the dock line. 
1340.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into the required setbacks are allowed except: 
(1)  Eaves, chimneys, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 18 inches are permitted to extend within the setbacks. 
(2)  An unenclosed balcony, porch or deck may project into a rear setback for a distance not exceeding 10 feet. 
1340.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: 
Maximum 30 feet or with a floor designed and used for residential purposes: maximum 45 feet. 
(b)  Exceptions: 

Steeples and clock towers may be erected to a height not exceeding twice the height of the attached building. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen a building's rooftop mechanical equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 730. Passed 3-19-07. Ord. 994. Passed 6-2-14) 
1340.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    An accessory building shall: 
(1)  Only be permitted in the rear yard, except accessory buildings may be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. 
(2)  Be located no closer than 4 feet to any side or rear property line. A boat house up to 250 square feet gross floor area may be built to the water's edge. 
(3)  Be constructed using materials and features similar to the principal building if the accessory building exceeds 500 square feet in gross floor area. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 554. Passed 2-4-02.) 
1340.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. Additional parking is not required for upper story dwellings above a first floor commercial or office use if the commercial or office us is in compliance with the parking requirements of this Code. Any residential building or driveway constructed after the effective date of this zoning code which has access to a maintained alley shall not have access to a street nor shall a parking area be located in the front yard. For parcels having alley access, the parking of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle is limited to the rear yard. 
(Ord. 763. Passed 7-2-07.) 
1340.09 - Special requirements. 
    To preserve and reinforce the context of historic buildings and land to establish development patterns of the Office Service district, all new buildings and additions to existing buildings are to be designed, constructed and used in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Except for buildings located on Garfield Avenue, no building shall have a gross floor area of more than 4,500 square feet on 1 level, and no more than 9,000 square feet gross floor area total, except a third floor and an additional 4,500 square feet are allowed if such floor is designed and used for residential purposes. 
(2)  No use shall be open to the public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  The predominant building wall and entryway shall face the street. 
(4)  Unless determined to be impractical by the Planning Director, the building width shall not be less than 80 percent of the property width at the street. 
(5)  Vertical building modulation shall be used to add variety and interest and to make a large building appear to be an aggregation of smaller units. Relief from a continuous street facing wall may be achieved with wall offsets in combination with pilasters, corbeling or other permanent architectural elements, however, offsets in any wall shall not be less than 8 inches from the subject plane. 
(6)  Window glazing shall be recessed from the outside of all building walls. 
(7)  Clear or lightly tinted transparent glass shall be used for all windows facing a public street. Decorative stained glass may be used for accents. Mirrored, smoked and darkly tinted glass is prohibited. 
(8)  Street-facing building facades shall incorporate permanent architectural elements which create shadow patterns and surface textures which, in turn, enhance visual interest. 
(9)  Except for buildings that are solely residential, windows or street level activities are required on 50 percent of the first story street wall facing any public street. Street level activities include public display space, public atriums, pedestrian entrances and interior circulation and windows with views into any designated street level use. 
(10)  For each 90 feet of linear building frontage, pedestrian entrances will be required. Pedestrian entrances may open onto the sidewalk or mid-block passages or walkways leading to the public right-of-way. Entries must be prominently identified and must not interfere with safe pedestrian passage along walkways. Primary entries must set back a minimum 4 feet from the facade. 
(11)  The spacing and shape of windows and openings on the building shall closely reflect the fenestration of any adjacent historic buildings. Brick, stone, wood or a combination thereof, compatible with adjacent historic buildings, shall be used. 
(12)  Fenestration, cornices and other primarily horizontal architectural elements incorporated in new buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be in context with historic buildings in the area. 
(13)  Any rooftop equipment shall be enclosed or screened from street level view using the same materials used for the building walls or a material which is approved by the Planning Director as visually compatible with the building. 
(14)  All buildings that front the street, except for parking structures, accessory and utility buildings and buildings that are intended and designed to be exclusively developed for residential use shall have a minimum height of 15 feet measured from the street level entrance level to the next finished level or roof structure. The Planning Director may grant a first floor building height exception if it has been clearly demonstrated that such provision is unnecessary or that such requirements would create a practical difficulty, as contrasted merely granting an advantage or convenience. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord 503. Passed 5-15-00. Ord. 547. Passed 10-15-01. Ord. 559. Passed 3-18-02 Ord. 955. Passed 10-1-12. Ord. 994. Passed 6-2-14). 
Chapter 1342 - C-2 Neighborhood Center District[12] 
    The Neighborhood Center district is for the purpose of accommodating small businesses primarily serving adjacent neighborhoods with day-to-day retail goods and services. These small centers are comprised of residentially-scaled buildings with limited parking areas and a strong pedestrian orientation. Existing buildings and quality vegetation should be retained. New buildings are to be designed to reflect a residential flavor and minimize impacts (e.g., noise, light, traffic) on neighborhood residences. Overall density of up to 29 dwellings per acre is allowed. 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL  125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 1476 

1342.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in these districts: 
  GP district uses; 
  C-3 district uses, except the following: drive-ins, drive-throughs, sexually-oriented businesses, vehicle wash facilities, veterinary services and kennels; 
  Boat liveries; 
  Convention centers; 
  Drinking places with or without entertainment; 
  Markets, public or municipal; 
  Medical Marihuana Provisioning Center meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The medical marihuana facility and use shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City, and the rules promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  The Medical Marihuana Provisioning Center shall not be in operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(3)  Except for Medical Marihuana Processors as set forth in this Section, no other medical marihuana facilities use shall occur on the parcel. 
(4)  Except for parents or guardians of a qualifying patient and the person holding a license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City or staff of the medical marihuana facility, persons other than a qualifying patient or primary caregiver shall be not permitted within the Medical Marihuana Provisioning Center when Medical Marihuana is being transferred. 
(5)  No use or consumption of marihuana shall be allowed at the medical marihuana facility. 
(6)  The medical marihuana facility shall not be used by a physician to conduct a medical examination or issue a medical certification document for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying patient registry identification card under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act. 
(7)  A qualifying patient under the age of 18 shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian and notice of such shall be conspicuously posted. 
(8)  A Medical Marihuana Provisioning Center shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school. 
(9)  An owner or operator of a Medical Marihuana Provisioning Center shall not have been convicted of a felony involving controlled substances within the last 10 years. 
(10)  The Medical Marihuana Provisioning Center shall have at all times a valid and current operating license issued by the State and the City of Traverse City under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City. 
(11)  All activities of a Medical Marihuana Provisioning Center shall be conducted within the building. 
(12)  The smell of marihuana shall not be detectable outside of the portion of any structure where marihuana is present. 
  Parking areas, private, for dwelling units (limited to 1 per dwelling unit); subject to Chapter 1374. 
  Parking areas, private, interior, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Parking area is accessed from the alley, 
(2)  Parking area is fully enclosed within a building, 
(3)  Parking surface is on average, at least 4 feet below the street elevation or is fronted with habitable space. 
  Parking areas, private, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Access shall be limited to 1 driveway per public street or 2 driveways per site, whichever is less. 
(2)  The parking is accessory to an allowed use. 
(3)  There can be demonstrated a need for private parking which will not be satisfied by existing public parking within 500 feet of the proposed use, except for private parking areas for dwelling units or interior private parking areas; 
(4)  All requirements of Chapter 1374, circulation and parking, are met, except Section 1374.03(d), parking space requirements. 
(5)  All requirements of Sections 1372.04, screening requirements for parking areas, and 1372.05, landscape development internal to a parking area are met. 
(6)  Pedestrian travel routes within the parking area shall be provided, clearly defined and approved by the Planning Director. 
  Parking areas, public, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Access shall be limited to 1 driveway per public street or 2 driveways per site, whichever is less. 
(2)  All parking areas which abut a public street shall be set back a minimum distance of 8 feet from the property line along said street and shall provide in this setback area appropriate screening with plant materials or a combination of plant materials, berming and decorative screenwalls to a minimum height of 3 feet. 
(3)  Pedestrian travel routes within the parking area shall be provided, clearly defined and approved by the Planning Director. 
(4)  Unless herein varied, the landscaping and site development chapter shall apply. 
  Parking structures, public or private, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Parking structures shall be designed to have horizontal versus stepped or sloping levels at areas of public view. Ramping shall be concealed from public view to the greatest degree possible. 
(2)  Openings shall not exceed 60 percent of the total wall surface. Openings shall be vertical or square. 
(3)  Sloped roofs are not required for parking decks, however: 
a.  The upper and lowest level of parking shall incorporate sufficient screening to shield cars from public view. 
b.  Parapet treatment is required to terminate the deck and give proper architectural finish to the structure. Cornices, overhangs and other devices which are consistent with the language of historical buildings may be employed. 
(4)  The design of parking decks shall be consistent with the design of historical buildings in the area. 
  Theaters, live and performance art centers. 
(Ord. 747, Passed 5-21-07; Ord. 867, Passed 6-7-10; Ord. 1076 , Passed 7-2-18; Ord. 1084 , Passed 12-3-18.) 
1342.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Neighborhood Center District if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Residential care and treatment facilities; 
  Schools; 
  Transitional housing and emergency shelters; 
  Wind Energy Building-Mount. 
(Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12. Ord. 1003. Passed 7-7-14) 
1342.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 20 feet 3,750 sq. ft. NA 70% maximum  
(Ord. 887. Passed 11-1-10.) 
1342.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
(1)  Building: The minimum setback is the lesser of 8 feet or the average setback of principal buildings on the same face block on the same side of the street. The maximum setback is 25 feet. 
(2)  Parking area: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks: 
(1)  Building: 
(2)  One side/aggregate: None, except a minimum ten-foot side setback is required on a side adjoining an R-District. 
(3)  Parking area: 5 feet, except a minimum ten-foot side setback is required on any side adjoining an R District 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
(1)  Building: 5 feet, except 20 feet if adjoining an R-District. 
(2)  Parking area: 5 feet, except a 20-foot setback is required for any parking area abutting, adjacent to or across a public alley from an R-District. 
(3)  Parking area: 5 feet, except a 20-foot setback is required for any parking area abutting, adjacent to or across a public alley from an R-District. 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots shall have a front setback on each street. 
(e)  Water setbacks: 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25 feet from the ordinary high water mark of Boardman River. Where the dock line is established by City ordinance, it shall be measured inland from the dock line. 
1342.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into the required setbacks are allowed except: 
(1)  Eaves, chimneys, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 18 inches are permitted to extend within the setbacks. 
(2)  An unenclosed balcony, porch or deck may project into a rear setback for a distance not exceeding 10 feet. 
1342.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: Maximum 30 feet or with a floor designed and used for residential uses: maximum 45 feet. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and clock towers may be erected to a height not exceeding twice the height of the attached building. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates the exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 731. Passed 3-19-07. Ord. 995. Passed 6-2-14) 
1342.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    An accessory building shall: 
(1)  Only be permitted in the rear yard, except accessory buildings may be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. 
(2)  Be located no closer than 4 feet to any side or rear property line. A boat house up to 242 square feet gross floor area may be built to the water's edge. 
(3)  Be constructed using materials and features similar to the principal building if the accessory building exceeds 500 square feet in gross floor area. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 554. Passed 2-4-02.) 
1342.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
    Parking is not required for upper story dwellings above a first floor commercial or office use. 
    Any residential building or driveway constructed after the effective date of this zoning code which has access to a maintained alley shall not have access to a street nor shall a parking area be located in the front yard. 
    For parcels having alley access, the parking of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle is limited to the rear yard. 
(Ord. 764. Passed 7-2-07.) 
1342.09 - Special requirements. 
    To preserve and reinforce the context of historic buildings and to establish land development patterns of the Neighborhood Center District, all new buildings and additions to existing buildings are to be designed, constructed and used in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  No building shall have a gross floor area of more than 6,000 square feet on 1 level, and no more than 12,000 square feet gross floor area total, except a third floor and an additional 6,000 square feet are allowed if such floor is designed and used for residential purposes. 
(2)  No use shall be open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  The predominant building wall and entryway shall face the street. 
(4)  Unless determine to be impractical by the Planning Director, the building width shall not be less than 80 percent of the property width at the street. 
(5)  Vertical building modulation shall be used to add variety and interest and to make a large building appear to be an aggregation of smaller units relief from a continuous street facing wall may be achieved with wall offsets in combination with pilasters, corbeling or other permanent architectural elements, however, offsets in any wall shall not be less than 8 inches from the subject plane. 
(6)  Window glazing shall be recessed from the outside of all building walls. 
(7)  Clear or lightly tinted transparent glass shall be used for all windows facing a public street. Decorative stained glass may be used for accents. Mirrored, smoked and darkly tinted glass is prohibited. 
(8)  Street-facing building facades shall incorporate permanent architectural elements which create shadow patterns and surface textures which, in turn, enhance visual interest. 
(9)  Except for buildings that are solely residential, windows or street level activities are required on 50 percent of the first story street wall facing any public street. Street level activities include public display space, public atriums, pedestrian entrances and interior circulation and windows with views into any designated street level use. 
(10)  For each 90 feet of linear building frontage, pedestrian entrances will be required. Pedestrian entrances may open onto the sidewalk or mid-block passages or walkways leading to the public right-of-way. Entries must be prominently identified and must not interfere with safe pedestrian passage along walkways. Primary entries must set back a minimum 4 feet from the facade. 
(11)  The spacing and shape of windows and openings on the building shall closely reflect the fenestration of any adjacent historic buildings. Brick, stone, wood or a combination thereof, compatible with adjacent historic buildings, shall be used. 
(12)  Fenestration, cornices and other primarily horizontal architectural elements incorporated in new buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be in context with historic buildings in the area. 
(13)  Any rooftop equipment shall be enclosed or screened from street level view using the same materials used for the building walls or a material which is approved by the Planning Director as visually compatible with the building. 
(14)  All buildings that front the street, except for parking structures, accessory and utility buildings and buildings that are intended and designed to be exclusively developed for residential use shall have a minimum height of 15 feet measured from the street level entrance level to the next finished level or roof structure. The Planning Director may grant a first floor building height exception if it has been clearly demonstrated that such provision is unnecessary or that such requirements would create a practical difficulty, as contrasted merely granting an advantage or convenience. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 546. Passed 10-15-01. Ord. 957. Passed 1-7-13. Ord. 995. Passed 6-2-14) 
Chapter 1344 - C-3 Community Center District 
    The Community Center (C-3) District is for the purpose of accommodating a wide range of retail goods and services available to the community. These uses are intended to be developed compactly and have coordinated access, preferably with limited driveways and shared parking facilities. More intense uses such as 24-hour stores and drive-through establishments are appropriate. 

1344.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Community Center District: 
  HR District uses; 
  C-2 District uses; 
  Amusement and recreation services (see mechanical amusement arcades below); 
  Communication establishments; 
  Contractors, with no outside storage; 
  Drinking places with entertainment; 
  Equipment rental and leasing; 
  Finance services, including those having drive throughs subject to the standards of Section 1374.06, drive-throughs; 
  Kennels, provided no that no building, open kennel or exercise runway is closer than 200 feet from a Residential District; 
  Mechanical amusement arcades subject to the following: 
(1)  All necessary licenses are obtained and maintained. 
(2)  There is in physical attendance at all times of operation a minimum of 1 adult employee whose sole responsibility is to supervise the conduct of patrons on or near the premises. 
(3)  Suitable ventilation, fire protection measures and adequate lighting inside and outside the premises are provided for the safety of patrons and the public as required by the Fire Marshal. 
(4)  One bicycle rack per mechanical amusement device is provided on-site and located subject to the approval of the Planning Director. 
(5)  There is not more than 1 arcade in a face block, and in no case shall an arcade be located closer than 600 feet to any existing arcade or amusement park. 
  Medical marihuana collective meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Use and transfer of Medical Marihuana shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act and the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  Transfer of medical marihuana shall be only allowed to a qualifying patient directly in person by his or her registered primary caregiver or by another qualifying patient as allowed by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act and the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  The collective shall not be in operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(4)  No medical marihuana cultivation shall occur on the parcel. 
(5)  Except for parents or guardians of a qualifying patient and the owner or staff of the facility, persons other than a qualifying patient or primary caregiver shall be not permitted within the collective when medical marihuana is being transferred or used. 
(6)  A qualifying patient under the age of 18 shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian and notice of such shall be conspicuously posted. 
(7)  A medical marihuana collective shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school. 
(8)  A medical marihuana collective shall not be located within 1,000 feet from another existing collective. 
(9)  An owner or operator of a medical marihuana collective shall not have been convicted of a felony involving controlled substances. 
(10)  The name and address of all persons with an ownership interest in the medical marihuana collective and all operators of the medical marihuana collective shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator at least 10 business days prior to opening the medical marihuana collective and least 10 business days prior to when a new person owns or operates the medical marihuana collective. 
  Microbrewery; 
  Motorized vehicle dealers, mobile home dealers, watercraft dealers and recreational vehicle dealers subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All outdoor display and storage in front or on the side of a building shall meet landscape requirements for parking areas. 
(2)  Outdoor display areas shall be differentiated from parking areas using contrasting surface material and shall be designated on a site plan. 
(3)  Any display platforms shall not be elevated more than 3 feet higher than the adjacent public right-of-way. 
  Personal services, including those having drive-throughs subject to the standards of Section 1374.06, drive-throughs; 
  Pet boarding or pet grooming services, provided that no building, open kennel or exercise runway is closer than 200 feet from an R-District. 
  Printing (commercial); 
  Repair services, miscellaneous; 
  Restaurants, family, fine and fast, including drive-ins and drive-throughs accessory to an on-site, indoor, full service restaurant and including the parking requirements of Chapter 1372, landscaping and Section 1374.06, drive-throughs; 
  Retail trade; 
  Service stations and repair shops (except tire retreading) with or without fuel dispensing; 
  Theaters, except outdoor; 
  Vehicle wash facilities subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Customer stacking space shall be provided at a rate of 3 spaces per bay or wash area for a stationary-type (coin-operated) system, and 8 spaces per bay for an automatic system. 
(2)  Customer stacking spaces shall be located and arranged to preclude obstruction of traffic flow on the public right-of-way or overhang and the public sidewalk. 
(3)  Grates the full width of the driveway shall be provided at the exits to intercept and collect excess water and prevent its spread onto the public right-of-way. 
(4)  A 35-foot setback is required from the property line where the primary exit for the vehicle was facility is made. All other setbacks shall conform to the district requirements. 
(5)  All operations connected with this facility shall be conducted within the buildings, except for vacuuming, so as to minimize the effect of noise and moisture on surrounding areas. 
(6)  Where an auto wash is adjoining residential property or is separated from such property by a public alley, there shall be provided a continuous decorative screenwall of not less than 5 feet or more than 6 feet in height. 
(7)  Ingress and egress shall be on an arterial or collector street, except where the Planning Commission determines public welfare or safety would be best served by allowing other means of ingress or egress. 
  Veterinary services, provided that no building, open kennel or exercise runway is closer than 200 feet from a R-District; 
  Warehousing. 
(Ord. 778. Passed 1-7-08. Ord. 878. Passed 8-16-10. Ord. 903. Passed 2-7-11.) 
1344.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Community Center District if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Communication towers; 
  Essential services buildings; 
  Residential care and treatment facilities; 
  Schools; 
  Transitional housing and emergency shelters; 
  Wind Energy Pole/Tower-Mount; 
  Wind Energy Building-Mount. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12. Ord. 1004. Passed 7-7-14) 
1344.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 20 feet 3,750 sq. ft. N/A 80% maximum  
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 888. Passed 11-1-10.) 
1344.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
Building: 25 feet maximum; 8 feet minimum. 
Parking area: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: 
One side/aggregate: None, except a ten-foot side setback is required on the side adjoining an R-District. 
Parking area: 5 feet, except a ten-foot setback is required on any portion abutting an R-District. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 5 feet, except 20 feet is required on any portion abutting or across an alley from an R-District. 
Parking area: 5 feet, except 20 feet is required on any portion abutting, adjacent to or across an alley from an R-district. 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots shall have a front setback on each street. 
(e)  Water setbacks: 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the Boardman River. Where the dock line is established by City ordinance, it shall be measured from the dock line. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1344.05 - Encroachments into the setback. 
    No encroachments into the required setbacks are allowed except: 
(1)  Eaves, chimneys, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 18 inches are permitted to extend within the setbacks. 
(2)  An unenclosed balcony, porch or deck may project into a rear setback for a distance not exceeding 10 feet. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1344.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: 

Maximum 45 feet. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and clock towers may be erected to a height not exceeding twice the height of the attached building. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 732. Passed 3-19-07) 
1344.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    An accessory building shall: 
(1)  Only be permitted in the rear yard, except accessory buildings may be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. 
(2)  Be located no closer than 5 feet to any side or rear property line. A boat house, up to 250 square feet gross floor area, may be built to the water's edge. 
(3)  Be constructed using materials and features similar to the principal building if the accessory building exceeds 500 square feet in gross floor area. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 554. Passed 2-4-02.) 
1344.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
    Parking is not required for upper story dwellings above a first floor commercial or office use. 
    Any residential building or driveway constructed after the effective date of this zoning code which has access to a maintained alley shall not have access to a street nor shall a parking area be located in the front yard. For parcels having alley access, the parking of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle is limited to the rear yard. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 765. Passed 7-2-07.) 
1344.09 - Special requirements. 
    To establish land development patterns of the district, all new buildings and additions to existing buildings are to be designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  The predominant building wall and entryway shall face the public or private street. 
(2)  Unless determined to be impractical, by the Planning Director, the building width shall not be less than 60 percent of the property width at the street. 
(3)  Vertical building modulation shall be used to add variety and interest and to make a large building appear to be an aggregation of smaller units. Relief from a continuous street facing wall may be achieved with wall offsets in combination with pilasters, corbeling or other permanent architectural elements; however, offsets in any wall shall not be less than 8 inches from the subject plane. 
(4)  Horizontal building modulation shall be used to reduce the perceived mass of a large building. Horizontal awnings, balconies, and roof features should be incorporated into new developments provided that their appearance varies through the use of color, materials, size and location. 
(5)  Except for buildings that are solely residential, windows or street level activities are required on 40 percent of the first story street wall facing any public street. Street level activities include public display space, public atriums, pedestrian entrances and interior circulation and windows with views into any designated street level use. 
(6)  Clear or lightly tinted transparent glass shall be used for all windows facing a public street. Decorative stained glass may be used for accents. Mirrored, smoked and darkly tinted glass is prohibited. 
(7)  Street-facing building facades shall incorporate permanent architectural elements which create shadow patterns and surface textures which, in turn, enhance visual interest. 
(8)  Any rooftop equipment shall be enclosed or screened from street level view using the same materials used for the building walls or a material which is approved by the Planning Director as visually compatible with the building. 
(9)  All buildings that front the street, except for parking structures, accessory and utility buildings and buildings that are intended and designed to be exclusively developed for residential use shall have a minimum height of 15 feet measured from the street level entrance level to the next finished level or roof structure. The Planning Director may grant a first floor building height exception if it has been clearly demonstrated that such provision is unnecessary or that such requirements would create a practical difficulty, as contrasted merely granting an advantage or convenience. 
(Ord. 619. Passed 2-2-04. Ord. 996. Passed 6-2-14) 
Chapter 1346 - C-4 Regional Center Districts[13] 
    The Regional Center Districts are for the purpose of accommodating a broad variety of retail, office and residential uses integrated with hotels, convention centers, and integrated common parking facilities. Internal linkage between stores is encouraged. It is extremely important that new development be integrated with historically significant buildings. The first floors of buildings are primarily for retail, financial services and restaurants. Dominant and striking visual features of the central area of the City should be maintained and enhanced. The upper stories of buildings are generally to be occupied by offices, services and residences. High density housing is also appropriate. 
    It is the intent of these districts to create streets which encourage pedestrian activity. Buildings along Boardman River should be designed to integrate with both the sidewalk and riverwalk systems. Driveways crossing sidewalks should be limited to public parking areas. 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 1476 

1346.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in these districts: 
  GP district uses; 
  C-3 district uses, except the following: drive-ins, drive-throughs, Medical Marihuana Provisioning Centers, sexually-oriented businesses, vehicle wash facilities, veterinary services and kennels; 
  Boat liveries; 
  Convention centers; 
  Drinking places with or without entertainment; 
  Markets, public or municipal; 
  Parking areas, private, for dwelling units (limited to 1 per dwelling unit); subject to Chapter 1374. 
  Parking areas, private, interior, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Parking area is accessed from the alley, 
(2)  Parking area is fully enclosed within a building, 
(3)  Parking surface is on average, at least 4 feet below the street elevation or is fronted with habitable space. 
  Parking areas, private, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Access shall be limited to 1 driveway per public street or 2 driveways per site, whichever is less. 
(2)  The parking is accessory to an allowed use. 
(3)  There can be demonstrated a need for private parking which will not be satisfied by existing public parking within 500 feet of the proposed use, except for private parking areas for dwelling units or interior private parking areas; 
(4)  All requirements of Chapter 1374, circulation and parking, are met, except Section 1374.03(d), parking space requirements. 
(5)  All requirements of Sections 1372.04, screening requirements for parking areas, and 1372.05, landscape development internal to a parking area are met. 
(6)  Pedestrian travel routes within the parking area shall be provided, clearly defined and approved by the Planning Director. 
  Parking areas, public, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Access shall be limited to 1 driveway per public street or 2 driveways per site, whichever is less. 
(2)  All parking areas which abut a public street shall be set back a minimum distance of 8 feet from the property line along said street and shall provide in this setback area appropriate screening with plant materials or a combination of plant materials, berming and decorative screenwalls to a minimum height of 3 feet. 
(3)  Pedestrian travel routes within the parking area shall be provided, clearly defined and approved by the Planning Director. 
(4)  Unless herein varied, the landscaping and site development chapter shall apply. 
  Parking structures, public or private, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Parking structures shall be designed to have horizontal versus stepped or sloping levels at areas of public view. Ramping shall be concealed from public view to the greatest degree possible. 
(2)  Openings shall not exceed 60 percent of the total wall surface. Openings shall be vertical or square. 
(3)  Sloped roofs are not required for parking decks, however: 
a.  The upper and lowest level of parking shall incorporate sufficient screening to shield cars from public view. 
b.  Parapet treatment is required to terminate the deck and give proper architectural finish to the structure. Cornices, overhangs and other devices which are consistent with the language of historical buildings may be employed. 
(4)  The design of parking decks shall be consistent with the design of historical buildings in the area. 
  Theaters, live and performance art centers. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 677. Passed 5-2-05. Ord. 782. Passed 2-4-08. Ord. 825. Passed 2-2-09; Ord. 1084 , Passed 12-3-18.) 
1346.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in these districts if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Communication towers; 
  Drive-throughs for finance services; 
  Essential services buildings; 
  Parking areas, private, if public parking is available within 500 feet of the allowed use; 
  Taller buildings in the C4-b or C4-c district; 
  Transit centers. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 610. Passed 9-2-03. Ord. 677. Passed 05-02-05. Ord. 779. Passed 1-7-08.) 
1346.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface No minimum No minimum N/A 100% maximum.  
The surface parking area shall not exceed the total floor area of all buildings on the lot. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 684. Passed 10-03-05.) 
1346.04 - Setbacks 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
Building: 2.5 feet minimum, except existing buildings that have been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or similar causes and located closer than 2.5 feet may be restored or rebuilt at the same location using the same foundation unless the foundation is located in the right-of-way. 8 feet maximum. 
Private parking area: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: 
One side/aggregate: None, except ten-foot side setback is required on any side abutting or across an alley from an R-district. 
Private parking area: 5 feet, except a ten-foot setback is required on any side abutting an R-district. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: None. A 20-foot setback is required if abutting or across an alley from an R-district. 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots shall have a front setback on each street. 
(e)  Water setbacks: May build to the edge of a public easement; if no public easement, then 10 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark or any dockline established by City ordinance. 
(f)  Bridge setbacks: Buildings shall be set back a distance of 25 feet from any bridge abutment unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer if he or she determines that the building will not interfere with the maintenance or reconstruction of the bridge and that utilities will not be adversely impacted. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 512. Passed 9-18-00. Ord. 576. Passed 10-7-02. Ord. 685. Passed 10-03-05. Ord. 818. Passed 1-5-09; Ord. No. 1054 . Passed 7-3-17) 
1346.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into setbacks are allowed except a building, balcony, porch or deck may project no more than 5 feet into a rear setback provided these projections are not less than 15 feet above grade and provided they do not project into any public right-of-way and except eaves, chimneys, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 2.5 feet are permitted to extend within the front or rear setbacks. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 511. Passed 9-18-00. Ord. 577. Passed 10-7-02.) 
1346.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building Height: Buildings in the C-4 District shall have a minimum height of 30 feet and a maximum building height as listed below. An existing building may have a one-story addition of no larger than the area of the first floor of that building as it existed on the effective date of Ordinance No. 467, which is July 16, 1999. More than 60 feet in height may be allowed only by special land use permit or as part of a planned unit development and subject to the requirements listed below. 
C-4a: 45 feet maximum. 
C-4b: 60 feet maximum. 68 feet in height is allowed if at least 20 percent of the building is designed and used for dwellings. 
C-4c: 85 feet maximum. An additional 15 feet shall be allowed for permitted uses that are designed and positioned in a manner that will effectively shield rooftop mechanical equipment or elevator shafts, but not to exceed an overall height of 100 feet. Buildings over 60 feet tall shall have at least 20 percent of the building designed and used for dwellings. That portion of the building with a finish floor elevation of 45 feet or greater must be recessed at least 10 feet from the first floor building facade. 
(b)  Exceptions: The following are exceptions to the above height restrictions: 
(1)  Steeples and clock towers may be erected in a C-4a district up to a height not exceeding 60 feet. 
(2)  Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 528. Passed 3-19-01. Ord. 548. Passed 12-17-01. Ord. 561. Passed 4-1-02. Ord. 631. Passed 4-19-04. Ord. 686. Passed 10-03-05. Ord. 692. Passed 12-05-05. Ord. 733. Passed 3-19-07.) 
1346.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    An accessory building shall: 
(1)  Only be permitted in the rear yard, except accessory buildings may be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. 
(2)  Be located no closer than 4 feet to any side or rear property line. A boat house up to 250 square feet gross floor area may be built to the water's edge. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 554. Passed 2-4-02.) 
1346.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    No parking is required in this district, however, if parking is provided, it must meet the standards contained in Chapter 1374, circulation and parking and restrictions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1346.09 - Special requirements. 
    To preserve and reinforce the context of historic buildings and land to establish development patterns of the Regional Center District, all new buildings and additions to existing buildings are to be designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  The predominant building wall and entryway shall face the public or private street. 
(2)  Unless determined to be impractical by the Planning Director, the building width shall not be less than 90 percent of the property width at the street. 
(3)  Vertical building modulation shall be used to add variety and interest and to make a large building appear to be an aggregation of smaller units. Relief from a continuous street facing wall may be achieved with wall offsets in combination with pilasters, corbeling or other permanent architectural elements; however, offsets in any wall shall not be less than 8 inches from the subject plane. 
(4)  Horizontal building modulation, like awnings, balconies and roof features shall be used to reduce the perceived mass of a large building. 
(5)  Fenestration, cornices and other architectural elements incorporated in new buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be in context with historic buildings in the area. 
(6)  Window glass planes shall be recessed at least 4 inches from the outside of all building walls to create a shadow line except in bay windows and to other projecting window elements. 
(7)  Clear or lightly tinted transparent glass shall be used for all windows facing a public street. Decorative stained glass may be used for accents. Mirrored, smoked and darkly tinted glass is prohibited. 
(8)  New buildings and additions to existing buildings, including parking structures, shall be constructed of durable materials utilizing the predominant building materials of traditional brick and stone used in the Regional Center District or constructed of materials of comparable aesthetic value. 
(9)  Any rooftop equipment shall be enclosed or screened from street level view using the same materials used for the building walls or a material which is approved by the Planning Director as visually compatible with the building. All utility meters and wall or ground mounted mechanical equipment, such as HVAC systems, shall be limited to the rear third of the parcel, unless determined impractical by the Planning Director. 
(10)  Except for buildings that are solely residential, windows or street level activities are required on 50 percent of the first story street wall facing any public street. Street level activities include public display space, public atriums, pedestrian entrances and exterior circulation. 
(11)  For each 90 feet of linear building frontage, pedestrian entrances are required. Pedestrian entrances may open onto the sidewalk or mid-block passages or walkways leading to the public right-of-way. Entries must be prominently identified and must not interfere with safe pedestrian passage along walkways. Primary entries must set back a minimum 4 feet from the property line. 
(12)  All buildings that front the street, except for parking structures, accessory and utility buildings and buildings that are intended and designed to be exclusively developed for residential use shall have a minimum height of 15 feet measured from the street level entrance level to the next finished level or roof structure. The Planning Director may grant a first floor building height exception if it has been clearly demonstrated that such provision is unnecessary or that such requirements would create a practical difficulty, as contrasted merely granting an advantage or convenience. 
(13)  Dumpsters or trash receptacles exterior to a building shall be placed in the in the rear yard, on private property, screened with a wall not less than the height of the dumpster or trash receptacle and be constructed of similar materials used for the exterior of the building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 545. Passed 10-15-01. Ord. 631. Passed 4-19-04; but with no changes to existing ordinance. Ord. 684. Passed 10-03-05. Ord. 687. Passed 10-03-05. Ord. 996. Passed 6-2-14; Ord. No. 1054 . Passed 7-3-17) 
Chapter 1347 - Development Districts[14] 
    The Development Districts are for the purpose of accommodating a mixture of land uses in areas traditionally known as the "Traverse City Ironworks" area, the "Depot" area and the "Red Mill" area. Residential uses are to be combined with shopping, restaurant, office and entertainment uses to create a village-like atmosphere. Compact, pedestrian-friendly developments which integrate well with adjacent properties are characteristic of these projects. 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 1476 

1347.01 - Uses allowed. 
    No use shall be open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed: 
    Ironworks (D-1), Depot (D-2) and Red Mill (D-3) areas: 
  C-2 uses without drive-throughs; 
  Banquet halls or conference rooms; 
  Communication establishments; 
  Contractors' offices with no outside storage; 
  Lodging facilities; 
  Markets, public or municipal; 
  Manufacturing or processing, no larger than 10,000 square feet, of: 
(1)  Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics and similar materials; 
(2)  Bakery products; 
(3)  Beverages; 
(4)  Canned, frozen and preserved fruits, vegetable and food specialties; 
(5)  Dairy products; 
(6)  Food preparations and kindred products-miscellaneous; 
(7)  Furniture and fixtures; 
(8)  Leather and leather products (finished), except leather tanning and finishing; 
(9)  Measuring, analyzing and controlling instruments, photographic, medical and optical goods, matches and clocks; 
  Medical marihuana provisioning center meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The medical marihuana facility and use shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City, and the rules promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  The medical marihuana provisioning center shall not be in operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(3)  Except for medical marihuana processors as set forth in this section, no other medical marihuana facilities use shall occur on the parcel; 
(4)  Except for parents or guardians of a qualifying patient and the person holding a license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City or staff of the medical marihuana facility, persons other than a qualifying patient or primary caregiver shall be not permitted within the medical marihuana provisioning center when medical marihuana is being transferred; 
(5)  No use or consumption of marihuana shall be allowed at the medical marihuana facility; 
(6)  The medical marihuana facility shall not be used by a physician to conduct a medical examination or issue a medical certification document for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying patient registry identification card under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act; 
(7)  A qualifying patient under the age of 18 shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian and notice of such shall be conspicuously posted; 
(8)  A medical marihuana provisioning center shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school; 
(9)  An owner or operator of a medical marihuana provisioning center shall not have been convicted of a felony involving controlled substances within the last 10 years; 
(10)  The medical marihuana provisioning center shall have at all times a valid and current operating license issued by the State and the City of Traverse City under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City; 
(11)  All activities of a medical marihuana provisioning center shall be conducted within the building; 
(12)  The smell of marihuana shall not be detectable outside of the portion of any structure where marihuana is present; 
  Parking structures, public or private, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Parking structures shall be designed to have horizontal versus stepped or sloping levels at areas of public view. Ramping shall be concealed from public view to the greatest degree possible. 
(2)  Openings shall not exceed 60 percent of the total wall surface. Openings shall be vertical or square. 
(3)  Sloped roofs are not required for parking decks, however: 
a.  The upper and lowest level of parking shall incorporate sufficient screening to shield cars from public view. 
b.  Parapet treatment is required to terminate the deck and give proper architectural finish to the structure. Cornices, overhangs and other devices which are consistent with the language of historical buildings may be employed. 
(4)  The design of parking decks shall be consistent with the design of historical buildings in the area. 
  Stores, retail, no larger than 8,000 square feet per floor per single retailer; 
  Theaters, except outdoor theaters. 
(Ord. 496. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 748. Passed 5-21-07. Ord. 782. Passed 2-4-08. Ord. 803. Passed 6-16-08. Ord. 936. Passed 4-2-2012; Ord. 1042. Passed 12-19-16; Ord. 1084 , Passed 12-3-18.) 
1347.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Communication towers; 
  Convention centers; 
  Essential services buildings; 
  Finance services with drive-throughs; 
  Stores, retail, over 8,000 square feet per floor; 
  Taller buildings (buildings taller than 60 feet or over 4 stories); 
  Transit centers in the D-2 and D-3 District; 
  Transitional housing and emergency shelters; 
  Wind Energy Building-Mount. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 610. Passed 9-2-03. Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12. Ord. 1005. Passed 7-7-14) 
1347.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface Depot: - N/A 60%, except 70% allowed if no driveways onto 8 th Street or if a shared driveway is used for a parcel without alley access Ironworks: - N/A 70%, except 80% allowed if no driveways onto a street or if a shared driveway is used for a parcel without alley access Red Mill: - N/A 70%, except 80% allowed if no driveways onto a street (not including Gillis Street) or if a shared driveway is used for a parcel without alley access  
(Ord. 476, Passed 7-6-99; Ord. 889, Passed 11-1-10; Ord. 1081 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
1347.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
Building: 
D-1 - Ironworks: 5 feet minimum, 10 feet maximum 
D-2 - Depot: 5 feet minimum, 10 feet maximum 
D-3 - Red Mill: 3 feet minimum, 10 feet maximum; except 8 feet minimum from Grandview Parkway and 8 feet minimum from Gillis Street. 
Parking areas: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: 
D-1 - Ironworks: None 
D-2 - Depot: None 
D-3 - Red Mill: None 
Parking areas: 5 feet, except a minimum 10-foot side setback is required on any side adjoining an R-district. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 
D-1 - Ironworks: None 
D-2 - Depot: None 
D-3 - Red Mill: None 
Parking areas: 5 feet, except a 20-foot setback is required for any parking area abutting, adjacent to or across a public alley from an R-District 
(d)  Corner and through lots shall have a front setback on each street. 
(e)  Water setbacks: 
Building: 25 feet from the ordinary high water mark. 
(f)  Bridge setbacks: Buildings shall be set back a distance of 25 feet from any bridge abutment. 
(Ord. 1081 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
1347.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into required setbacks are allowed except eaves, chimneys, sills, belt course, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 18 inches are permitted to extend within the setbacks. 
1347.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: 
(1)  D-1 - Ironworks: 
That portion of a building along 8th Street within 100 feet of the right-of-way: 60 feet and five-story maximum. 
Remaining area: 45 feet maximum. An additional 15 feet is allowed if 25 percent of the project is designed and used for residential uses and the building is no taller than 60 feet. Another 15 feet is allowed by a special land use permit or planned unit development if 25 percent of the project is designed and used for residential uses and 75 feet is not exceeded. 
That portion of a building above 45 feet shall be recessed a minimum of 20 feet from the facade facing a public street. 
(2)  D-2 - Depot: 
That portion of a building along 8th Street (within 100 feet of the right-of-way): 60 feet and five-story maximum. 
Remaining Area: 45 feet maximum. An additional 15 feet is allowed if 25 percent of the project is designed and used for residential uses and the building is no taller than 60 feet. Another 15 feet is allowed by a special land use permit or planned unit development if 25 percent of the project is designed and used for residential uses and 75 feet is not exceeded. 
That portion of a building taller than 45 feet shall be recessed a minimum of 20 feet from the facade facing the public street. 
(3)  D-3 - Red Mill: 
That portion of a building within 100 feet from the property line along east Gillis Street right-of-way (extended to Grandview Parkway) is limited to 45 feet maximum. 
That portion of a building within 100 feet of Grandview Parkway right-of-way shall not exceed a building height of 45 feet maximum. 
Remaining Area: 45 feet maximum. An additional 15 feet is allowed if 25 percent of the project is designed and used for residential uses and the building is no taller than 60 feet. Another 15 feet is allowed by a special land use permit or planned unit development if 25 percent of the project is designed and used for residential uses and 75 feet is not exceeded. 
That portion of a building taller than 45 feet shall be recessed a minimum of 20 feet from the facade facing the public street. 
Any existing 5 story building in the D-3 District, constructed prior to 2005 within 30 feet from the right-of-way line of Grandview Parkway, is exempt from minimum residential requirements, provided that it shall comply with all other underlying zoning requirements. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and clock towers may be erected to a height not exceeding twice the height of the attached building. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 699. Passed 3-20-06. Ord. 734. Passed 3-19-07. Ord. 940. Passed 4-7-12; Ord. 1083 , Passed 11-5-18.) 
1347.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    An accessory building shall be constructed using materials and features similar to the principal building if the accessory building exceeds 500 square feet in gross floor area. 
1347.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1372. 
1347.09 - Special requirements. 
    Ironworks (D-1), Depot (D-2) and Red Mill (D-3) areas. To preserve and reinforce the context of historic buildings and to establish land development patterns of the development districts, all new buildings and additions to existing buildings are to be designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  The predominant building wall and entryway shall face the public or private street. 
(2)  Unless determined to be impractical, by the Planning Director, the building width shall not be less than 90 percent of the property width at the street. 
(3)  Vertical building modulation shall be used to add variety and interest and to make a large building appear to be an aggregation of smaller units. Relief from a continuous street facing wall may be achieved with wall offsets in combination with pilasters, corbeling or other permanent architectural elements; however, offsets in any wall shall not be less than 8 inches from the subject plane. 
(4)  Horizontal building modulation like awnings, balconies and roof features shall be used to reduce the perceived mass of a large building. 
(5)  Fenestration, cornices and other primarily horizontal architectural elements incorporated in new buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be in context with historic buildings in the area. 
(6)  Window glass planes shall be recessed at least 4 inches from the outside of all building walls to create a shadow line except in bay windows and to other projecting window elements. 
(7)  Clear or lightly tinted transparent glass shall be used for all windows facing a public street. Decorative stained glass may be used for accents. Mirrored, smoked and darkly tinted glass is prohibited. 
(8)  New buildings and additions to existing buildings, including parking structures, shall be constructed of durable materials utilizing the predominant building materials used in the district and every building facade shall be constructed of materials comparable in aesthetic value. 
(9)  Any rooftop equipment shall be enclosed or screened from street level view using the same materials used for the building walls or a material which is approved by the Planning Director as visually compatible with the building. 
(10)  Except for buildings that are solely residential, windows or street level activities are required on 50 percent of the first story street wall facing any public street. Street level activities include public display space, public atriums, pedestrian entrances and exterior circulation. 
(11)  For each 90 feet of linear building frontage, pedestrian entrances are required. Pedestrian entrances may open onto the sidewalk or mid-block passages or walkways leading to the public right-of-way. Entries must be prominently identified and must not interfere with safe pedestrian passage along walkways. Primary entries must be set back a minimum of 4 feet from the property line. 
(12)  All buildings that front the street, except for parking structures, accessory and utility buildings and buildings that are intended and designed to be exclusively developed for residential use shall have a minimum height of 14 feet measured from the street level entrance level to the next finished level or roof structure. 
(Ord. 698 Passed 3-20-06. Ord. 996. Passed 6-2-14; Ord. 1081 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
Chapter 1348 - T - Transportation District[15] 
    The Transportation (T) District is for the purpose of accommodating special areas for the moving of goods and people and supporting aeronautical and non-aeronautical uses that benefit the operation of the Cherry Capital Airport as approved by the Northwestern Regional Airport Commission and in compliance with the Airport Zoning Act, Act No. 23 of the Public Acts of 1950. 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507, Airport Zoning Act, M.C.L.A.  259.431 et seq. 
Cross reference- Signs,  1476.06 

1348.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Transportation Zone: 
  OS District uses, including buildings 3,000 square feet or larger in gross floor area; 
  GP District uses; 
  I District uses, except C-2 District Uses and medical marihuana facilities; 
  Air transportation, including airports and airport terminals; 
  Amusement and recreation services (indoor only); 
  Automobile gasoline/convenience stores; 
  Automobile, motorcycle, trailer, recreational vehicle or boat showrooms; 
  Brew pubs; 
  Business services; 
  Drugstore; 
  Engineering, accounting, research, management and related services; 
  Finance, insurance and real estate services; 
  Finance services without drive-throughs; 
  Indoor fruit and vegetable markets; 
  Landing areas; 
  Laundromats; 
  Legal services; 
  Lodging facilities; 
  Microbrewery; 
  Motorized vehicle dealers, mobile home dealers, watercraft dealers and recreational vehicle dealers subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All outdoor display and storage in front or on the side of a building shall meet landscape requirements for parking areas. 
(2)  Outdoor display areas shall be differentiated from parking areas using contrasting surface material and shall be designated on a site plan. 
(3)  Any display platforms shall not be elevated more than 3 feet higher than the adjacent public right-of-way. 
  Parcel packing services; 
  Parking areas, public or private, 
  Passenger transportation services; 
  Personal services; 
  Pet grooming services without outdoor runs or kennels; 
  Repair services; 
  Restaurants, family, fine and fast without drive-throughs; 
  Retail use of 10,000 square feet or more; 
  Security services; 
  Services stations and repair stations; 
  Theaters; 
  Theatrical producers, entertainers, bands and orchestras; 
  Transportation service; 
  Vehicle wash facilities as permitted in the C-3 District; 
  Veterinary services, without outdoor runs; 
  Water transportation. 
(Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12; Ord. 1033 . Passed 5-2-16; Ord. No. 1089 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
1348.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Transportation District if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Communication towers. 
  Wind Energy Pole/Tower-Mount. 
  Wind Energy Building Mount. 
(Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12) 
1348.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 20 feet No minimum. No maximum. 70% maximum.  
1348.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks. 
Building: Minimum setbacks are 25 feet. 
Parking area: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. Parking may be provided streetward of the building along South Airport Road provided a minimum 25 foot vegetative buffer area that will effectively screen the parking area from public view as set forth in Section 1372.04 is maintained where a vegetative buffer exits or, if no other vegetative buffer exists, other screening is provided as set forth in Section 1372.04 within the 25 foot buffer area. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: None except as follows: 
(1)  25 feet if abutting or adjacent to an R-District. 
(2)  50 feet if a loading dock is abutting or adjacent to an R-District. 
Parking area: If contiguous to an R-District, a minimum of 10 feet. Otherwise, 5 feet. If shared parking is developed, these setbacks would affect only the perimeter of the combined parcels. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 5 feet, except as follows: 
(1)  25 feet if abutting or adjacent to an R-District. 
Parking area: 5 feet, except 20 feet if abutting, adjacent to or across a public alley from an R-District. 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots having a frontage on 2 streets shall provide the required front setback on both streets. 
(Ord. 1033 . Passed 5-2-16) 
1348.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into the setbacks are allowed. 
1348.06 - Building height. 
    Building height: The lesser of 45 feet or the approach, transitional, conical and inner horizontal surfaces which establish the height limitation under this Chapter are denoted on the Airport Zoning Plan, and are established in conformance with approach standards or regulations of the Michigan Aeronautics Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration. In acting upon applications for permits, the Zoning Administrator will arrive at proper height limitations by insuring FAA Form 7460-1 is completed with Federal Aviation Administration determination of no hazard to aviation. Air traffic control towers are exempt from this height requirement. 
(Ord. 735. Passed 3-19-07; Ord. 1033 . Passed 5-2-16) 
1348.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall: 
(a)  Not exceed the Building Height limitation as set forth in Section 1348.06. 
(b)  Not be closer than 5 feet to any side or rear property line or 25 feet if abutting or adjacent to an R-District. 
(Ord. 1033 . Passed 5-2-16) 
1348.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
1348.09 - Special requirements. 
    To preserve and reinforce the development patterns of the Transportation District, the following special requirements shall apply. 
(1)  The predominant building wall and entryway shall face the public or private street. 
(2)  Street-facing building facades shall incorporate permanent architectural elements which create shadow patterns and surface textures which, in turn, enhance visual interest. 
(3)  Any rooftop equipment shall be enclosed or screened from street level view using the same materials used for the building walls or a material which is approved by the Planning Director as visually compatible with the building. 
(4)  Commercial and industrial outdoor lighting shall not exceed 1 foot candle or cause glare onto neighboring properties. 
(5)  Driveways on South Airport Road shall be limited to 1 per parcel and shall be no closer than 400 feet to the nearest driveway on the same side of the street or 150 feet from the nearest intersection. 
(6)  All properties developed shall allow for internal access to other abutting industrial or commercial properties. 
(7)  All utilities shall be placed underground and shall follow private or public streets or the primary maneuvering lanes within a parking area. 
(Ord. 1033 . Passed 5-2-16) 
1348.10 - Federal laws. 
    Notice of construction or alteration shall be provided to the Federal Aviation Administration on Form 7460-1 for the following: 
(1)  Any construction or alteration exceeding 200 feet above ground level. 
(2)  Any construction or alteration: 
  Within 20,000 feet of the Cherry Capital Airport which exceeds a 100:1 surface from any point on the runway of the Cherry Capital Airport with at least one runway more than 3,200 feet. 
  Within 10,000 feet of the Cherry Capital Airport which exceeds a 50:1 surface from any point on the runway of the Cherry Capital Airport with its longest runway no more than 3,200 feet. 
  Within 5,000 feet of the Cherry Capital Airport which exceeds a 25:1 surface. 
(3)  Any highway, railroad or other traverse way whose prescribed adjusted height would exceed that above noted standards. 
(4)  When requested by the FAA. 
(5)  Any construction or alteration located on the Cherry Capital Airport regardless of height or location. 
(Ord. 1033 . Passed 5-2-16) 
1348.11 - Unlawful land use. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, no person may use any lands within any area of land or water, or both, lying within a 10 mile radius from the established center of the Cherry Capital Airport which: 
(1)  Would create electrical interference with radio communications between the airport and aircraft or create interference with navigational aids employed by aircraft; 
(2)  Would make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others or result in glare to the eyes of flyers using the airport; 
(3)  Would create air pollution in such amounts as to impair the visibility of flyers in the use of the airport; 
(4)  Would locate or permit the operation of a dump, waste disposal site, sanitary landfill, hazardous waste facility, solid waste transfer station or recycling facility within 10,000 feet of any runway at the airport, unless the construction, location and operation of the site is approved or authorized by the Federal Aviation Administration as not being in violation of its orders, rules or regulations applicable to the airport, or unless a waiver is issued by the Federal Aviation Administration; 
(5)  Would otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft; 
(6)  Would attract birds; 
(7)  Would raise the descent minimums of any instrument approach procedure to the airport, or otherwise limit operations at the airport, as determined by an airspace study conducted by the Federal Aviation Administration; 
(8)  Would violate the rules of the Federal Aviation Administration or the Michigan Department of Transportation Aeronautics Division. 
(Ord. 1033 . Passed 5-2-16) 
Chapter 1350 - GP - Government/Public District[16] 
    The Government/Public (GP) District is for the purpose of accommodating specialized public buildings while encouraging that the public properties reflect the community's values in the design and maintenance of the buildings and grounds. 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 

1350.01 - Uses allowed. 
(a)  Master site and facilities plan. When applying for a land use permit, the governmental unit shall present a Master Site and Facilities Plan for the current uses on all contiguous property owned by that governmental unit and all anticipated uses within a minimum of the next 5 years. This plan shall show adjacent properties sufficiently to identify surrounding uses and potential impacts on them by the applicant's plan and shall conform to the requirements of Traverse City Code Section 1366.08. 
(b)  Uses allowed in the GP district. The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Government/Public District: 
  Administration of economic programs; 
  Administration of human resource programs; 
  Athletic fields; 
  Auditoriums; 
  Cemeteries; 
  Child care organizations, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended; 
  Community Gardens; 
  Cultural facilities; 
  Electrical, combination electric and gas and other utility services, water supply, sewage systems (except gas storage and refuse); 
  Environmental quality and housing program administration 
  Essential services and essential services with buildings; 
  Executive, legislative and general government uses except correctional institutions; 
  Finance, taxation and monetary services, public; 
  Health services except hospitals, sales and rentals; 
  Libraries; 
  National security and international affairs; 
  Parking structures, public or private, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Parking structures shall be designed to have horizontal versus stepped or sloping levels at areas of public view. All ramping shall be concealed from public view. 
(2)  Openings shall not exceed 60 percent of the total wall surface. The shape of openings shall be vertical or square. 
(3)  Materials for parking structures shall follow the same restrictions as buildings; 
(4)  Sloped roofs are not required for parking decks, however: 
a.  The upper and lowest level of parking shall incorporate sufficient screening to shield cars from public view. 
b.  Parapet treatment is required to terminate the deck and give proper architectural finish to the structure. Cornices, overhangs and other devices which are consistent with the language of historical buildings may be employed. 
(5)  The design of parking decks shall be consistent with the design of historical buildings in the area. 
  Parks; 
  Places of Worship; 
  Playgrounds; 
  Public works facilities; 
  Recreational facilities; 
  Social services; 
  Transitional housing; 
  United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 589. Passed 1-06-03. Ord. 614. Passed 11-3-03. Ord. 665. Passed 03-21-05. Ord. 775. Passed. 11-5-07. Ord. 842. Passed 8-3-09; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18) 
1350.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Government/Public District if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Communication towers; 
  Correctional institutions; 
  Landing areas; 
  Schools; 
  Taller buildings; 
  Transit centers; 
  Wind Energy Pole/Tower Mount. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 610. Passed 9-2-03. Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12) 
1350.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 20 feet No minimum No maximum 70% maximum  
The surface parking area shall not exceed the total floor area of all buildings on the lot. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1350.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
Building: 25 feet minimum, or as shown on the approved Master Site and Facilities Plan allowing a lessor setback. 
Parking area: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater, or as shown on the approved Master Site and Facilities Plan allowing a lesser setback. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: None, except 25 feet if abutting or adjacent to an R-district. 
Parking area: 5 feet, except a 10-foot setback is required for any parking area abutting, adjacent to or across an alley from an R-District. 
(c)  Rear setbacks (minimum): 
Building: 25 feet. 
Parking area: 5 feet, except a 20-foot setback is required for any parking area abutting, adjacent to or across a public alley from an R-District. 
(d)  Water setback: 25 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark or any dockline established by City ordinance. 
(e)  Corner lots and through lots having a frontage on 2 streets shall provide the required setback yard on both streets. 
(f)  An additional setback from of 1 foot for each foot of building height above 40 feet is required for any portion of a building above 40 feet. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 607. Passed 7-21-03.) 
1350.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    None are allowed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1350.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: 25 to 90 feet, except all existing buildings may double their existing first floor area. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 548. Passed 12-17-01. Ord. 736. Passed 3-19-07) 
1350.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall: 
(1)  Not be located in the front yard. 
(2)  Shall not exceed 30 feet in height. 
(3)  Shall not be closer than 25 feet to any side or rear property line. Boat houses up to 250 square feet gross floor area, may be built up to the water's edge. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1350.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
Chapter 1352 - Grand Traverse Commons (GTC) Districts[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 1063, passed February 2, 2018 repealed Ch. 1352, in its entirety and reenacted a new Chapter as set out herein. Former Ch. 1352 pertained to the Planned Redevelopment Districts and derived from Ord. 383. Passed 5-17-94; Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99; Ord. 666. Passed 3-21-05; and Ord. 771. Passed 9-4-07. 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 

1352.01 - Purpose. 
    The Grand Traverse Commons District is a jointly planned jurisdictional area established pursuant to the Michigan Joint Municipal Planning Act 226 of 2003, as amended. 
(Ord. 1063 . Passed 2-5-18) 
1352.02 - Jurisdictional authority. 
    The jurisdictional authority for the Grand Traverse Commons District shall be the Grand Traverse Commons Planning Commission, established pursuant to the Joint Municipal Planning Act, MCL 125.131, et. seq., and by agreement between the City of Traverse City and the Charter Township of Garfield Township with an effective date of May 14, 2007 and approved by Chapter 1224 of the Codified Ordinances for the City of Traverse City and Section 1 of Ordinance No. 48 for the Charter Township of Garfield. 
(Ord. 1063 . Passed 2-5-18) 
1352.03 - Jurisdictional zoning. 
    The Zoning Ordinance for the Grand Traverse Commons Districts shall be the Grand Traverse Commons Development Regulations, an ordinance intended to implement the concepts outlined in the Grand Traverse Commons Master Plan of 2010 as adopted per P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended, being, the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (M.C.L. 124.3801 et seq.). 
(Ord. 1063 . Passed 2-5-18) 
Cross reference- Grand Traverse Commons Development Regulations, located on the City of Traverse City official website, Grand Traverse Commons Joint Planning Commission page. 
Chapter 1354 - I - Industrial District 
    The Industrial (I) District is for the purpose of accommodating light manufacturing, research and development plants, warehousing, and similar clean industries. Industrial areas are envisioned to be attractively developed and landscaped with emphasis placed on maintaining and enhancing existing vegetation. Linkages with pedestrian walkways and recreational trails is also important. 

1354.01 - Uses allowed. 
    The following uses of land and buildings together with accessory uses are allowed in the Industrial District: 
  GP District uses; 
  C-2 District uses meeting the setbacks (1342.02), building height (1342.06) and special requirements (1342.09) of the C-2 District and shall not open to the public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
  C-2 District uses in the Airport Industrial Park and Traversefield Enterprise Place is limited to existing buildings more than 5 years old, based upon the date of the initial certificate of occupancy issued. Minor additions are allowed provided the addition is for barrier free access, fire safety or to improve the energy efficiency of the building; 
  Auto repair; 
  Communications establishments; 
  Construction, special trades; 
  Contractors; 
  Contractors, heavy construction; 
  Crematories provided the use is at least 500 feet from a Residential Zoning District, public park or school as defined by the Zoning Code; 
  Cutting plastics, leather, etc; 
  Equipment rental and leasing, miscellaneous; 
  Fuel dealers; 
  Funeral services; 
  Gas systems; 
  Kennels for boarding provided that no building, open kennel or exercise runway shall be located closer than 200 feet from any R District; 
  Lumber yards-Retail; 
  Manufacturing or processing of: 
(1)  Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics and similar materials; 
(2)  Bakery products; 
(3)  Beverages; 
(4)  Canned, frozen and preserved fruits, vegetable and food specialties; 
(5)  Dairy products; 
(6)  Electronic and other electrical equipment and components; 
(7)  Fabricated metal products, except machinery and transportation equipment and except ordnance and accessories; 
(8)  Food preparations and kindred products-miscellaneous; 
(9)  Furniture and fixtures; 
(10)  Grain mill products; 
(11)  Industrial and commercial machinery and computer equipment; 
(12)  Leather and leather products (finished), except leather tanning and finishing; 
(13)  Lumber and wood products, except furniture, wood preserving and reconstituted wood products; 
(14)  Manufacturing industries-miscellaneous; 
(15)  Measuring, analyzing and controlling instruments, photographic, medical and optical goods, matches and clocks; 
(16)  Printing, publishing and allied industries; 
(17)  Stone, clay, glass and concrete products, except asbestos products; 
(18)  Sugar and confectionery products; 
  Medical marihuana grower meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The medical marihuana facility and use shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Facilities Licensing Act, rules promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, and Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  All medical marihuana plants cultivated shall be contained within a fully enclosed locked facility inaccessible on all sides and equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by the person holding a license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City or staff of the medical marihuana facility; 
(3)  Cultivation shall be conducted so as not to create dust, glare, noise, or light spillage beyond the parcel and shall not be visible from an adjoining public way. Lighting shall not be visible outside of the building from sunset to sunrise; 
(4)  The smell of marihuana shall not be detectable beyond the parcel; 
(5)  A medical marihuana grower shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school; 
(6)  The medical marihuana grower shall have at all times a valid and current operating license issued by the State and the City of Traverse City under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City; 
(7)  Except for a medical marihuana processor use as set forth in this section, no other medical marihuana facilities use shall occur on the parcel; 
(8)  No use or consumption of marihuana shall be allowed at the medical marihuana facility; 
  Medical marihuana processor meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The facility and use shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City, and the rules promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  A partition wall shall separate the medical marihuana processor space from the medical marihuana grower space that must include a door, capable of being closed and locked between the medical marihuana grower and medical marihuana processor spaces; 
(3)  Except for medical marihuana growers as set forth in this section, no other medical marihuana facilities use shall occur on the parcel; 
(4)  Except for regulatory authorities, no persons other than the person holding a license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City or staff of the facility, shall be permitted within the medical marihuana processor portion of the facility when medical marijuana is being processed; 
(5)  No use or consumption of marihuana shall be allowed at the medical marihuana facility; 
(6)  A medical marihuana processor shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school; 
(7)  An owner or operator of a medical marihuana processor shall not have been convicted of a felony involving controlled substances within the last 10 years; 
(8)  The medical marihuana processor shall have at all times a valid and current operating license issued by the State and the City of Traverse City under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City; 
(9)  All activities of a medical marihuana processor shall be conducted within the building and out of public view; 
(10)  The smell of marihuana shall not be detectable outside of the portion of any structure where marihuana is present; 
  Medical marihuana provisioning center meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The medical marihuana facility and use shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City, and the rules promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  The medical marihuana provisioning center shall not be in operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(3)  Except for medical marihuana processors as set forth in this section, no other medical marihuana facilities use shall occur on the parcel; 
(4)  Except for parents or guardians of a qualifying patient and the person holding a license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City or staff of the medical marihuana facility, persons other than a qualifying patient or primary caregiver shall be not permitted within the medical marihuana provisioning center when medical marihuana is being transferred; 
(5)  No use or consumption of marihuana shall be allowed at the medical marihuana facility; 
(6)  The medical marihuana facility shall not be used by a physician to conduct a medical examination or issue a medical certification document for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying patient registry identification card under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act; 
(7)  A qualifying patient under the age of 18 shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian and notice of such shall be conspicuously posted; 
(8)  A medical marihuana provisioning center shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school; 
(9)  An owner or operator of a medical marihuana provisioning center shall not have been convicted of a felony involving controlled substances within the last 10 years; 
(10)  The medical marihuana provisioning center shall have at all times a valid and current operating license issued by the State and the City of Traverse City under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City; 
(11)  All activities of a Medical marihuana provisioning center shall be conducted within the building; 
(12)  The smell of marihuana shall not be detectable outside of the portion of any structure where marihuana is present; 
  Medical marihuana safety compliance facility meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The facility and use shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City, and the rules promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  Except for regulatory authorities, no persons other than the person holding a license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City or staff of the facility, shall be permitted within the medical marihuana safety compliance facility when medical marijuana is being processed; 
(3)  No use or consumption of marihuana shall be allowed at the medical marihuana facility; 
(4)  A medical marihuana safety compliance facility shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school; 
(5)  An owner or operator of a medical marihuana safety compliance facility shall not have been convicted of a felony involving controlled substances within the last 10 years; 
(6)  The medical marihuana safety compliance facility shall have at all times a valid and current operating license issued by the State and the City of Traverse City under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City; 
(7)  All activities of a medical marihuana safety compliance facility shall be conducted within the building and out of public view; 
(8)  The smell of marihuana shall not be detectable outside of the portion of any structure where marihuana is present; 
  Medical marihuana secure transporter meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The medical marihuana facility and use shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City, and the rules promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  No other medical marihuana facilities use shall occur on the parcel; 
(3)  No use or consumption of marihuana shall be allowed at the facility; 
(4)  A medical marihuana secure transporter shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school. This provision shall not apply while engaged in the operation of transporting as authorized by the Michigan Medical Facilities Licensing Act; 
(5)  An owner or operator of a medical marihuana secure transporter shall not have been convicted of a felony involving controlled substances within the last 10 years; 
(6)  The medical marihuana secure transporter shall have at all times a valid and current operating license issued by the State and the City of Traverse City under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City; 
  Metal slitting and shearing; 
  Motor freight transportation and warehousing; 
  Nurseries, retail; 
  Offices, general, up to 5,000 square feet gross floor area on any site and/or building; 
  Offices primarily serving industry in the district which clearly establish support services for permitted industries in the district; 
  Parcel packing services; 
  Pet boarding or pet grooming services, provided that no building, open kennel or exercise runway is closer than 200 feet from an R-District; 
  Places of Worship; 
  Postal and delivery services; 
  Pressure container filling; 
  Primary metal industries, including smelting, forging and similar operations, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The maximum lot size is 14 acres. 
(2)  No odors, smoke or noise from the use are likely to create a disturbance on neighboring public or private property. 
  Retail outlets, if accessory to manufacturing use; 
  Salvaging damaged merchandise not engaged in sales; 
  Scrap steel cutting; 
  Sign painting and lettering shops; 
  Solvents recovery services; 
  Tape slitting for trade; 
  Testing and laboratory services; 
  Veterinary services for animal specialties provided that no building, open kennel or exercise runway shall be no closer than 200 feet from any R district; 
  Vocational schools; 
  Warehousing; 
  Weighing foods and other commodities; 
  Wholesale trade - durable goods; 
  Wholesale trade - non-durable goods except livestock and wholesale live animals. 
(Ord. 674. Passed 04-04-05. Ord. 776. Passed 11-05-07. Ord. 841. Passed 8-3-09. Ord. 878. Passed 8-16-10. Ord. 929. Passed 11-7-11. Ord. 982. Passed 10-7-13. Ord 1024. Passed 09-08-15; Ord. 1084 , Passed 12-3-18; Ord. No. 1089 , Passed 2-19-19.) 
1354.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the Industrial District if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Communication towers. 
  Wind Energy Pole/Tower-Mount 
  Wind Energy Building Mount 
(Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12) 
1354.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 100 feet No minimum No maximum 80% maximum  
1354.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
Building: 25 feet minimum. 
Parking area: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but no closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: One side/aggregate: Zero. 
Parking: 5 feet, except a minimum of 10 feet if contiguous to an R-district. 
(c)  Rear setback: 
Building: 15 feet minimum. 
Parking: 5 feet, except 20 feet if abutting, adjacent to or across a public alley from an R-district. 
(d)  Through lots and corner lots having a frontage on 2 streets shall provide the required front setback on both streets. 
1354.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into the setbacks are allowed. 
1354.06 - Building height. 
Building height: Maximum 60 feet. 
Public utility buildings may be erected to a height not exceeding 100 feet. 
(Ord. 737 Passed 3-19-07.) 
1354.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall: 
(1)  Not be located in the front yard except accessory buildings may be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. 
(2)  Be no closer than 15 feet to any side or rear property line. Boat houses up to 250 square feet gross floor area, may be built up to the water's edge. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 554. Passed 2-4-02.) 
1354.08 - Special requirements. 
    Curbing is required only for that portion of a parking area including the approach driveways and parking lot facing the street. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
Chapter 1356 - NMC - Northwestern Michigan College Districts[18] 
    The Northwestern Michigan College (NMC) Districts are for the purpose of accommodating universities, colleges and other advanced learning institutions. Such uses often incorporate residential, office, recreational, and cultural activities. 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings; authority to zone, MCL  125.3201; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances; powers of legislative bodies; acquisition of property, MCL  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3504, MCL  125.3201 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 1476 

1356.01 - Uses allowed. 
(a)  Master site facilities plan. When applying for a land use permit, NMC shall present a Master Site and Facilities Plan for the current uses on all contiguous property owned by NMC and all anticipated uses within a minimum of the next 5 years. This plan shall show adjacent properties sufficiently to identify surrounding uses and potential impacts on them by the applicant's plan and conform to the requirements of Traverse City Code Section 1366.08. 
(b)  Uses allowed in the NMC-1 district. The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the NMC-1 district: 
  OS district uses; 
  R-15 district uses; 
  Clustered single-family dwellings. 
  Child care organizations, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended; 
  The following, provided buildings are no larger than 10,000 square feet gross floor area: Universities, colleges and theological schools including the buildings used for administrative and faculty offices, classrooms, laboratories, chapels, auditoriums, museums, lecture halls, libraries, student and faculty centers, athletic facilities, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, but not including colleges or trade schools operated for profit and not including the use of any building, stadium or other facility for primarily commercial purposes. 
(c)  NMC-2 District uses. Uses permitted in the NMC-2 district: 
  OS district uses; 
  R-29 district uses; 
  NMC-1 district uses, without the gross square foot limitations; 
  Bookstores; 
  Cultural facilities if parking facilities are not visible from a residential district; 
  Essential services and essential services with buildings; 
  Institutional headquarters; 
  Marinas and maritime operations associated with the college and its partners; 
  Meeting facilities and convention centers; 
  Places of worship; 
  Public administration; 
  Schools; 
  Theatrical producers, bands, orchestras and entertainers. 
(Ord. 475. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 524. Passed 2-20-01. Ord. 590. Passed 1-06-03. Ord. 667. Passed 03-21-05; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18) 
1356.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    When applying for a land use permit NMC shall present a Master Site and Facilities Plan for the current uses on all the campus property and all anticipated uses within a minimum of the next 5 years. The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the NMC Districts, if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Code: 
  Communication towers, 
  Essential services buildings in a NMC-1 District, 
  Taller buildings in an NMC-2 district except buildings located on Grand Traverse Bay are limited to 3 stories and 50 feet, 
  Transitional housing and emergency shelters, 
  Wind Energy Pole/Tower-Mount, 
  Wind Energy Building-Mount. 
(Ord. 475. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 524. Passed 2-20-01. Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12. Ord. 1006. Passed 7-7-14) 
1356.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface NMC-1: 20 feet No minimum 15 dwelling units/acre 30% maximum (1) NMC-2: 20 feet No minimum 29 dwelling units/acre 50% maximum (1)  
(1) The surface parking area shall not exceed 15 percent of the total area of any lot over 10 acres. Hard surface recreational areas shall not be included as impervious surface for determining the percentage of allowable impervious surface. 
(Ord. 475. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 533. Passed 6-4-01.) 
1356.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
Buildings: 100 feet or as shown on the approved Master Site and Facilities Plan allowing a lesser setback. 
Parking area: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater, except in the NMC-2 District on Grand Traverse Bay, parking in front of the building is allowed provided: 
(1)  At least 40 percent of Area "A" located on the major street (the area directly in front of the building and of the required front setback line) shall be maintained with landscaping, pedestrian walks or plazas in order to provide a strong visual and physical connection between the building and the public street. (See diagram below). 
(2)  Occasional overflow parking may occur within the landscaped portion of area "A" consisting of a parking surface of grass or brick pavers provided a strong pedestrian connection between the public walk and the building's principal entrance(s) is retained. 
(3)  Area "A" may be traversed by 1 two-way drive and a drop-off area for vehicles. This area and any crossing drive shall be designed to encourage only slow-moving vehicles. The drive shall be designed to conform to a uniform pedestrian walkway elevation. 
(4)  On corner lots, the frontage along the minor street shall meet the requirements for setbacks for side yards. 

Parking on Grand Traverse Bay in NMC-2 District 
For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but no closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: One side/Aggregate: Zero 
Parking area: 5 feet minimum, except 10 feet if abutting or adjacent to an R-District. If shared parking is developed, these setbacks would affect only the perimeter of the combined parcels. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 5 feet, except 20 feet if abutting or across an alley from an R-District. 
Parking area: 5 feet, except 20 feet if abutting or across an alley from an R-District. 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots having a frontage on 2 streets shall provide the required front setback on both streets. 
(e)  Water setbacks: 50 feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay except marina buildings up to 3,000 square feet gross floor area may be located at the water's edge. 
(Ord. 475. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1356.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into the setbacks are allowed. 
(Ord. 475. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1356.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: 

NMC-1: Maximum 45 feet 
NMC-2: Maximum 90 feet. More than 60 feet may be allowed by SLUP or PUD, except buildings on Grand Traverse Bay are limited to 50 feet. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and towers may be erected to a height the lessor of twice the height of the attached building or 90 feet. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen existing rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 475. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 524. Passed 2-20-01. Ord. 738 Passed 3-19-07.) 
1356.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall: 
(1)  Not be located in the front yard, except accessory buildings may be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. 
(2)  Not exceed 30 feet in height. 
(3)  Not be closer than 10 feet to any side or rear property line. Boat houses up to 3,000 square feet gross floor area may be built up to the water's edge. 
(Ord. 475. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 524. Passed 2-20-01. Ord. 554. Passed 2-4-02.) 
1356.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
    Requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
(Ord. 475. Passed 7-6-99.) 
Chapter 1358 - H - Hospital Districts[19] 
    The H-1 and H-2, Hospital Districts are for the purpose of accommodating medical centers, hospitals and all their normally related functions, if properly sited in relation to each other and pursuant to an approved plan for that district. The difference between the H-1 and H-2 districts are fewer uses but greater size allowed in the H-2 district. Developments in the H-2 district shall be functionally integrated with other buildings and parking areas and be in substantial conformity with the Hospital Master Site and Facilities Plan. 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 1476 

1358.01 - Uses allowed. 
(a)  Master site facilities plan. When applying for a land use permit for H-2 District properties, the applicant shall present a Master Site and Facilities Plan for the current uses on all contiguous property owned by applicant and all anticipated uses within a minimum of the next 5 years. This plan shall show adjacent properties sufficiently to identify surrounding uses and potential impacts on them by the applicant's plan and shall conform to the requirements of Traverse City Code Section 1366.08. 
(b)  H-1 District. The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the H-1 Hospital District: 
  Child care organizations, as defined by MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended; 
  Community Gardens; 
  Dormitories; 
  Dwellings, multiple family, up to 29 dwelling units per acre; 
  Florists; 
  Health services, including clinics of doctors and dentists; 
  Hospitality houses; 
  Medical marihuana provisioning center meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The medical marihuana facility and use shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City, and the rules promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  The medical marihuana provisioning center shall not be in operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(3)  Except for medical marihuana processors as set forth in this section, no other medical marihuana facilities use shall occur on the parcel; 
(4)  Except for parents or guardians of a qualifying patient and the person holding a license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City or staff of the medical marihuana facility, persons other than a qualifying patient or primary caregiver shall be not permitted within the medical marihuana provisioning center when medical marihuana is being transferred; 
(5)  No use or consumption of marihuana shall be allowed at the medical marihuana facility; 
(6)  The medical marihuana facility shall not be used by a physician to conduct a medical examination or issue a medical certification document for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying patient registry identification card under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act; 
(7)  A qualifying patient under the age of 18 shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian and notice of such shall be conspicuously posted; 
(8)  A medical marihuana provisioning center shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school; 
(9)  An owner or operator of a medical marihuana provisioning center shall not have been convicted of a felony involving controlled substances within the last 10 years; 
(10)  The medical marihuana provisioning center shall have at all times a valid and current operating license issued by the State and the City of Traverse City under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City; 
(11)  All activities of a medical marihuana provisioning center shall be conducted within the building; 
(12)  The smell of marihuana shall not be detectable outside of the portion of any structure where marihuana is present; 
  Medical marihuana safety compliance facility meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The facility and use shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City, and the rules promulgated pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  Except for regulatory authorities, no persons other than the person holding a license under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City or staff of the facility, shall be permitted within the medical marihuana safety compliance facility when medical marijuana is being processed; 
(3)  No use or consumption of marihuana shall be allowed at the medical marihuana facility; 
(4)  A medical marihuana safety compliance facility shall not be located within a 1,000-foot radius from any existing school; 
(5)  An owner or operator of a medical marihuana safety compliance facility shall not have been convicted of a felony involving controlled substances within the last 10 years; 
(6)  The Medical Marihuana Safety Compliance Facility shall have at all times a valid and current operating license issued by the State and the City of Traverse City under Chapter 845 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Traverse City; 
(7)  All activities of a medical marihuana safety compliance facility shall be conducted within the building and out of public view; 
(8)  The smell of marihuana shall not be detectable outside of the portion of any structure where marihuana is present; 
  Residential care and treatment facilities. 
The following uses, if they meet the requirements of an accessory use, except that they need not be in the same building or on the same lot: 
  Duplicating, mailing, stenographic and office services no larger than 2,000 square feet gross floor area; 
  Schools for the handicapped; 
  Educational services to the public related to health care; 
  Financial institutions with no drive-throughs; 
  Gift shops no larger than 2,000 square feet gross floor area; 
  Orthopedic stores; 
  Pharmacies no larger than 2,000 square feet gross floor area; 
  Places of worship; 
  Recreational facilities; 
  Restaurants, family, fine and fast, under 2,000 square feet in gross floor; 
  Area without drive-throughs or drive-ins; 
  Social services; 
  Veterinary services, without outdoor runs. 
(C)  H-2 District. The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed in the H-2 District: 
  H-1 District uses; 
  Health services; 
  Hospitality houses; 
  Hospitals and medical centers; 
  Medical care facilities; 
  Parking structures, public or private, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Parking structures shall be designed to have horizontal versus stepped or sloping levels at areas of public view. All ramping shall be concealed from public view. 
(2)  Openings shall not exceed 60 percent of the total wall surface. Openings shall be vertical or square. 
(3)  Sloped roofs are not required for parking structures, however: 
a.  The upper and lowest level of parking shall incorporate sufficient screening to shield cars from public view. 
b.  Parapet treatment is required to terminate the deck and give proper architectural finish to the structure. Cornices, overhangs and other devices which are consistent with the design of historical buildings may be employed. 
(4)  The design of parking decks shall be complementary to the design of historical buildings in the area. 
  Residential care and treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. No. 550. Passed 12-3-01. Ord. 591. Passed 1-06-03. Ord. 602. 6-2-03. Ord. 668. Passed 03-21-05. Ord. 842. Passed 8-3-09. Ord. 844. Passed 8-3-09. Ord. 880. Passed 8-16-10. Ord. 904. Passed 2-7-11; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18; Ord. 1084 , Passed 12-3-18.) 
1358.02 - Uses allowed by special land use permit. 
    The following uses of land and buildings, together with accessory uses, are allowed if a special land use permit is issued according to the standards of this Zoning Code: 
  Communication towers; 
  Essential services buildings; 
  Landing areas; 
  Taller buildings for H-2 district uses; 
  Transitional housing and emergency shelters; 
  Wind Energy Pole/Tower-Mount; 
  Wind Energy Building-Mount. 
(Ord. No. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. No. 550. Passed 12-3-01. Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12. Ord. 1007. Passed 7-7-14. Ord. 1010. Passed 9-2-14) 
1358.03 - Lot, density and impervious surface provisions. 
Lot width (min.) Lot area (min.) Density 
(maximum) Impervious surface 20 feet No minimum 29 dwelling units/acre H-1: 70% maximum H-2: 60% maximum  
(Ord. No. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. No. 551. Passed 12-3-01. Ord. No. 568. Passed 7-1-02.) 
1358.04 - Setbacks. 
(a)  Front setbacks: 
Buildings: H-1: The lessor of 8 feet or the average setback of principal buildings on the same face block. H-2: 25 feet or as shown on the approved Master Site and Facilities Plan allowing a lesser setback. 
Parking areas: H-1: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but no closer than 25 feet from the front property line. H-2: Behind or to the side of the principal building and set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater, or as shown on the approved Master Site and Facilities Plan allowing a lesser setback. 
(b)  Side setbacks (minimum): 
Building: 5 feet, except a ten-foot side setback is required on the side abutting an R-District. 
Parking areas: If contiguous to an R-district, a minimum of 10 feet. Otherwise, 5 feet. If shared parking is developed, these setbacks would affect only the perimeter of the combined parcels. 
(c)  Rear setbacks: 
Building: 5 feet, except 20 feet if abutting or adjacent to an R-district. 
Parking areas: 5 feet, except 20 feet if abutting, adjacent to or across an alley from an R-District. 
(d)  Corner lots and through lots having a frontage on 2 streets shall provide the required front setback on both streets. 
(e)  An additional setback of 1 foot for each foot of building height above 45 feet is required for any portion of a building above 45 feet. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 608. Passed 7-21-03.) 
1358.05 - Encroachments into the setbacks. 
    No encroachments into the setbacks are allowed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1358.06 - Building height. 
(a)  Building height: 
H-1: Maximum 45 feet. 
H-2: West of Elmwood Avenue (within 100 feet of the right-of-way) 110 feet maximum. 
Remaining area: 90 feet maximum 
More than 60 feet may be allowed by SLUP or PUD. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
Steeples and clock towers may be erected to a height the lessor of twice the height of the attached building or 110 feet. 
Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop equipment if the wall extends around the perimeter of the building and incorporates exterior building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 704. Passed 7-17-06. Ord. 739. Passed 3-19-07.) 
1358.07 - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings shall: 
(1)  Not be permitted in the front yard, except accessory buildings may be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. 
(2)  Not be closer than 5 feet to any side or rear property line. 
(Ord 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 554. Passed 2-4-02.) 
1358.08 - Parking, loading and driveways. 
(a)  Requirements for parking, loading and driveways are contained in Chapter 1374. In addition, athletic fields may provide up to 50 percent of the required number of organized parking on an area developed in turf grasses. Grassed parking areas are considered as providing 1 parking space for every 350 square feet of continuous turf-covered area. All grassed parking areas shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition and shall not be used more than 12 times per calendar year. When use requires more frequent parking, an impervious surface or approved pervious hard surface parking area shall be developed. 
(b)  Parking is not required for upper story dwellings above a first floor commercial or office use. 
(c)  All parking areas within the same block shall be designed to allow interconnection to neighboring parking areas. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1358.09 - Special requirements. 
    The following requirements apply: 
(1)  All roof-mounted equipment, including satellite dishes and other communication equipment, shall be screened from view by a parapet or similar architectural feature. The equipment shall not be visible from recreation trails or from public sidewalks adjacent to the site. 
(2)  All equipment and activities shall be screened and placed so as to create no noise disturbance on any neighboring property. 
(3)  No material, equipment, or goods of any kind shall be stored on the roof of any building or outside unless otherwise allowed by ordinance. 
(Ord 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
Chapter 1360 - Sexually Oriented Businesses[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 1476 

1360.01 - Purpose. 
(a)  In the development and execution of this chapter, it is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances or when 1 or more of them are located in near proximity to a residential zone, church, school, daycare center, or dedicated park, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects shall not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this chapter. These controls are for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses within any 1 area, or to prevent deterioration or blighting of nearby neighborhoods. These controls do not legitimatize activities, which are prohibited in other chapters of the City's Ordinances. 
(b)  In regulating sexually oriented businesses, it is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(c)  Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the City, and on findings incorporated in the cases of Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); Thomas v. Chicago Park District, 122 S. Ct. 775 (2002), City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. City of Memphis, 48 F.3d 220 (6th Cir. 1995); Broadway Books v. Roberts, 642 F.Supp. 486 (E.D. Tenn. 1986); Bright Lights, Inc. v. City of Newport, 830 F.Supp. 378 (E.D. Ky. 1993); Richland Bookmart v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Dj vu v. Metro Government, 1999 U.S. App. LEXIS 535 (6th Cir. 1999); Bamon Corp. v. City of Dayton, 7923 F.2d 470 (6th Cir. 1991); Threesome Entertainment v. Strittmather, 4 F.Supp.2d 710 (N.D. Ohio 1998); J.L. Spoons, Inc. v. City of Brunswick, 49 F.Supp.2d 1032 (N.D. Ohio 1999); Triplett Grille, Inc. v. City of Akron, 40 F.3d 129 (6th Cir. 1994); Nightclubs, Inc. v. City of Paducah, 202 F.3d 884 (6th Cir. 2000); O'Connor v. City and County of Denver, 894 F.2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990); Dj vu of Nashville, Inc., et al. v. Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County, 2001 U.S. App. LEXIS 26007 (6th Cir. Dec. 6, 2001); Z.J. Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. City of Aurora, 136 F.3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); Connection Distrib. Co. v. Reno, 154 F.3d 281 (6th Cir. 1998); Sundance Assocs. v. Reno, 139 F.3d 804 (10th Cir. 1998); American Library Association v.Reno, 33 F.3d 78 (D.C. Cir. 1994); American Target Advertising, Inc. v. Giani, 199 F.3d 1241 (10th Cir. 2000); Z.J. Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. City of Aurora, 136 F.3d 683 (10th Cir. 1998); ILQ Investments, Inc. v. City of Rochester, 25 F.3d 1413 (8th Cir. 1994); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 2002 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 1896 (D.Md., Feb. 6, 2002); Currence v. Cincinnati, 2002 U.S. App. LEXIS 1258 (6th Cir., Jan. 24, 2002); and City of Grand Rapids, Michigan - 137 - November 5, 2007 Chapter 61 Zoning Ordinance Article 9 -Use Regulations other cases; and on testimony to Congress in 136 Cong. Rec. S 8987; 135 Cong. Rec. S. 14519; 135 Cong. Rec. S 5636; 134 Cong. Rec. E 3750; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona - 1979; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Houston, Texas - 1997; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986; Seattle, Washington - 1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Cleveland, Ohio - and Dallas, Texas - 1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; Bellevue, Washington, - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square study - 1994; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98; and also on findings from the paper entitled "Stripclubs According to trippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and from "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000, and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the City finds that sexually oriented businesses as a category of establishments are correlated with harmful secondary effects, and that the foregoing reports are reasonably believed to be relevant to the problems that the City of Traverse City is seeking to abate and prevent in the future. 
(Ord. 814. Passed 11-03-08.) 
1360.02 - Regulated uses. 
    Uses subject to these controls and referred to herein as Regulated Uses are as follows: 
  Adult book or video stores. 
  Adult cabarets. 
  Adult motion picture theaters. 
  Adult novelty stores. 
  Adult panorams. 
  Burlesque halls. 
(Ord. 814. Passed 11-03-08.) 
1360.03 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Adult book or video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its business devoted to books, magazines, periodicals, films or video tapes which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. 
    Adult cabaret means a cabaret which regularly features go-go dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers; or waiters, waitresses or other employees showing specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an establishment regularly used for presenting motion pictures distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult novelty store means an establishment that has a substantial or significant portion of its business devoted to the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices designed for sexual stimulation. 
    Adult panoram means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its business devoted to an entertainment use where patrons view in individual viewing booths, films, tapes, or live entertainment showing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Burlesque hall means an establishment which regularly features live performances which are characterized by entertainers showing specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Cabaret means a cafe, restaurant, bar, or similar establishment where patrons are entertained by performers who dance or sing or play musical instruments. 
    Specified anatomical areas are defined as: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region, 
b.  Buttock, 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities are defined as: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state or simulated state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts or simulated acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching or simulated fondling or others erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
    Substantial or significant portion. A business will be deemed to have a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade or services if it meets at least 1 of the following criteria: 
(1)  Thirty-five percent or more of the stock, materials, or services provided are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas, or both. 
(2)  Thirty-five percent or more of the usual floor area of the building is used for the sale, display, or provision of services distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas, or both. 
(3)  The advertising (on signs, in publications, on television or radio and/or other media forms) associated with the business, describes or relates to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas, or both. 
(Ord. 814. Passed 11-03-08. Ord. 913. Passed 05-02-11.) 
1360.04 - Regulations. 
    The Regulated Uses listed in Section 1360.02 are allowed subject to the following: 
(1)  District. The use is located within a C-3 zoning district. A Regulated Use is not allowed in any other zoning district even if it incorporates C-3 zoning district uses. 
(2)  Location. The use is located outside a 300-foot radius of a residential district, a church, school, or day care center and outside a 200-foot radius of an officially dedicated park and the Regulated Use is not located within a 1,000-foot radius of another Regulated Use. All measurements under this section shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the Regulated Use or building containing a Regulated Use to the nearest property line of the residential district, church, school, day care center or park. 
(3)  Minors on premises. Persons operating a Regulated Use shall not permit any person under the age of 18 to be on the premises of said Regulated Use either as an employee or as a customer. 
(4)  Hours. The maximum hours of operation of the Regulated Use shall be from to 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(5)  Displays. Sexually oriented products or services or any picture or other representation thereof, shall not be displayed so as to be visible from the street or neighboring property. 
(6)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided the same as other businesses of a similar nature that are not sexually oriented (e.g., movie theaters, retail sales and eating and drinking establishments), except that all parts of the parking area shall be illuminated from dusk until 1 hour after the business closes. 
(7)  Expansion. Once established, a Regulated Use shall not be expanded in any manner without first applying for and receiving a waiver of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(8)  Discontinuance. If a Regulated Use is discontinued and events cause the areas to not be available for the location of a Regulated Use, the use may not be re-established without applying for and receiving a waiver of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. 814. Passed 11-03-08.) 
1360.05 - Waivers, conditions and limitations. 
(a)  Waivers. Prior to the granting of any waiver as herein provided, the Board of Zoning Appeals may impose any such conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, or operation of the Regulated Use as may in its judgment be necessary for the protection of the public interest. Any evidence and any guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith will be fulfilled. 
(b)  Procedures. The Board of Zoning Appeals may waive the minimum distance restrictions, allow an expansion, or allow re-establishment after discontinuance, pursuant to the standards provided in sub-section (c) of this section and pursuant to the following procedures: 
(1)  The Planning Director will serve notice on all owners and occupiers of all property within 300 feet of the proposed use. 
(2)  Said notice will give a minimum of 30 days from the mailing of the notice until the Board of Zoning Appeals hearing on the matter. 
(3)  Said notice will include a postcard addressed to the City, containing spaces for stating approval or disapproval of the proposed Regulated Use and including space for commentary. 
(4)  The total number of postcards or other written responses returned prior to the hearing will be tallied. The votes yea and nay will also be tallied. These votes will be considered as evidence, in the Board of Zoning Appeals' decision as to whether to grant the waiver. 
(c)  Standards. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a waiver if the following findings are made: 
(1)  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent of this Chapter will be observed. 
(2)  That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a blighted or deteriorating area in its immediate surrounds. 
(3)  That the establishment in the area of a Regulated Use or an additional Regulated Use will not be contrary to any neighborhood conservation, nor will it interfere with any urban renewal. 
(4)  That all applicable State laws and local ordinances will be observed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 814. Passed 11-3-08.) 
Chapter 1362 - Planned Unit Developments[21] 
    The purpose of planned unit developments is to permit flexibility in zoning regulations so that developments conserve environmental resources, economic investment and the community's social fabric while reclaiming marginal and abandoned areas. Where appropriate, new development contiguous to urban boundaries should be organized as compact, pedestrian-friendly, mixed-use neighborhoods characteristic of Traverse City's historic areas. 
    Approval of a planned unit development shall not be considered an ordinance amendment. 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs in planned unit developments,  1476.13 

1362.01 - Standards for approval. 
    Approval will not be granted when the planned unit development is sought primarily to avoid the imposition of standards and requirements of existing zoning classifications. A planned unit development shall be approved if it is shown that the land use and development meet all of the following standards: 
(1)  The planned unit development (PUD) is intended to accommodate developments with mixed uses, having sites with unusual topography or unique settings within the community, or on land which exhibits difficult and costly development challenges. 
(2)  The use is compatible with adjacent land use, the natural environment and the capacities of affected public services and facilities. The use is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of City residents. 
(3)  The area of development is at least 3 contiguous acres. Where there are exceptional topographic, physical conditions, environmental factors, or other unusual or unique circumstances associated with a parcel which limits the parcel's ability to be reasonably developed, the minimum acreage requirement may be varied by the City Commission following a recommendation by the Planning Commission that the proposed PUD would allow development of land in such a manner as to be compatible with the surrounding land uses and the development would not be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(4)  Any size area of development contiguous to an existing PUD may be added to that PUD under the major amendment provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  The uses as designed are compatible with adjacent land uses and consistent with all City ordinances. 
(6)  Historic buildings that physically express the history of Traverse City will be preserved or restored and maintained unless it is shown that the building's condition prohibits preservation, restoration or renovation. New buildings and additions to existing buildings shall be compatible with historic buildings adjacent to them. 
(7)  New developments shall be based on traditional forms in terms of placement, design and quality of materials, so that they share a common identity and express their common heritage with Traverse City. 
(8)  The project emphasizes pedestrian circulation and access. The circulation system is composed of short blocks, narrow streets, sidewalks and alleys, where appropriate and practical. The vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall be well-defined and safe. 
(9)  The outside storage of motor vehicles shall either occur on-street or behind or below buildings. 
(10)  The natural landscape features will be preserved and integrated as an integral part of the overall design. Building placement and design represents thoughtful responses to the specific site features and the climate to create interesting and desirable outdoor spaces. 
(11)  There shall be adequate public services and facilities to serve the development. 
(12)  The site plan submitted with the PUD application satisfies all the standards for granting site plan approval. 
(13)  If all or part of the land is in a Mixed Use PUD area as shown on the Zoning Map, then all requirements for that MX-PUD must be met. 
(14)  The parcel, including any non-contiguous parcels, must be capable of being planned and developed as 1 integral land use unit. 
(Ord. 669. Passed 03-21-05. Ord. 743. Passed 5-7-07.) 
1362.02 - Procedure for approval. 
(a)  Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application, the applicant shall meet with the Planning Director to review the proposed project, the Traverse City Code of Ordinances, and planning documents that relate to the property. 
(b)  Application. A planned unit development application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation and then to the City Commission for decision. The Planning Commission may hold a public hearing with such notice as it deems advisable. 
(c)  Public hearing. A public hearing before the City Commission shall be held on each planned unit development request properly filed under this Zoning Code. Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than 15 days before the date of the public hearing. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Traverse City and shall be mailed or personally delivered to: 
(1)  The owners of the property for which approval is being considered; 
(2)  All persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question; and 
(3)  At least 1 occupant of each dwelling unit or area owned or leased by different persons within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. Where a single structure contains more than 4 dwelling units or other distinct owned or leased areas, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. The occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. Where the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. 
(d)  Notice. The notice of the public hearing shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the nature of the planned unit development request; 
(2)  A description of the property which is the subject of the planned unit development, including a listing of all street addresses within the property where they exist; 
(3)  The time and place of the public hearing for consideration of the planned unit development request; and 
(4)  When and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(e)  Decision. The application for planned unit development may be denied, approved or approved with conditions after conducting a public hearing with such notification as provided herein. The decision shall be in the form of an order which shall incorporate a statement of conclusions and shall specify the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed. Unless otherwise mutually agreed, an application for a PUD shall be decided by the City Commission within 45 days of the public hearing on the application, and if no such decision is rendered, the application shall be deemed approved. A decision of the City Commission shall be final. There shall be no appeal of the City Commission's decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(f)  Compliance. After approval of a planned unit development, the land to which it pertains shall be developed and used in its entirety only as authorized and described in the order approving the planned unit development. 
(Ord. 669. Passed 03-21-05. Ord. 720. Passed 2-5-07.) 
1362.03 - Planned unit development application. 
(a)  Required information. A planned unit development application shall be submitted to the Planning Director. An application shall not be deemed accepted by or filed with the City until it is certified as complete by the Planning Director. The application must be signed by the applicant and by the owner or a person with the owner's written consent and must contain: 
(1)  A land use permit application with a site plan; 
(2)  A boundary survey of the property prepared by a registered surveyor; 
(3)  A non-refundable application fee established by City Commission resolution. 
(b)  Additional information. Upon the request of the Planning Director within 35 days of accepting the application, the applicant shall provide such additional information and items pertinent to the development or use: 
(1)  A description of the developer's intent and objectives (physical, social and environmental); 
(2)  The method of the proposed financing; 
(3)  A market and economic feasibility statement; 
(4)  A description of the proposed development staging and timing; 
(5)  A description of the impact of development on local streets, natural features, schools and utilities; 
(6)  Identification of any waste emissions and methods of handling smoke, dust, noise, odors, liquids, solids and vibrations; 
(7)  A facade drawing showing all sides of new building(s) in the proposed development. All exterior building materials shall be labeled on the drawing. 
(8)  Such other information and items pertinent to the development or use. 
(c)  Failure to provide in a timely manner. Failure of the applicant to provide such requested information in a timely manner may be grounds for denial of the application. 
1362.04 - PUD order. 
    If it is determined that the application is consistent with the intent of this Zoning Code and with the other standards and requirements herein contained, an order authorizing development and use in accordance with the application and material submitted shall be issued. The PUD order may contain any lawful conditions or restrictions which the City Commission may consider necessary to carry out the purposes of this Zoning Code and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The PUD order shall recite the findings of fact and the reasons upon which it is based and may specify the following: 
(1)  Dimensional and parking restrictions. The PUD order may alter and establish lot size limits, required facilities, buffers, open space areas, density limits, set-back requirements, height limits, building size limits, off-street parking regulations, landscaping rules, miscellaneous regulations and density and intensity limits where such regulations or changes are consistent with the intent of this chapter and the standards set forth herein. Dimensional, parking and use restrictions of the underlying zoning shall not apply to the area within an approved planned unit development unless expressly retained in the PUD order. 
(2)  Use restrictions. The PUD order may also authorize principal and other uses not permitted in the district where the land is located, provided that such uses are consistent with the intent of this Zoning Code and the standards set forth herein. 
(3)  Date. A PUD order shall be dated as of the date of approval by the authorizing official or body. 
(4)  Recording. PUD orders shall be recorded with the City Clerk and the Register of Deeds of the county in which the land is located. 
1362.05 - Phased developments. 
    Each phase of a planned unit development (PUD) shall be planned, developed and approved to exist as an independent PUD. Each phase of a PUD shall be applied for and considered as a separate PUD. An applicant may elect to incorporate an existing PUD and a proposed phase of that PUD as a PUD amendment. 
1362.06 - Amendments. 
    A PUD order may be amended as follows: 
(1)  Minor amendment. Minor amendments are those which will have no foreseeable effect beyond the property boundary, such as minor changes in the siting of buildings, the alignment of utilities and the alignment of interior roadways and parking areas. Minor amendments for good cause may be authorized by the Planning Director without notice or hearing, provided no such changes shall significantly increase the size or height of structures, significantly reduce the efficiency or number of public facilities serving the PUD, significantly reduce usable open space, significantly reduce or increase parking areas, or significantly encroach on natural features proposed by the plan to be protected. 
(2)  Major amendment. Any amendment not qualifying as a minor amendment is considered to be a major amendment and must be approved by the authority granting the PUD to be amended according to the procedures authorized by this chapter for approval of a PUD. 
1362.07 - Termination. 
    The PUD order shall automatically expire 2 years from the date of final approval if the applicant has not commenced substantial construction and is not diligently proceeding to completion. Upon written request stating the reasons therefor, the Planning Director may extend an order for 1 additional year. An order may be terminated upon application by the owners of record of the land subject to a granting order. It shall be submitted and considered under the same process as is then established for granting or amending such order. The applicant shall demonstrate that if the order is terminated, the property shall comply with all current requirements for the zoning district(s) of that property. The order may be rescinded at any time by the authority granting it for a material misrepresentation in the application, or for a violation of the order by the applicant or his or her successors, agents or assigns after notice to the current owners and occupiers of the PUD area and after a hearing on the violation. Upon termination of an order, the zoning requirements shall revert to the current requirements for the zoning district designated for the property. 
(Ord. 707. Passed 10-2-06.) 
1362.08 - Mixed use PUD-Morgan Farm. 
    A mixed use PUD is for the purpose of accommodating a mixture of land uses in the area traditionally known as the "Morgan Farm area" as that area is shown on the Zoning Map. 
    It is available to permit a single development or series of development phases that encourage diversity of complimentary land uses mixing primarily residential uses with office, retail, recreational and other related uses. Upon issuance of a PUD order, the following uses are allowed and the following standards apply in addition to the standards of Section 1362.01 (4) through (14): 
(a)  Requirements if no PUD is granted. If a PUD is not in effect, the use and dimensional requirements shall be the same as for the R-1b zoning district. 
(b)  Uses allowed under a PUD. If a PUD is granted, R-1b uses, together with accessory uses, are allowed and up to 15 percent of the gross floor area of a project may allow C-2 uses or up to 50 percent of the gross floor area of the project may allow lodging facilities where at least 20 percent of the project's housing units for the balance of the project meet the Affordable Housing Standards in Section 1376.02. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements under a PUD. If a PUD is granted, dimensional requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Parcel size. The minimum land area required shall be 10 adjacent acres under single ownership and control. For the purpose of this requirement, streets shall not be deemed to divide acreage. 
(2)  Size and area. The size and area requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  The maximum density is 7 dwelling units per acre. 
b.  The maximum impervious surface ratio is .35. 
(3)  Open space. 30 percent of the land area of a project shall be used for common open space. 
(d)  Additional requirements under a PUD. If a PUD is granted, the following requirements pertaining to impervious surface ratio, setbacks, mix of uses, building height and bulk are as follows: 
(1)  The minimum setback of any building shall be at least 20 feet from boundary lines or public streets and 60 feet from a state highway. 
(2)  Office or retail floor area shall be limited to 15 percent of the total residential floor area. Lodging facilities up to 50 percent of the gross floor area of the project may be allowed where at least 20 percent of the project's housing units for the balance of the project meet the Affordable Housing Standards in Section 1376.02. 
(3)  Maximum building height shall be 60 feet. That portion of a building taller than 45 feet must be set back an additional 10 feet from the above minimum setback for each foot of building height that exceeds that height. An additional 10 feet in building height shall be allowed to permit parking level(s) under the building. 
(e)  Access requirements under a PUD. If a PUD is granted, the following access requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Site access to the public rights-of-way shall be provided by a common driveway or driveways which are intended to service the entire development. 
(2)  Access to individual uses within the development shall be provided by a private road which shall be adequately sized to accommodate emergency vehicle access and projected traffic loads but not excessively large. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 824. Passed 2-2-09.) 
Chapter 1364 - Special Land Use Regulations[22] 
    The purpose of this chapter is to permit and provide for a special review process for unique uses and activities in zoning districts where they would not otherwise be permitted, provided these uses and activities are made compatible with permitted uses in these districts by following the standards in this chapter. 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 1476 

1364.01 - Types of special land use permit review. 
(a)  Types of procedure. Special land use permits (SLUPs) are reviewed and approved through either a City Commission procedure or an administrative procedure depending upon the potential impact the proposed use or activity may have upon the adjacent land uses and the broader community. 
(b)  City commission SLUPs. Applications for special land use permits for the following uses shall be reviewed by the City Commission according to the procedures and standards contained in this chapter: 
(1)  New buildings 3,000 square feet or larger in gross floor area for allowed uses in an OS or RC district. 
(2)  Clustered single-family dwellings allowed in an R-1a, R-1b or R-2 district. 
(3)  Communication towers allowed in a T, GP, I, C-3, NMC-2 (except on Grand Traverse Bay) and H-2 District or properties owned by governmental agencies. 
(4)  Convention centers in a D district. 
(5)  Conversions of one-family to two-family dwellings in an R-1a or R-1b district. 
(6)  Correctional institutions allowed in a GP district. 
(7)  Drive-throughs for finance services in C-4 and D districts. 
(8)  Essential services structures. 
(9)  Reserved. 
(10)  Residential care and treatment facilities allowed in an R-9, R-15, R-29, HR, C-1, C-2, C-3 or H-1 or H-2 district. 
(11)  Schools allowed in an R-1a, R-1b, R-2, R-9, R-15, R-29, C-1, C-2, C-3 or GP district. 
(12)  Stores, retail, over 8,000 square feet per floor in a D district. 
(13)  Taller buildings allowed in a C-4b, C-4c, D, GP, NMC-2 or H-2 district. 
(14)  Temporary accessory dwelling units in an RC, R-1a or R-1b district. 
(15)  Theaters, live, and performance art centers allowed in an R-9, R-15 or R-29, Multiple Family Dwelling District. 
(16)  Transitional housing and emergency shelters allowed in an HR, C-1, C-2, C-3, D-1, D-2, D-3, H-1, H-2, I, NMC-1 or NMC-2 district. 
(17)  Wind energy system, pole or tower-mounted, allowed in T, GP, C-3, NMC-1, NMC-2, H-1, H-2 or I district and properties owned by governmental agencies. 
(18)  Wind energy system, building-mounted, allowed in NMC-1, NMC-2, I, T, H-1, H-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, D and HR districts. 
(c)  Administrative special land use permits. Applications for special land use permits for the following uses shall be reviewed by the Planning Director according to the procedures and standards contained in this chapter: 
(1)  Adult foster care small group home in an RC, R-1a, R-1b and R-2 district. 
(2)  Communication antennas in all districts. 
(3)  Group day care homes, including adult daycare in an R-1a, R-1b, R-2, R-9, R-15 and R-29 district. 
(4)  Landing areas in an H or GP district. 
(5)  Parking area, private, in a C-4 district if public parking is available within 500 feet of an allowed use; 
(6)  Parking area construction deferral. 
(7)  Places of worship in an R-1a, R-1b, R-2, R-9, R-15 and R-29 district. 
(Ord. 496. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 676. Passed 5-02-05. Ord. 710. Passed 10-2-06. Ord. 780. Passed 1-7-08. Ord. 784. Passed 3-17-08. Ord. 871. Passed 7-19-10. Ord. 897. Passed 12-6-10, Ord. 939 Passed 4-2-12 Ord. 971. Passed 6-3-13. Ord. 999. Passed 7-7-14). 
1364.02 - General standards for approval. 
    Each application for a special land use shall be reviewed for the purpose of determining that the proposed use meets all of the following standards: 
(1)  The use shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious and compatible in appearance with the intended character of vicinity. 
(2)  The use shall not be hazardous nor disturbing to existing or planned uses in the vicinity. 
(3)  The use shall be served adequately by existing or proposed public infrastructure and services, including but not limited to, streets and highways, police and fire protection, refuse disposal; water, waste water, and storm sewer facilities; electrical service, and schools. 
(4)  The use shall not create excessive additional requirements for infrastructure, facilities, and services provided at public expense. 
(5)  The use shall not involve any activities, processes, materials, equipment or conditions of operation that would be detrimental to any person or property or to the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, odors or water runoff. 
(6)  Where possible, the use shall preserve, renovate and restore historic buildings or landmarks affected by the development. If the historic structure must be moved from the site, the relocation shall be subject to the standards of this section. 
(7)  Elements shall relate the design characteristics of an individual structure or development to existing or planned developments in a harmonious manner, resulting in a coherent overall development pattern and streetscape. 
(8)  The use shall be consistent with the intent and purposes of the zoning district in which it is proposed. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 670. Passed 03-21-05. Ord. 831 Passed 5-4-09.) 
1364.03 - Special land use applications. 
    All land for which an application for a special land use permit is made shall be owned by the applicant or by a person who has consented, in writing, to the application. The parcel must be capable of being planned and developed as 1 integral land use unit. Noncontiguous parcels may be considered. The application must be signed by the applicant and by the owner or a person with the owner's written consent and must contain: 
(1)  A site plan as described by this Zoning Code; 
(2)  A statement of present ownership of all land which is the subject of the request; 
(3)  An application fee. This application fee shall be non-refundable. The City Commission shall, by resolution, establish the amount of the application fee. 
(4)  Upon the request of the Planning Director or the Planning Commission, the applicant shall provide such other information pertinent to the special land use application. Failure of the applicant to provide such requested information within a reasonable time may be grounds for denial of the application. 
(5)  If the application is approved, the applicants shall pay all Register of Deeds recording fees to record the special land use permit. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1364.04 - City commission procedure for approval. 
    The following procedures shall be followed for special land use permits to be granted by the City Commission: 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application, the applicant shall meet with the Planning Director to review the proposed project, the Traverse City Code of Ordinances, and any planning documents that relate to the property. 
(2)  Application. A special land use permit application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. 
(3)  Public hearings. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing with such notice as it deems advisable. After review, the Planning Commission shall submit a written recommendation to the City Commission based upon the standards of this Zoning Code. 
b.  A public hearing shall be held by the City Commission on each special land use application properly filed under this Zoning Code. Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than 15 days before the date of the public hearing. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and shall be mailed or personally delivered to: 
1.  The owners of the property for which approval is being considered; 
2.  All persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question; and 
3.  At least 1 occupant of each dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different persons within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. Where a single structure contains more than 4 dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure with a request to post the notice at the primary entrance of the structure. The occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. Where the name of the occupant is not known, structures within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. Where the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. 
(4)  Notice. The notice of the City Commission public hearing shall contain: 
a.  A description of the nature of the special land use request; 
b.  A description of the property which is the subject of the special land use request, including a listing of all existing street addresses within the property where they exist; and 
c.  The time and place of consideration of and public hearing on the special land use request; and 
d.  When and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(5)  Decision. The City Commission may deny, approve or approve with conditions requests for special land use approval after a hearing and notification as provided herein. Its decision shall be in the form of an order which shall incorporate a statement of conclusions and shall specify the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed. An order denying a special land use shall state the standards which have not been met. A decision of the City Commission shall be final. There shall be no appeal of the City Commission's decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(6)  Order. If the City Commission determines that the application is consistent with the intent of this Zoning Code as expressed in this chapter and with the other standards and requirements herein contained, it shall issue an order authorizing the special land use in accordance with the application and material submitted, modified as it may consider necessary to carry out the intent and standards of this Zoning Code, and containing any lawful conditions or restrictions which it may consider necessary to carry out the purposes of this Zoning Code and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The order shall recite the findings of fact and the reasons upon which it is based. 
(7)  Compliance. After approval of a special land use, the land to which it pertains shall be developed and used in its entirety only as authorized and described in the order approving the special land use or only as authorized by the provisions of this Zoning Code which would apply if the special land use order had not been issued. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 670. Passed 03-21-05. Ord. 721. Passed 2-5-07) 
Editor's note- For "taller buildings," which are those buildings greater than sixty (60) feet in height, see City Charter  28 for additional requirements. 
1364.05 - Administrative procedure for approval. 
    The following procedure shall be followed for special land use permits to be granted by the Planning Director: 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application, the applicant shall meet with the Planning Director to review the proposed project, the Traverse City Code of Ordinances, and any planning documents that relate to the property. 
(2)  Application. A special land use application shall be submitted to the Planning Director for review and decision. 
(3)  Notice. If the applicant or the Planning Director requests a public hearing, only notification of the public hearing need be made. If not so requested, upon receipt of an application, the Planning Director shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City 1 notice that the request has been received and shall send by mail or personal delivery such notice to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet. Such notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in notification. Notification need not be given to more than 1 occupant of a structure unless there is more than 1 dwelling unit, in which case 1 occupant of each unit shall be given notice. Such notice shall do the following: 
a.  Describe the nature of the special land use request; 
b.  Indicate the property which is the subject of the special land use request; 
c.  State when and where the special land use request will be considered and; 
d.  Indicate when and where comments will be received concerning the request; 
e.  Indicate that a public hearing on a special land use request may be requested by a property owner or occupant of a structure located within 300 feet of the boundary of property being considered for a special use. 
(4)  Public hearing. At the initiative of the Planning Director, upon the request of the applicant, or upon request of a property owner or the occupant of a structure located within 300 feet of the boundary of the property being considered for a special land use, a public hearing with notification as required herein shall be held by the Planning Director before rendering a decision. 
(5)  Decision; order. The Planning Director may deny, approve or approve with conditions, requests for special land use approval after notification as provided in this section. The decision shall be in the form of an order which shall incorporate a statement of conclusions and shall specify the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed. An order denying a special land use shall state the standards which have not been met. 
(6)  Appeals to the planning commission. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Planning Director may appeal the decision within 14 days to the Planning Commission. In order to file such an appeal, a person must complete and sign an application for appeal and submit it to the Planning Director on the form provided by that office. In addition, the person appealing must pay the fee established by resolution of the City Commission for such appeals. All reasons and facts in support of the appeal shall be submitted in writing by the person appealing. The Planning Director shall transmit to the Planning Commission all materials submitted in connection with the application including the written decision being appealed and a summary of public comments. Notice of the Planning Commission hearing shall be given in the same manner as notice of a hearing on a special land use granted by the Planning Commission. After a hearing de novo, the Planning Commission shall decide the appeal de novo within a reasonable time and shall submit its decision in writing to the applicant. A decision of the Planning Commission shall be final. There shall be no appeal of the Planning Commission's decision to the City Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(7)  Compliance. After approval of a special land use, the land to which it pertains shall be developed and used in its entirety only as authorized and described in the order approving the special land use or only as authorized by the provisions of this Zoning Code which would apply if the special land use order had not been issued. 
(8)  Planning director referral to planning commission. At the discretion of the Planning Director, a special land use requiring administrative approval of the Planning Director may be submitted to the Planning Commission under procedures described in Section 1364.04 
(Ord. 701. Passed 5-1-06. Ord. 777. Passed 12-3-07.) 
1364.06 - Amendments. 
    A SLUP order may be amended as follows: 
(1)  Minor amendment. Minor amendments are those which will have no foreseeable effect beyond the property boundary, such as minor changes in the siting of buildings, the alignment of utilities and the alignment of interior roadways and parking areas. Minor amendments for good cause may be authorized by the Planning Director without notice or hearing, provided no such changes shall significantly increase the size or height of structures, significantly reduce the efficiency or number of public facilities serving the site, significantly reduce the usable open space or significantly encroach on natural features proposed by the plan to be protected. 
(2)  Major amendment. Any amendment not qualifying as a minor amendment is considered to be a major amendment and must be approved by the authority granting the SLUP to be amended according to the procedures authorized by this chapter for approval of a SLUP. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this chapter or the granting order, an order approving a special land use may be amended by the granting authority according to the procedures authorized by this chapter for approval of a special land use. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1364.07 - Termination of orders. 
    A special land use order shall expire 2 years from the date of final approval if the applicant has not commenced substantial construction and is not diligently proceeding to completion or, where no construction is necessary, if the use authorized has not been commenced. Upon written request stating the reasons therefor, the granting authority may extend the order for 1 additional year. An order may be terminated upon application by the owners of record of the land subject to a granting order. It shall be submitted and considered under the same process as is then established for granting or amending such order. The applicant shall demonstrate that if the order is terminated the property shall comply with all current requirements for the zoning district(s) of that property. The order may be rescinded at any time by the granting authority for a violation of the order by the applicant, its successors, agents or assigns after notice to the current owners and occupiers of the property and after a hearing on the violation. Upon termination of an order, the zoning requirements shall be the current requirements for the zoning district designated for the property. Any use authorized by a special land use order shall be continuously maintained once the same is commenced, and if not so continuously maintained, the special land use permit shall expire. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 708. Passed 10-2-06.) 
1364.08 - Special land use permits granted by the city commission. 
    The City Commission may grant a special land use permit for the following uses in any district, except as herein qualified: 
(1)  New buildings 3,000 square feet or larger in gross floor area for allowed uses in an OS or RC District subject to the following: 
a.  The building is for an allowed use; 
b.  The minimum yard requirements may be changed by the Planning Commission based upon topography and existing site limitations (i.e, water, roads, neighboring buildings). 
c.  Traffic related to the use shall not substantially increase congestion on surrounding streets and intersections. 
d.  The use is not likely to create excessive noise across the real property boundary. 
(2)  Clustered single-family dwellings. The purpose of clustered housing is to provide owners of large parcels of single- or two-family residential property the alternative to develop their properties in an environmentally sensitive and cost-effective manner by clustering single-family homes or townhouses rather than spreading development over the entire site. By clustering development, sensitive and attractive environmental features can be preserved as common open space to be enjoyed by future residents. Clustered housing is subject to the following: 
a.  The use is located in an R-1a, R-1b or R-2 district. 
b.  The property is of at least 5 contiguous acres under single ownership and control. 
c.  The development must meet the front, side and rear-yard setback requirements of the district on the periphery of the parcel. More than 1 building may be located on a single lot, but setback requirements for the district shall apply to each building based on hypothetical lot lines approved by the Planning Director as proposed by the applicant. 
d.  The overall density of the development shall not exceed the allowable density of the district; (4.4 dwelling units per acre in an R-1a district, 5.8 dwelling units per acre in an R-1b district and 10.9 dwelling units per acre in an R-2 district). 
e.  Townhouses are permitted, provided there are no more than 4 dwelling units per detached structure. The front building wall plane is interrupted and off-set in order to project the character and appearance of individual dwelling units; 
f.  A parking area shall be provided only at the side or the rear of the building for which it is designed to service. That portion of the parking area which is exposed to the street shall be screened to minimize the visual impact of the parking area from the public street. Parking areas must also be screened along lot lines bordering residential uses or zones on the periphery of the parcel. Screening shall create an effective visual barrier consisting of a screenwall or a landscaped area at least 6 feet wide, densely planted with a mixture of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs, and shall create an effective visual barrier. All trees shall be a minimum of 2-inch caliper when planted. Native trees and shrubs shall be planted whenever possible. In instances where healthy plant material exists on the site prior to development, in part or in whole, for purposes of off-street parking, the Planning Commission may adjust the application of the above-stated standard to allow credit for such plant material. 
g.  Trash containers shall be properly screened. 
h.  All other standards not specifically altered in the zoning district shall apply to clustered housing. 
(3)  Communication towers. The intent of this section is to ensure communication towers are constructed and placed in a manner which will protect the public health, safety and welfare and where visual impact will be minimized. Communication towers are permitted if all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  The communication tower is located in a T, GP, C-3, NMC-2 (except on Grand Traverse Bay), H-2 or I district and properties owned by governmental agencies. 
b.  The communication tower complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations and all applicable building codes. 
c.  The tower is no higher than 20 feet above the height restrictions of the district in which it is located unless it can be demonstrated that additional height is necessary for the tower's intended purpose, but in no case shall the tower exceed 50 feet above the height restrictions of the district. Height is measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
d.  Communication towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 75 percent of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line. Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. The City Commission may reduce the standard setback requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby. 
e.  The design of the buildings and structures related to communication towers shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
f.  The tower shall not use blinking or flashing lights, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
g.  Cabinets housing operating equipment shall be architecturally screened from adjacent properties and street level views. 
h.  Existing mature trees and natural land forms on the site are preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
i.  The communications tower and operating equipment shall comply with the general standards for approval contained in this chapter. Any tower that is not in operation for a continuous period of 12 months is considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City. Failure to remove an abandoned tower within said 90 days may be removed by the City at the owner's expense. 
(4)  Convention centers in a D district, subject to the following: 
a.  The building is limited to 30,000 square feet; 
b.  Thirty five percent of the building facade shall be windows or other street level activity; 
c.  A traffic and economic impact analysis to assess impacts on neighboring streets is provided by the applicant. 
(5)  Conversions of one-family dwellings to two-family dwellings in a R-1a or R-1b district, subject to the following: 
a.  The dwelling and lot existed prior to December 10, 1958, substantially as they exist at the time of the request for a special land use permit for purposes of complying or determining compliance with these requirements. Any change made after 1958 may not be used to demonstrate compliance with these requirements. 
b.  The dwelling is a minimum of 20 percent larger than the average area of those neighboring single-family dwellings within 300 feet to each side of the subject property, including those dwellings along the opposite side of the street. 
c.  The lot area is not less than 4,000 square feet per proposed dwelling unit. 
d.  A minimum of 800 square feet of interior living area is required for a 1 bedroom dwelling unit and 1,200 square feet of living area is required for a 2 bedroom dwelling unit. In no case shall any secondary dwelling unit provide more than 2 bedrooms. 
e.  The dwelling has a minimum of 2,800 square feet of living area exclusive of any basement or third story area. 
f.  A dwelling unit or portion of a dwelling unit is not provided in the basement, and the basement area shall not be considered to fulfill any requirement of this Zoning Code. 
g.  No part of a dwelling unit, other than storage, exists above the second story. 
h.  Access to a second floor dwelling unit is provided from the interior of the structure. 
i.  The exterior appearance of the structure is not altered from its single-family character. 
j.  Off-street parking is provided as required by this Zoning Code. 
(6)  Correctional institutions subject to the following: 
a.  The use is located in a GP district. 
b.  All open recreational areas shall be in completely enclosed courtyards. 
c.  Cell windows and openings shall be screened from the public street view. 
d.  A master site and facilities plan shall be submitted. 
(7)  Drive-throughs for finance services in C-4 and D districts subject to the following: 
a.  The drive-through meets all of the standards of Section 1374.06, unless a more restrictive standard is imposed by this section. 
b.  The drive-through shall be accessed from an alley, not a street. However, a single lane driveway may exit onto a street if such driveway existed and was utilized prior to July 16, 1999, and it can be clearly demonstrated that alley egress for the drive-through is not practical. 
c.  The drive-through shall be limited to 2 service lanes. 
d.  The building associated with the drive-through shall be streetward of the approach lanes to screen the vehicle service lanes. 
(8)  Essential service structures. Are subject to the following: 
a.  The structure and use are reasonably necessary for the public convenience or welfare and, where applicable, a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been obtained from the appropriate regulating agency. 
b.  Noise, lights, glare and odor will not disturb the surrounding land uses or members of the public. 
c.  Fencing or other adequate security is constructed to adequately protect the public. 
d.  If potential adverse effects have been identified, alternative sites have been examined and the proposed site is reasonably necessary to provide the essential service to residents and visitors of the City. 
e.  Evidence of the appropriate franchise, license or other required governmental permission is demonstrated. 
f.  Setbacks of the district shall apply unless varied by the Planning Commission for good cause. Communication towers shall be regulated pursuant to Traverse City Code Section 1364.09. 
(9)  Reserved. 
(10)  Residential care and treatment facilities subject to the following: 
a.  The use is located in an R-9, R-15, R-29, HR, C-1, C-2, C-3 or H-1 or H-2 district. 
b.  The facility shall be located on an arterial or collector street as shown on the Zoning Map if such facility has more than 12 residents. 
c.  Off-street parking is provided as required by this Zoning Code, except that the Planning Commission may vary the number of parking spaces required. 
d.  The design of the structure is approved by the Fire Marshall prior to the issuance of the special land use permit and at least annually thereafter to maintain the permit. 
e.  The structure is not used as a medical clinic or for outpatient treatment unless located in a C-1, C-2 or C-3 District. 
f.  The structure is not used primarily for office, administrative or regular meetings if located in a multiple family dwelling district, although occasional meetings may be allowed upon approval of the Planning Commission. 
g.  All necessary licenses are obtained and maintained. 
h.  The operators of the facility maintain a list of all persons residing at the facility and record their length of stay. State licensed residential facilities (e.g., adult foster care homes) with under 7 residents are considered by State law to be single family residences, and state law preempts this Code. MCL 125.583(b); MSA 5.2933(2). 
(11)  Schools subject to the following: 
a.  The use is located in an R-1a, R-1b, R-2, R-9, R-15, R-29, C-1, C-2 C-3 or GP district. 
b.  A Master Site and Facilities Plan is submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission showing: 
1.  Existing facilities and planned facilities for the ensuing 5 years. 
2.  Adequate street crossing facilities, pedestrian routes and projected number of pedestrians. 
3.  Sufficient areas for motor vehicle and bus circulation routes, together with areas for pick up and drop off of students. 
4.  If child care use is provided, the facilities for such use shall be designated in the plan, together with the child care hours of operation. 
5.  The building and parking area shall not exceed 70 percent of the lot area. 
c.  A traffic study must be submitted to the Planning Commission. 
(12)  Stores, retail, over 8,000 square feet per floor in a D district, subject to the following: 
a.  The building is limited to 30,000 square feet; 
b.  Thirty five percent of the building facade shall be windows or other street level activity; 
c.  A traffic and economic impact analysis to assess impacts on neighboring streets is provided by the applicant. 
(13)  Taller buildings. "Taller buildings" mean those buildings greater than 60 feet in height. The purpose of this section is to encourage sensitive design for taller buildings. Since there are very few buildings taller than 60 feet in the City, it is of public interest that prominent buildings, simply by order of their height, are designed in a manner which will maintain the pedestrian scale at the street level. At the same time, the physical, visual and spatial characteristics of the City are encouraged to be promoted by consistent use, compatible urban design and architectural design elements. Taller buildings are allowed in a C-4b, C-4c, D, GP, NMC-2 or H-2 district subject to the following: 
a.  The building's height is consistent with Section 1368.01. 
b.  Roof top mechanical equipment and penthouse space that are an integral part of the architectural design are permitted. All mechanical equipment, appurtenances and access areas shall be completely architecturally screened from view and enclosed. 
c.  Extended heights for steeples and other architectural embellishments less than 400 square feet each shall not be used to determine the height of the building. 
d.  The applicant shall prepare and deliver to the Planning Director a scale model, video image or other similar depiction of the taller building in relation to surrounding land and buildings. 
(14)  Temporary accessory dwelling units (TAD) in an RC, R-1a or R-1b district, subject to the following: 
a.  The existing site and use are substantially in compliance with this Zoning Code. 
b.  The floor area of the TAD unit is not larger than 676 square feet. 
c.  The applicant shall present sufficient evidence to the Planning Commission to establish a substantial need for the TAD unit. The TAD shall be discontinued when the person or persons with the substantial need permanently moves to a different domicile or when there is a change in the circumstances where the substantial need no longer exists. 
d.  A TAD unit is developed within an existing single-family and/or usual accessory use under this Zoning Code. 
e.  A special land use permit for a TAD unit is not assignable or transferable and will expire automatically unless the applicant submits written evidence that a substantial need continues to exist 3 years from the date of approval and thereafter every 5 years. 
f.  Upon the expiration of the special land use permit the TAD unit shall be discontinued and the property shall be brought into full compliance with the use requirements of this Zoning Code. 
g.  Individual site plans, floor plans, elevation drawings and building plans for both the proposed TAD unit and the subsequent reconversion to conventional single-family residence and/or accessory use shall be submitted with the application for a special land use permit and shall be prepared by a registered architect or engineer licensed to practice in the state. 
(15)  Transit centers, subject to the following: 
a.  The center is located in a C-4, D-2, D-3 or GP district. 
b.  Buses can directly access the center without being dependent upon an access or sub collector street in a residential district. 
c.  Existing streets in the area accommodate the projected bus traffic. 
d.  The location of the center lends itself to an integrated transportation system (i.e., walk, bus, bike, rail). 
e.  The center is within 1/4 mile to a high concentration of job sites or dwellings. 
f.  Noise, lights, glare and odor will not unreasonably disturb the surrounding land uses or members of the public. 
g.  If potential adverse effects have been identified, alternative sites have been examined and determined by the applicant not to be feasible. 
h.  No transit vehicle fueling, repair or storage is allowed. 
(16)  Theaters, live, and performance art centers in an R-9, R-15, or R-29, Multiple-Family Dwelling District, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The use must have existed prior to 2005. 
b.  Minor additions are allowed provided the addition is for barrier free access, fire safety ort space that will not increase the seating capacity of the facility. 
c.  Additions are architecturally compatible with the existing structure and the character of the neighborhood. 
d.  The applicant submits a parking plan that demonstrates there is sufficient parking within 500 feet to meet the theater's parking demand. 
e.  On-site exterior lighting is directed to minimize impacts on adjacent residential areas. 
f.  Performances are not allowed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(17)  Transitional housing and emergency shelters , subject to the following: 
a.  The facility is fully enclosed in a building located in an HR, C-1, C-2, C-3, D-1, D-2, D-3, H-1, H-2, or I District. 
b.  The site is located within a 1/2 mile of a bus stop connected by sidewalks or bike trails. 
c.  The lot is not located within 1,500 feet of another lot devoted to transitional housing or emergency shelter. 
d.  The facility shall have a maximum of 100 beds and/or sleeping pads. 
e.  The building provides 50 square feet of heated building space per person staying overnight at the facility. 
f.  The operator of the Emergency shelter shall provide continuous, on-site supervision by an employee or volunteer during all hours of operation. 
g.  The operator of the facility shall have a written management plan including, as applicable, staffing levels, provisions for staff and volunteer training, neighborhood outreach, length of stay of residents, hours of operation, crime prevention, security, screening of residents to insure compatibility and the mission of service provided at the facility. The management plan shall establish a maximum length of time which clients may be accommodated. 
h.  The operator shall have an ongoing housing assistance program on the premises to place the residents into permanent housing and maintain a list of all persons residing at the facility. 
i.  Parking requirements would be determined by the Planning Director based on the intensity of the operation described in the management plan. 
(18)  Wind energy system, pole or tower-mounted structures. The intent of this section is to ensure that free-standing wind energy systems are constructed and placed in a manner which will protect the public health, safety and welfare and where visual impact is minimized. Free-standing wind energy systems are permitted if all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  The free-standing wind energy system is located in a T, GP, C-3, NMC-1, NMC-2, H-1, H-2 or I district and properties owned by governmental agencies. 
b.  Guy wires are only permitted to be used in the I and T districts. 
c.  The free-standing wind energy system complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations and all applicable building codes. 
d.  The pole or tower is no higher than 20 feet above the height restrictions of the district in which it is located unless it can be demonstrated that additional height is necessary for the wind energy system's intended purpose, but in no case shall the wind energy system exceed 40 feet above the height restrictions of the district. 
e.  Wind energy systems must be set back a distance equal to at least 75 percent of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line. The setback can be reduced by up to 50 percent or a minimum of 20 feet from the lot line if it can be demonstrated through a registered architect or professional engineer that the tower is designed to collapse, fall, curl or bend within a distance or zone shorter than the height of the wind turbine. Accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. The City Commission may reduce the standard setback requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby. 
f.  The design of the wind energy system or buildings and structures related to the wind energy systems shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
g.  The wind energy system shall not use blinking or flashing lights, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
h.  Wind energy system cabinets housing operating equipment shall be architecturally screened from adjacent properties and street level views. 
i.  Existing mature trees and natural land forms on the site are preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
j.  The wind energy pole or tower-mounted system and operating equipment shall comply with the general standards for approval contained in this chapter. Any wind energy system that is not in operation for a continuous period of 12 months is considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City. Failure to remove an abandoned wind energy system within said 90 days may be removed by the City at the owner's expense. 
k.  The wind energy system will meet the standards set in the City of Traverse City Code of Ordinances, Chapter 652, Noise Control, specifically section 652.04 (h). A wind energy system emits a pure tone and would be subject to a reduction of 5 dBA. 
(19)  Wind energy system, building-mounted structures. The intent of this section is to ensure that building-mounted wind energy systems are constructed and placed in a manner which will protect the public health, safety and welfare and where visual impact is minimized. Building-mounted wind energy systems may exceed the 20 feet above the height limitation of the district if all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Height exceptions to what is allowed by right will not be allowed in the GP, PR, RC, R-1a, R-1b, R-2, R-9, R-15, R-29 Districts. 
b.  A taller building-mounted wind energy system may be located in NMC-1, NMC-2, I, T, H-1, H-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, D and HR Districts. 
c.  Guy wires are only permitted to be used in the I and T Districts. 
d.  The building-mounted wind energy system complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations and all applicable building codes. 
e.  A building-mounted wind energy system is no higher than 20 feet above the height of the roof deck in which it is located unless it can be demonstrated that additional height is necessary for the wind energy system's intended purpose, but in no case shall the wind energy system exceed 40 feet above the height of the roof. 
f.  The setback can be reduced by up to 50 percent or a minimum of 20 feet from the lot line if it can be demonstrated through a registered architect or professional engineer that the tower is designed to collapse, fall, curl or bend within a distance or zone shorter than the height of the wind turbine. Accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. The City Commission may reduce the standard setback requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby. 
g.  The design of the wind energy system or buildings and structures related to the wind energy systems shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
h.  The wind energy system shall not use blinking or flashing lights, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
i.  Wind energy system cabinets housing operating equipment shall be architecturally screened from adjacent properties and street level views. 
j.  Existing mature trees and natural land forms on the site are preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
k.  The wind energy pole or tower-mounted system and operating equipment shall comply with the general standards for approval contained in this chapter. Any wind energy system that is not in operation for a continuous period of 12 months is considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City. Failure to remove an abandoned wind energy system within said 90 days may be removed by the City at the owner's expense. 
l.  The wind energy system will meet the standards set in the City of Traverse City Code of Ordinances, Chapter 652, Noise Control, specifically section 652.04(h). A wind energy system emits a pure tone and would be subject to a reduction of 5 dBA. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 527. Passed 3-19-01. Ord. 556. Passed 2-4-02. Ord. 592.Passed 1-06-03. Ord. 620. Passed 2-2-04. Ord. 676. Passed 05-02-05. Ord 688. Passed 10-03-05. Ord. 740. Passed 3-19-07. Ord. 780. Passed 1-7-08. Ord. 785. Passed 3-17-08. Ord. 871. Passed 7-19-10. Ord. 932 Passed 2-6-12 Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12. Ord. 971. Passed 6-3-13. Ord. 1000. Passed 7-7-14. Ord. 1029. Passed 1-4-16) 
Editor's note- For "taller buildings," which are those buildings greater than sixty (60) feet in height, see City Charter  28 for additional requirements. 
1364.09 - Administrative special land use permits. 
    The Planning Director may grant an Administrative Special Land Use Permit for the following uses in any district except as herein qualified: 
(1)  Adult foster care small group home in an R-C, R-1a, R-1b and R-2 subject to the following specific requirements: 
a.  All necessary licenses are obtained and maintained. Expiration or revocation of a license automatically terminates the special land use permit and a change in the licensee requires a special land use permit renewal. 
b.  The adult foster care licensee shall be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
c.  The lot is not located within 500 feet of another lot devoted to such use. 
d.  The use is not allowed in an apartment. 
e.  No additional parking is required for the Adult Foster Care Home provided on-street parking is allowed adjacent to the property. If on-street parking is not allowed, 2 parking spaces shall be provided on premise. 
(2)  Communication antennas. The intent of this section is to ensure that communication antennas are constructed and placed in a manner which will protect the public health, safety and welfare and where visual impact will be minimized. Co-location of communication antennas are permitted, subject to the following: 
a.  Communications antennas and cabinets housing operating equipment are not permitted for residential buildings or structures in a R District. When associated with a building, the antenna(s) and cabinet(s) housing operating equipment shall be located inside the building. 
b.  The antenna(s) is no taller than 8 feet above a building or structure. 
c.  The antenna(s) shall be screened, located or designed in a manner which minimizes views from adjacent properties and street level views or blends with the architecture so as not to be noticed. 
d.  Cabinets housing operating equipment located on a building roof shall be enclosed or screened from street level view using the same materials used for the building walls or a material which is approved by the Planning Director as visually compatible with the building. 
e.  Cabinets housing operations equipment not located in a building or on a building roof shall be architecturally screened from adjacent properties and street level views. 
f.  All necessary licenses shall be obtained and maintained. 
g.  The antenna(s) and operating equipment shall comply with the general standards for approval contained in this chapter. 
(3)  Landing areas. A landing pad, area, strip, deck or building roof used to launch or receive aircraft, including, but not limited to power-driven winged or delta winged aircraft, gliders, balloons, and helicopters, subject to the following: 
a.  The use is located in an H-1, H-2, or GP district. 
b.  A noise contour map shall be constructed and overlaid on a land use map. 
c.  The noise contours shall be based on the noise exposure forecasts. 
d.  Noise loads shall not exceed maximum recommended FAA noise standards for residentially developed areas. 
(4)  Parking area, private, in a C-4 district if public parking is available within 500 feet of an allowed use , subject to the following standards: 
a.  No buildings may be removed or demolished to provide the private parking area. 
b.  Access shall be from an alley or adjacent property only, not from a public street. 
c.  All requirements of Chapter 1374, Circulation and Parking, are met, except Section 1374.03(d). 
d.  All requirements of Sections 1372.06, Screening requirements for parking areas, and 1372.08, Landscape development internal to a parking area are met. 
e.  Pedestrian travel routes within the parking area shall be provided, clearly defined and approved by the Planning Director. 
(5)  Parking area construction deferral . It is the intent of this section to provide a mechanism whereby a portion of the off-street parking otherwise required by this Code may be deferred to a future time if it can be demonstrated by the applicant that the number of required parking spaces is excessive of the actual need of a specific use. 
a.  Standards. The following standards shall be met for the approval of any parking deferral: 
1.  The property must be located in a GP or I district. 
2.  No more than 50 percent of the parking otherwise required by this Code shall be deferred. 
3.  The area of the site where parking has been deferred shall remain clear of any new structure. 
4.  This clear area shall not be used for parking, the location of a new building, an area to satisfy storm-water management requirements, open space requirements, or screening requirements of this Code. 
5.  A land banked area shall be maintained in its natural condition or landscaped depending upon which is most appropriate for the development in the vicinity as determined by the Planning Director. 
b.  Process. In addition to other special land use application requirements, the following shall be submitted for review and approval: 
1.  A completed application for parking deferral signed by the landowner and business owner as applicants 
2.  A project site plan showing the off-street parking area proposed to be developed and the treatment of the area of the site where parking is to be deferred. 
3.  A written narrative, signed by the applicant(s), describing in detail the current use of the property, the working shifts, the number of full and part-time employees on each shift, the expected customer counts per day based upon past experience, and records of any operational characteristics which are unique to the subject use which would impact the demand for parking. 
(6)  Places of worship in an R-1a, R-1b, R-2, R-9, R-15 and R-29 district, subject to the following: 
a.  The building shall be designed and used primarily for worship. 
b.  The use and related parking shall not necessitate the removal of any historically significant structure as determined by the Historic Districts Commission. 
c.  The maximum lot size shall be 15,000 square feet if located in an R-1a, R-1b or R-2 district and having frontage only on an access street. 
d.  On street parking within 600 feet from the site may account for up to 50 percent of the required parking. All off-street parking shall be located to the rear of the primary building. 
e.  The building and parking area shall not exceed 70 percent of the lot area. 
f.  Parking is allowed in an R-District if associated with a building located in an R-District. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99 Ord. 586. Passed 11-04-02. Ord. 629. Passed 3-15-04. Ord 711 Passed 10-2-06. Ord. 786. Passed 3-17-08. Ord. 871. Passed 7-19-10. Ord. 897. Passed 12-6-10; Ord. 1076 . Passed 7-2-18) 
Chapter 1366 - Site Plans and Site Development Standards[23] 
    Site plan review is intended to ensure developments are designed to integrate well with adjacent developments, minimize nuisance impacts on adjoining parcels, insure safe and functional traffic access and parking and minimize impacts on sensitive environmental resources. 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning authority, M.C.L.A.  117.4i 
Cross reference- Duties of Zoning Administrator re: flood plains,  1458.04; Signs, Ch. 1476 

1366.01 - Site plans required; site diagrams; waiver. 
(a)  Site plans. Site plans are required as follows: 
(1)  Any request for a land use permit, land clearing (see definition), an administrative special land use permit or building permit (other than for single or two-family dwellings) shall be accompanied by 3 copies of a site plan complying with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Any request for a Planning Commission-special land use permit, planned unit development, or request for a land use permit for a use that generates more than 500 trip ends per day shall be accompanied by 14 copies of a site plan complying with the requirements of this chapter. The generation of trip ends is determined by reference to the latest edition of the Trip Generation manual promulgated by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
(b)  Site diagrams. Any request for a land use permit or building permit for a single family or two-family dwelling or accessory structure shall be accompanied by 3 copies of a diagram drawn to scale showing the proposed use of the site, buildings and structures on the site, lot lines and their relationship to existing property lines and to neighboring sites. The Planning Director shall circulate site diagrams to the relevant officials for comments as to conformance to state and federal laws and the Traverse City Code. A sample site diagram is shown as Figure 1-4 in Appendix 2. 
(c)  Waiver. The Planning Director may waive site plan requirements in any of the following cases when he or she determines that the submission of a site plan would serve no useful purpose: 
(1)  Accessory structures; 
(2)  Any enlargement of a principal building by less than 20 percent of its existing gross floor area of provided such enlargement will not result in a requirement for additional parking; 
(3)  A change in principal use where such change would not result in a increase in impervious surface, additional off-street parking, access or other external site characteristics or a violation of this Code. 
(Ord 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1366.02 - Site plan review. 
(a)  Procedure for all site plans. 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application, an applicant may meet with the Planning Director to review the proposed project, the Traverse City Code of Ordinances, and planning documents that relate to the property. 
(2)  Application. An applicant shall apply for site plan consideration not less than 21 calendar days before the date on which such site plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. All site plans shall be submitted to the Planning Director for review according to the standards and requirements of this Code and as follows: 
(3)  Official review. The Planning Director shall circulate site plans to the relevant agencies or officials for comments as to the proposed development's conformance to all applicable standards and requirements and whether approval of the site plan is recommended. 
(4)  Approval; referral. Once the Planning Director deems the site plans or site diagram to be complete, a land use permit may be issued, or, if the site plan accompanies a request for Planning Commission special land use permit, planned unit development or change of use that generates more than 500 trip ends per day, the plan shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review with a recommendation to approve, deny or modify the site plan. If modifications are recommended, the applicant shall be notified in advance of the Planning Commission meeting so that adjustments can be made prior to such meeting. A site plan shall be deemed approved only upon the signature of the Planning Director on a land use permit. No land use permit or building permit shall be issued without an approved site plan. 
(5)  Time limits. 14 days are allowed for departmental review of all site plans and site diagrams (7 days for site plans which have been approved by the Planning Commission). If, for any reason, the Planning Director cannot process the plan within these time limits, he or she shall so notify the applicant and shall set a date for finalizing the review. 
(b)  Planning commission review. Once a site plan is forwarded to the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall review the site plan according to the standards and requirements of this chapter. The Planning Commission shall approve or deny the site plan (not the use) according to the standards and requirements of this Code. 
(Ord 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 671. Passed 03-21-05.) 
1366.03 - Site plan requirements. 
(a)  Requirements. A land use permit application shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by resolution of the City Commission. Site plans shall be sealed by a registered architect or engineer, except site plans to be referred to the Planning Commission for approval may defer this requirement until receiving Planning Commission approval. Site plans shall be drawn to scale, rendered on a minimum sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches and shall include the following: 
(1)  A legal description, property lines, lot lines and property dimensions; 
(2)  The scale, north arrow, date and vicinity map; 
(3)  The property owner's and applicant's name and address; 
(4)  The preparer's name and address; 
(5)  Street names, existing street and alley widths, the location and width of utility easements, the size and location of existing and proposed public utilities and building service lines; 
(6)  The zoning classification of the site and surrounding properties and, where applicable, the zoning request; 
(7)  Required setback lines, lot size, lot coverage and any variance to be requested; 
(8)  The size and location of existing buildings and improvements on and adjacent to the subject parcel; 
(9)  The existing building use and proposed building use, location, shape, building height, elevations, floor area and unit computations and dimensions and a description of all exterior building materials; 
(10)  A land use tabulation summary provided in the margin of the plan indicating types of uses, acreage for each land use, number of units, densities and land use intensities; 
(11)  The proposed number and location of parking spaces, maneuvering lanes, sidewalks, driveways, dumpster placements, HVAC units and utility meter placements and loading areas, and their dimensions and proposed points of access to the site from public streets and alleys; 
(12)  The proposed location and dimensions of site drainage areas, walkways, landscaped areas, recreation areas, open space and screen walls; 
(13)  Natural features, such as unique topographic features, wetlands, 100-year flood plain elevations, creeks, springs and others, with an indication as to which are proposed to be maintained, altered or removed during site development; and 
(14)  Any other information necessary to establish compliance with City ordinances. 
(15)  The following additional information if requested by the Planning Director: 
a.  A report describing the soil types and the ability of soils to accommodate the proposed development; 
b.  A tree location survey signed by an engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, showing all existing trees having a diameter at breast height of 6 inches or greater, the common and/or scientific names and the diameter at breast height of these trees, plus an indication of trees to be preserved, to be transplanted, or to be removed during site development. Closely grouped trees shall be designated by the predominate species represented, the number present and the diameter at breast height range of the group or clump; 
c.  The existing and proposed topography at 2 foot contours. 
(b)  Waiver. The Planning Director may waive any or all site plan requirements if the construction or alteration does not affect existing traffic circulation, drainage, grading, relationship of buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting, parking and other considerations of site plan review. Any of these requirements may be waived by the Planning Director where, in his or her judgment, such data will not bear on his or her decision or the decision of the Planning Commission. 
(c)  Appeals. The property owner may appeal a decision of the Planning Director or Planning Commission to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord 476. Passed 7-6-99; Ord. No. 1054 . Passed 7-3-17) 
1366.04 - Standards for granting site plan approval. 
    A site plan shall conform to all applicable requirements of the City Fire Marshall, state and federal laws and local ordinances and approval may be conditioned upon the applicant receiving necessary local, state and federal permits before final site plan approval or an occupancy permit is granted. In addition, a development shall conform to the following site development standards which shall be reflected on the site plan: 
(1)  Primary structures shall be oriented so that their main entrance faces the street upon which the lot fronts. If the development is on a corner lot, the main entrance may be oriented to either street or to the corner. 
(2)  All roof-mounted equipment, including satellite dishes and other communication equipment, must be screened from recreation trails or from a public sidewalk adjacent to the site by a parapet wall or similar architectural feature. 
(3)  Reasonable visual and sound mitigation for all dwelling units shall be provided. Fences, walks, barriers and landscaping shall be used appropriately for the protection and enhancement of property and for the privacy of its occupants. 
(4)  Every principal building or groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit emergency access by some practical means to all sides. 
(5)  Every development shall have legal access to a public or private street. 
(6)  The development, where possible, shall provide vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems which reflect and extend the pattern of streets, pedestrian and bicycle ways in the area. Travelways which connect and serve adjacent development shall be designed appropriately to carry the projected traffic. 
(7)  A pedestrian circulation system shall be provided which is physically separated and insulated as reasonably possible from the vehicular circulation system. 
(8)  All parking areas shall be designed to facilitate safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, minimize congestion at points of access and egress to intersecting roads, to encourage the appropriate use of alleys and minimize the negative visual impact of such parking areas. 
(9)  Where the opportunity exists, developments shall use shared drives. Unnecessary curb cuts shall not be permitted. 
(10)  All loading and unloading areas and outside storage areas, including areas for the storage of trash, which are visible from residential districts or public rights-of-way shall be screened by a vertical screen consisting of structural and/or plant materials not less than 6 feet in height. 
(11)  Exterior light sources shall be deflected downward and away from adjacent properties and rights-of-way and shall not violate night sky provisions of the Traverse City Code of Ordinances. 
(12)  Adequate utilities shall be provided to properly serve the development. All utilities shall be placed underground. 
(13)  Sites at which hazardous substances and potential pollutants are stored, used or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges to the air, surface of the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers or wetlands. 
(Ord 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1366.05 - Conditional approvals. 
(a)  The Planning Commission or Planning Director may attach conditions to the approval of a site plan when such conditions: 
(1)  Would insure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity are capable of accommodating increased service and service facilities loads caused by the land use or activity. 
(2)  Would protect the built and natural environment. 
(3)  Would insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land. 
(b)  The Planning Commission or Planning Director may conditionally approve a site plan on conformance with fencing, screening, buffering or landscaping requirements of this Code and may collect a performance guarantee consistent with these requirements to insure conformance. When so doing, the following finding shall be made and documented as part of the review process: 
(1)  That such fencing, screening, buffering or landscaping would mitigate negative effects of noise, dust, lighting, vehicular or pedestrian traffic, loading or unloading, parking or other similar impact on adjoining parcels; 
(2)  That absent such conditions, the development would adversely affect the reasonable use, enjoyment and value of adjoining lands in light of similar benefits enjoyed by other properties in the area. 
(Ord 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1366.06 - Site plan amendments. 
    No change shall be made to an approved site plan prior to or during construction except upon application to the Planning Director and according to the following procedures: 
(1)  Minor change. A change to a site plan or site plan involving minor changes in the siting of buildings, the adjustment of utilities, walkways, traffic ways and parking areas and similar minor changes may be approved by the Planning Director. 
(2)  Major change. A change or amendment to a Planning Commission-approved site plan, involving a change in the number and location of accesses to public streets and alleys, an increase or decrease over 10 percent in the number of parking spaces, a major relocation or re-siting of a building, an increase in the gross floor area or height of a building, a reduction in open space and similar major changes shall require the approval of the Planning Commission. A major change to a site plan before or during construction where a Planning Commission-approved site plan was required shall be approved by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1366.07 - Expiration. 
    Site plan approval shall automatically expire with the expiration of the land use permit. 
(Ord 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1366.08 - Master site and facilities plans. 
(a)  Procedure for all master site and facilities plans. 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Before submitting a Master Site and Facilities Plan, an applicant may meet with the Planning Director to review the proposed plan, the Traverse City Code of Ordinances, and the City Plan. 
(2)  Application. An applicant shall apply for master site and facilities plan consideration not less than 21 calendar days before the date on which such plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. The plan shall be submitted to the Planning Director for review according to the standards and requirements of this Code and as follows: 
(3)  Official review. The Planning Director shall circulate the Master Site and Facilities Plan to the relevant agencies or officials for comments as to the proposed development. 
(4)  Approval; referral. Once the Planning Director deems the requirements for the Master Site and Facility Plan have been met, the plan shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review with a recommendation to approve, deny or modify the plan. If modifications are recommended, the applicant shall be notified in advance of the Planning Commission meeting so that adjustments can be made prior to such meeting. The Planning Commission shall review the Master Site and Facilities Plan according to the standards and requirements of this chapter. The Planning Commission shall approve or deny the plan (not the use) according to the standards and requirements of this Code. 
(5)  Compliance. After approval of a Master Site and Facility Plan, the land to which it pertains shall be developed and used in its entirety only as authorized and described in this plan. Where there is insufficient information on the plan to determine building and parking locations and alike, the zoning code requirements for the district shall prevail. 
(b)  Planning commission review and approval. A Master Site and Facilities Plan shall be deemed approved only upon the signature of the Secretary for the Planning Commission on the plan. No land use permit or building permit shall be issued without an approved master site and facilities plan and approved site plan in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Master site and facilities plan requirements. 
(1)  Requirements. A Master Site and Facilities Plan shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by resolution of the City Commission. Plans shall be drawn to scale, rendered on a minimum sheet size of 11 inches by 17 inches and shall include the following: 
a.  A legal description and property lines; 
b.  The scale, north arrow, date and vicinity map; 
c.  The property owner's name and address; 
d.  The contact person's name and address; 
e.  Street names, existing street and alley widths, the location and width of utility easements within and on adjacent public rights of way.(use separate sheet for clarity); 
f.  The zoning classification of the surrounding properties; 
g.  The size and location of existing buildings and improvements adjacent to the subject parcel; 
h.  Natural features, such as unique topographic features, boundaries of regulated wetlands, 100-year flood plain elevations, creeks, springs and others. 
i.  The building code use groups of existing and proposed buildings; 
j.  Location of building envelopes and the maximum height of buildings allowed by the zoning district within these areas; 
k.  The percentage of property allocated for buildings, parking areas and streets; 
l.  A general circulation plan for pedestrians and motorists and general location of parking areas. 
m.  A conceptual plan in a narrative or graphic plan that describes the central storm-water features, if any. 
(2)  Waiver. Any of these requirements may be waived by the Planning Director where, in his or her judgment, such data will not bear on the decision of the Planning Commission. 
(3)  Appeals. The property owner may appeal a decision of the Commission to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(d)  Standards for granting master site and facilities plan approval. A master site and facilities plan shall conform to the following site development standards which shall be reflected on the plan: 
(1)  Whenever practical, the primary structures shall be oriented so that their main entrance faces a street upon which the lot fronts. If the development is on a corner lot, the main entrance may be oriented to either street or to the corner. 
(2)  Every principal building or groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit emergency access. 
(3)  Every development shall have legal access to a public or private street. 
(4)  The plan, where possible, shall provide vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems which reflect and extend the pattern of streets, pedestrian and bicycle ways in the area. 
(5)  A pedestrian circulation system shall be provided which is physically separated and insulated as reasonably possible from the vehicular circulation system. 
(6)  All parking areas shall be located in a manner which will reduce the visual impact of such parking areas from adjacent public streets. 
(7)  Where the opportunity exists, developments shall use shared drives and interconnect with adjacent properties to reduce travel distance. Unnecessary curb cuts shall not be permitted. 
(e)  Master site and facility plan amendments. No change shall be made to an approved site plan prior to or during construction except upon application to the Planning Director and according to the following procedures: 
(1)  Minor change. A slight modification to a Master Site and Facilities Plan involving the siting of buildings, the adjustment or extension of utilities, walkways, traffic ways and parking areas and similar modifications may be approved by the Planning Director. 
(2)  Major change. A change or amendment to a Master Site and Facility Plan, involving a significant change in the number and location of accesses to public streets, alleys and parking areas, a major relocation or re-siting of buildings, a significant increase in the building footprint or height of a building, a significant reduction in open space and similar major changes shall require the approval of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord 588. Passed 1-06-03. Ord. 741. Passed 3-19-07.) 
Chapter 1368 - Size and Area Requirements 

1368.01 - Building height. 
(a)  Purpose. The height standards serve several purposes: 
(1)  They promote a reasonable building scale and relationship of 1 building to another; 
(2)  They promote options for privacy for neighboring properties; and 
(3)  They reflect the general building scale and placement of buildings in the area. 
(b)  All maximum heights below may be further limited to ensure the maximum safety in the use of the Cherry Capital Airport. 
(c)  Height requirements. The maximum and minimum height requirements are indicated in the following chart: 
District Feet(max-min) OS 45 RC 45 R-1a/ 
R-1b 35 R-2 35 R-9 40 R-15 40 R-29 40 HR 45 8 C-1 30 8 (45 3, 8 ) C-2 30 8 (45 3, 8 ) C-3 45 8 C-4 1 a 30-45 8 b 30-60(68 2,4,8 ) c 30-85 2,5 D See D District chapter 8 T 45 GP 25-90 I 60 (public utility 
buildings - 100') NMC-1 45 NMC-2 90 (On Bay: 50') H-1 45 H-2 See H District Chapter PRD See PR District chapter  
1 Buildings in the C-4 District shall have a minimum height of 30 feet, except an existing building may have an addition of no larger than the area of the first floor of that building as it existed on the effective date of Ordinance No. 467, which is July 16, 1999. 
2 Over 60 feet in height may be allowed only by special land use permit or as part of a planned unit development and subject to the requirements listed above. 
3 Forty-five feet in height is allowed if at least 1 floor is designed and used for residential uses. 
4 Sixty-eight feet in height is allowed if at least 20 percent of the building is designed and used for dwellings. 
5 An additional 15 feet is allowed for rooftop mechanical equipment or elevator shafts, but not to exceed an overall height of 100 feet. Buildings over 60 feet tall shall have at least 20 percent of the building designed and used for dwellings. 
6 Air traffic control towers are exempt from this height requirement. 
7 All existing buildings may double their existing first floor area. 
8 All buildings that front the street, except for parking structures, accessory and utility buildings and buildings that are intended and designed to be exclusively developed for residential use shall have a minimum height of 15 feet measured from the street entrance level to the next finished level or roof structure. The Planning Director may grant a first floor building height exception if it has been clearly demonstrated that such provision is unnecessary or that such requirements would create a practical difficulty, as contrasted merely granting an advantage or convenience. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 491. Passed 4-17-00. Ord. 552. Passed 12-17-01. Ord. 628. Passed 3-15-04. Ord. 652. Passed 8-16-04. Ord. 705. Passed 7-17-06. Ord. 742. Passed 3-19-07. Ord. 992. Passed 6-2-14) 
1368.02 - Setbacks; yards. 
(a)  Purpose. The setback regulations for buildings serve several purposes: 
(1)  They maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access for firefighting; 
(2)  They reflect the general building scale and placement of buildings in the City's neighborhoods; 
(3)  They promote a reasonable physical relationship between buildings; and 
(4)  They provide adequate flexibility to site a building so that it may be compatible with the neighborhood, fit the topography of the site, allow for required outdoor areas, and allow for architectural diversity. 
(b)  Setbacks required. Unless a stated specific setback is established by this Code, the minimum setbacks, the distance between a property line and a building wall, are required as indicated in each district's chapter in this Code and on the following chart: 
District Front Side setbacks Rear Setback from water One Side Aggregate OS Average setback of buildings within 200' on either side or 30' if there are no buildings 10 20 30 50' from ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25' from ordinary high water mark of Boardman River or any dock line established by City ordinance (exceptions in OS District for certain buildings). RC Average setback of buildings within 200' on either side or 25' if there are no buildings 10 
(None if adjacent to an RC District.) 20 
(None if adjacent to an RC District) 30 R-1a 25' minimum 8 2 20 2 30 R-1b Within 4' of the average setback of principal buildings on the same face block; no closer than 6' from the front property line. 6 2 14 2 25 50' from ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay and Boardman Lake and 25' from ordinary high water mark of Boardman River or any dock line established by City ordinance (exceptions in OS District for certain buildings). R-2 A 6 2 14 25 R-9 A 6 14 1 25 R-15 A 6 14 1 25 R-29 A 6 14 1 25 HR Within 4' of the average setback of principal buildings on the same face block; no closer than 8' from the front property line. None, except a minimum 10-foot side setback is required on the side adjoining a residential district. 5 feet, except a minimum 20-foot rear setback is required if adjacent to or across an alley from a residential district. C-1 The lesser of 8' or the average setback of principal buildings on the same face block. None, except a minimum 10-foot side setback on any side adjoining an R-District. 5 feet, except 20' on any portion abutting or across an alley from an R-District C-2 A 
Maximum 25' 5 feet, except 20 feet if adjoining an R-District. C-3 Bldg 25' max 
Bldg 8' min 5', except 20' on any portion abutting or across an alley from an R-District. C-4 2.5 3 minimum, 
15' maximum. Buildings shall be set back a minimum of 25' from any bridge abutment unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer if he or she determines that the building will not interfere with the maintenance or reconstruction of the bridge and that utilities will not be adversely impacted. Build to edge of a public easement; if no public easement, 10' from high water mark or dockline established by City ordinance. D See Chapter 1347 for requirements T 25' 0 0 None, except 25' if abutting or adjacent to an R-district N/A GP 25' minimum, or as shown on the approved Master Site and Facilities Plan allowing a lessor setback. None, except 25' if abutting or adjacent to an R-District. N/A 25 feet 25' inland from the ordinary high water mark or any dockline established by City ordinance I 25' 0 0 15' minimum N/A NMC-1 and 
NMC-2 100' or as shown on approved Master Site & Facilities Plan. 0 0 5 feet, except 20' if abutting or adjacent to an R-district. 50' from ordinary high water mark of Grand Traverse Bay H-1 The lessor of 8 feet or the average setback of principal buildings on the same face block. 5 feet, except a 10' setback is required on a side adjoining an R-District. N/A H-2 25 feet or as shown on the approved Master Site and Facilities Plan allowing a lessor setback.  
1 For structures above grade on lots or tracts of land on Grand Traverse Bay, the setback is the greater of 30 percent of the lot width or the number listed on the chart above. 
2 Thirty-five percent of a building wall may be located no closer than 4' from the property line. 
3 Existing buildings closer than 2.5 feet that have been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or similar causes and located closer than 2.5 feet may be restored or rebuilt at the same location using the same foundation unless located in the right-of-way. 
(c)  Encroachments into the setbacks. No encroachments into the setbacks are allowed except those indicated in each district chapter and except barrier free ramps as approved by the Planning Director and except in the C-4 district, a building, balcony, porch or deck may project no more than 5 feet into a rear setback provided these projections are not less than 15 feet above grade and provided they do not project into any public right-of-way and except eaves, chimneys, sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed 2.5 feet are permitted to extend within the front or rear setbacks. 
(d)  Storage in an R-district yard. In an R-district, no yard, except the rear yard, shall be used for the location of a swimming pool or for the storage of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle or equipment. For the purposes of this Code, storage shall mean parking the vehicle or equipment in an area unused for the purpose for which it was designed for a period of 30 consecutive days or more. 
(e)  Contiguous lots. 2 or more parcels, lots of record or platted lots, when contiguous and when held in common ownership, shall be treated together as a single lot for the purposes of this Zoning Code, provided such lots are located in the same zoning district. 
(f)  Corner lots. On corner lots, the location of the required rear setback will be determined by the Planning Director, who will use the following guidelines in reaching a decision: 
(1)  The required rear setback is commonly located opposite the street frontage having the lessor dimension. 
(2)  The required rear setback is opposite the street upon which the address has been assigned. 
(3)  The required rear setback commonly abuts a public alley. 
(4)  The required rear setback is commonly located to conform to the established development pattern of adjacent properties on the face block. 
(g)  Nonconforming lots. 
(1)  When a lot of record as of the effective date of this ordinance has less area or width than herein required in the district in which it is located, and the owner of such lot does not own any other parcel adjacent thereto, such lot may nonetheless be used for the construction of a dwelling and for normal accessory uses subject to the standards of this Code. 
(2)  Where 2 or more abutting lots of record, which individually provide less area or width than herein required, are owned by the same party and such lots together create a parcel which complies with the area or width standards of this Zoning Code, such lots shall not thereafter be divided for the purpose of creating another buildable lot or parcel, except in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(h)  Compliance required. No setback area or lot existing at the time of adoption of this Zoning Code shall be reduced in dimensions or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein except as a result of government action. Setbacks or lots created after the effective date of this Zoning Code shall meet at least the minimum requirements established herein. 
(i)  Street-specific setbacks. The following setbacks are specific to the streets indicated: (Reserved) 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 490. Passed 4-17-00. Ord. 510. Passed 9-18-00. Ord. 576. Passed 10-7-02. Ord. 625. Passed 3-15-04. Ord. 653. Passed 8-16-04.) 
1368.03 - Lot width, lot area, impervious surface and density requirements. 
(a)  Density. Density standards serve several purposes. They match housing density with the availability of public services and with the carrying capacity of the land. For example, more housing can be allowed on flat areas than on steep, slide-prone zones. At the same time, density standards promote development opportunities for housing and promote urban densities in less developed areas. The density regulations are a tool to judge equivalent density when comparing standard and nonstandard land divisions (such as Planned Unit Developments). 
(b)  Lot size. In standard land divisions, lot size limits help to preserve the overall character of developed neighborhoods by assuring that new houses will generally have the same size lots as the surrounding built-up area. They also assure that development on a lot will, in most cases, be able to comply with all applicable development standards. 
(c)  Compliance required. Every single-family dwelling and every two-family dwelling erected or structurally altered after the effective date of this Zoning Code in the R-1a, R-1b, and R-2 districts shall be located on a lot. 
(d)  Impervious surface. Surface parking areas shall not exceed the total floor areas of all buildings on the lot in the C-4 and GP districts. In the NMC-1 and NMC-2 districts, the surface parking area shall not exceed 15 percent of the total area of any lot over 10 acres. 
(e)  Table. The lot width, lot area and impervious surface and density requirements for each district shall be as indicated in each district and as on the following chart: 
District Minimum Lot 
Width (feet) 1 Minimum 
Lot Area (square feet) Maximum 
Density (dwelling units 
per acre) Maximum 
Impervious 
Surface % OS 20 None N/A 20 RC 20 None 4.4 20 R-1a 90 9,000 Not applicable 30 R-1b 35/45 6 5,000 Not applicable 45 R-2 50 or 35 for a 
single-family dwelling 4,000 Not applicable 45 R-9 50 7,500 9 (18 4 ) 35 (45 5 ) R-15 50 7,500 15 (30 4 ) 40 (50 5 ) R-29 50 7,500 29 (58 4 ) 50 (60 5 ) HR 50 7,500 44 rooms/acre 70 C-1 20 3,750 N/A 60 C-2 20 3,750 N/A 70 C-3 20 3,750 N/A 80 C-4 None None N/A 100 3 D See Chapter 1347 for requirements T 20 None None 70 GP 20 None None 70 2 I 100 None None 80 PRD See Chapter 1352 for requirements NMC-1 20 None 15 30 2 NMC-2 20 None 29 50 2 H-1 20 None 29 70 H-2 20 None 29 60  
1 See access control restrictions, Traverse City Code, Section 1374.04. 
2 The surface parking area shall not exceed 15 percent of the total area of any lot over 10 acres. 
3 The surface parking area shall not exceed the total floor area of all buildings on the lot. 
4 A density bonus shall be provided equal to one market-rate unit for each affordable housing unit provided according to the requirements of Chapter 1376. Density shall not exceed the maximum density specified. 
5 The maximum impervious surface percentage may be increased by up to 10 percentage points for projects that include affordable housing units that meet the standards of Chapter 1376, as authorized by the Planning Director, if the modification is necessary to reasonably achieve the permitted density, including the bonus units; or to achieve a greater number of affordable housing units than the defined affordable housing incentives. 
6 The minimum lot width for parcels located north or east of the US31/M-72, east of Milliken Drive and south of Eastern Ave are 45 feet. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 489. Passed 4-17-00. Ord. 534. Passed 6-4-01. Ord. 551. Passed 12-3-01. Ord. 555. Passed 2-4-02. Ord. 568. Passed 7-11-02. Ord. 624. Passed 3-15-04. Ord. 654. Passed 8-16-04. Ord. 829. Passed 3-16-09. Ord. 832. Passed 5-4-09. Ord. 890. Passed 11-1-10. Ord. 917. Passed 6-6-11. Ord. 956. Passed 1-7-13) 
1368.04 - Condominiums. 
    Dimensional requirements for commercial and multi-family condominiums shall be computed on the basis of the entire condominium project land. dimensional requirements for residential, single and two-family condominiums shall be computed based on the lot lines as established in the condominium documents, or, if none, based on each separate structure and a hypothetical lot line as approved by the Planning Director after considering common elements, limited common elements, and private elements. The area of streets to be used by more than 1 separate condominium building shall not be included in lot area computations. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1368.05 - Compliance required. 
    Any building or structure erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered shall conform with the height, yard, bulk and other dimensional limits herein established for the district in which located. No portion of 1 lot, once established and/or improved with a building or structure shall be created unless each lot resulting from each such reduction, division or sale shall conform with all of the requirements established herein. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
Chapter 1370 - Nonconforming Uses[24] 
    The intent of this Zoning Code is to allow to continue a lawful use of any building or land existing on the effective date of this Zoning Code, or any amendment thereto, although it may not conform with this Zoning Code or amendment, but to encourage their improvement if it enhances the neighborhood. 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 
Cross reference- Signs, Ch. 1476 

1370.01 - Classifications. 
    There shall be the following classes of nonconforming uses: 
(a)  Class 1. Those where the use of the building or land does not conform to the zoning district use regulations; and 
(b)  Class 2. Those where the use of the building or land does comply with the zoning district use regulations, but such use does not meet the dimensional or parking regulations of this Code. Where the only reason for a nonconforming use being Class 2 is noncompliance with current off-street parking regulations, the provisions of this Zoning Code regarding off-street parking and powers of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall take precedence over this section to the extent they are inconsistent. (See Chapters 1324, Board of Zoning Appeals and 1374, Circulation and Parking.) 
(c)  Class 3. Those where the use of the building or land was a use as of right or a legal non-conforming use, but is later allowed only by special land use permit in the zone in which located. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1370.02 - General regulations. 
(a)  Enlargement or structural alterations. Nonconforming uses of property shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  A Class 1 nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or structurally altered when such alteration requires a building permit, nor shall they be expanded or increased in intensity of use, unless the Board of Zoning Appeals or Planning Director grants an exception as described in this Zoning Code. 
(2)  A Class 2 nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or structurally altered when such alteration requires a building permit, unless the resultant building creates no further violation of this Zoning Code than lawfully existed at the time of the enlargement or alteration. However, upon approval of the Planning Director, a Class 2 nonconforming use may be expanded to add floor space above the first floor level to the extent of the first floor encroachment, and a porch or other architectural feature which once existed and encroached in the required setback may be reconstructed, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the building plans for the addition shall be approved by the Planning Director, who will consider the relationship of the addition with the scale, materials and architectural style of the existing structure. 
b.  The addition shall not substantially degrade the light and air available to the neighboring properties. 
c.  The addition shall not include or utilize window or wall air conditioning units or other appliances or devices which may unnecessarily disturb neighbors due to their proximity to adjacent structures. 
d.  Ice, snow and stormwater from the addition shall be maintained within the boundaries of the subject property and shall not present a safety hazard to residents, guests or neighbors. 
(3)  A Class 3 nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or structurally altered without first obtaining a special land use permit for the existing use and the alteration, if enlargement or alteration would result in any of the following: 
a.  An increase or decrease in the square footage of the building by more than 10 percent, 
b.  Introduction of a new use on the site which is anticipated to increase daily motor vehicle trip-ends, 
c.  Addition of a separate building or structure occupied on a regular basis, 
d.  Addition or deletion of parking spaces, or 
e.  Significant alteration of traffic patterns adjacent to the site. 
(4)  A Class 2 nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or structurally altered when such alteration requires a building permit, unless the resultant building creates no further violation of this Zoning Code than lawfully existed at the time of the enlargement or alteration. However, a Class 2 nonconforming use may be expanded to extend an existing sidewall of a one- or two-family dwelling that encroaches in the required side setback, subject to the conditions listed in subsection (a)(2) above and the notice and appeal provisions of subsection (c) below, subject to front and rear setback requirements and impervious surface restrictions and providing such expansion or extension meets all applicable building codes. 
(b)  Repair or improvement of nonconforming buildings. A nonconforming use may be repaired or improved provided that such repair or improvement to a Class 1 nonconforming use is approved by the Planning Director and will do 1 or more of the following: 
(1)  Improve the structure only to add an unenclosed porch or another similar architectural feature that is in keeping with the surrounding architectural style. 
(2)  Improve the structure only to provide barrier free access or accommodation. 
(3)  Improve the structure only to accomplish changes recommended by the Historic Districts Commission. 
(4)  Clearly and convincingly improve the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood. 
(c)  Notice. Before deciding on the request for enlargement of a Class 2 nonconforming use or for repair or improvement of a Class 1 nonconforming use, the Planning Director shall notify all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. Notice shall be mailed and shall describe the request and indicate the deadline for written comments to be received by the Planning Director. The Planning Director's decision may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by an aggrieved person. 
(d)  Reconstruction and restoration. A nonconforming use damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or other similar causes may be restored or rebuilt, provided that such restoration for a Class 1 nonconforming use does not exceed 50 percent of its true cash value, exclusive of land and foundations, as determined for property tax assessment purposes. 
(e)  Change of use. A Class 1 nonconforming use shall not be changed to other than a permitted use unless the Board of Zoning Appeals grants an exception as described earlier in this Zoning Code. 
(f)  Prior construction approval. Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prohibit the completion of construction and use of a nonconforming building for which a building permit has been properly issued and substantial construction commenced prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code, provided that the entire building shall have been completed according to plans filed with the permit application within 1 year after the issuance of the building permit. 
(g)  Conconforming land uses. The nonconforming uses of land, where no building is located, may be continued, provided that the nonconforming land use shall not in any way be expanded or extended either on the same property or adjoining property. 
(h)  Nonconforming use certificate. A nonconforming use certificate may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a nonconforming use. The certificate shall specify the nature of the nonconformity and such other pertinent matters as may be deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator. Upon application for a nonconforming use certificate by all owners of record of the land in question, the Zoning Administrator shall issue or deny such certificate within 30 days or such greater time as may be mutually agreed upon. The application shall be in writing upon a form prepared by the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by such information as the applicant deems pertinent or as the Zoning Administrator may request. An applicant may appeal the denial of a certificate to the Board of Zoning Appeals. This administrative remedy shall be exhausted before a person alleges the existence of a nonconforming use by defense to a zoning enforcement action or otherwise. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 494. Passed 5-1-00. Ord. 593. Passed 1-06-03.) 
1370.03 - Loss of nonconforming use status. 
(a)  Loss. Status as a nonconforming use shall be lost and the nonconformity shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning Code if any of the following occur: 
(1)  Increasing the non-conformity. Unless otherwise allowed or except where permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, expansion or change of the use or structure in such a way so as to increase the size, degree or intensity of the nonconformity; 
(2)  Zoning violation. Except for the initial nonconformity, any violation of the Zoning Code; or 
(3)  Abandonment of the use. Intent to abandon a nonconforming use may be presumed where the use ceases for more than a year and the owner has not expressed in writing an intent to maintain the use within 30 days after being requested in writing to do so. If nonconforming use status is lost, all future use shall be in conformity with this Zoning Code and the initial nonconforming use may not be continued or re-established. 
(4)  Reduction. If a nonconforming use or structure is reduced or changed in such a way so as to decrease the size, degree or intensity of the nonconformity, the use or structure may not thereafter be expanded or changed to cause an increase in the nonconformity. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1370.04 - Illegal uses. 
    Nonconforming uses of buildings or land established without a required building permit or land use permit, or those nonconforming uses which cannot be proven conclusively as existing prior to the effective date of the section upon which the nonconformity is based, are declared illegal uses and shall be discontinued. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1370.05 - District boundary changes. 
    Whenever the boundaries of a district are changed so as to transfer an area from 1 district to another district of another classification, this chapter shall also apply to any existing uses or structures that become nonconforming as a result of the boundary changes. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99.) 
1370.06 - Elimination. 
    In accordance with Act 207 of the Public Acts of 1921, as amended (M.C.L. 125.581 et seq.), the City may acquire properties on which nonconforming uses or structures are located, by condemnation or other means, and may remove such uses and structures. The resultant property may be leased or sold for a conforming use or may be used for a public use. The net cost of such acquisition may be assessed against a benefit district, may be paid from other sources of revenue, or may be paid by a combination of special assessments and other revenue. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
Chapter 1372 - Landscaping[25] 
    The process of development may require the alteration of existing topography and soil structure, the disruption of native vegetation and the expansion of impervious surface area over the development site. The cumulative effects of the land altering process extend far beyond the property lines of an individual development site and if development is not undertaken within the context of the broader community, it will not only degrade the individual development, but also the community of which it is a part. It is, therefore, the intent of this chapter to protect and manage vegetation to: 
(1)  Aid in the stabilization of the environmental balance through air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater protection and recharge and the control of stormwater runoff. 
(2)  Safeguard and enhance private and public property values and encourage continued investment in the community. 
(3)  Enhance community appearance, identify unique natural beauty, and promote quality development at a suitable scale. 
(4)  Provide visual screens between land uses of differing character and use intensities. 
(5)  Prevent reductions in the City's urban forest. 
(6)  Provide for the preservation of larger native trees which are valuable amenities to the urban environment that, once destroyed, can only be replaced after generations; and 
(7)  Ensure that the local stock of native trees and vegetation is replaced. 
    It is recognized that alternative design concepts exist which, if adopted, could exceed the results envisioned using these development standards. It is intended that the requirements of this chapter be flexible and permit latitude in site design and the use of plant materials when it can be shown that variation from the requirements will provide a development substantially better than that achievable using the minimum standards of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall be considered the minimum development standards and not a design goal. 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 

1372.01 - Compliance required. 
(a)  For all uses except one- and two-family residential uses, compliance with this chapter shall be required for: 
(1)  Any new building, rebuilding, conversion, enlargement or structural alteration requiring a building permit and having a value of $20,000.00 or more; 
(2)  Land clearing as described in this Zoning Code; or 
(3)  Parking areas that are required to comply with Section 1374.03, Motor Vehicle Parking. 
(Ord. No. 1070 . Passed 4-2-18) 
1372.02 - Alternative compliance. 
    The Planning Director may approve variations from strict compliance with this chapter when an applicant can demonstrate that the following apply to a specific development site: 
(1)  When topography, shape, size or other natural features make full compliance impractical or impossible. 
(2)  When space limitations or prevailing development patterns in the surrounding neighborhood justify alternative compliance for in fill projects and redevelopment in older established areas of the City. 
(3)  When safety considerations warrant alternative compliance. 
(4)  When there is not an alternative in the practical siting of a building, location of site access or the location of underground utilities to service the site. 
(5)  When the alternative compliance plan is equal to or superior in its ability to fulfill the intent of this chapter. 
1372.03 - Standards and materials. 
(a)  General performance standards. The following general performance standards shall apply whenever compliance is required: 
(1)  All areas not covered by buildings, parking areas, driveways, walkways, pedestrian plazas or other pedestrian oriented impervious surfaces or water surfaces shall be planted with living vegetation, including canopy trees, shrubbery and ground covers. The combination of plant materials selected shall be placed in harmonious and natural associations and represent the approved indigenous landscape materials and their cultivars listed in Appendix 3. 
(2)  Not less than 80 percent of any landscape area shall be covered by plant materials. Stone and other mulches, grass and other ground covers, pedestrian walks, other impervious surfaces or water surfaces may cover the remaining 20 percent of the landscape area. 
(3)  The general site topography and any natural landforms unique to the property shall be maintained and made part of the development whenever possible to reinforce the local and regional character. 
(4)  All trees shall be located to allow sufficient room for growth. 
(5)  Landscape materials shall not obstruct access to or view of fire hydrants or other fire connections. 
(b)  Landscape materials. The following landscape material requirements shall apply whenever compliance is required: 
(1)  All landscape plant materials preserved or used pursuant to the provisions of this Code shall be healthy and compatible with local climate, site soils characteristics, drainage and available water supply. 
(2)  Deciduous canopy trees required by this Code shall not be less than 2.5 inches diameter at breast height. 
(3)  Coniferous trees required by this Code shall be at least 6 feet in height when planted. 
(4)  All shrubs required shall be of a size generally known in the nursery industry as requiring a 5 gallon container. 
(c)  Irrigation and maintenance standards. The following irrigation and maintenance standards shall apply whenever compliance is required: 
(1)  All landscape plant materials required by this Code shall be supplied with a watering system sufficient to maintain the plants in a healthy condition. 
(2)  All plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition. Dead and unsalvageable plant materials shall be replaced with the same size and variety of plant materials originally required on the site development plan within 30 days of the "Notice to Replace" issued by the City. Replacement may be delayed if the Planning Director determines that circumstances beyond the control of the property owner prevent timely replacement. 
(d)  Utilities. All utility lines such as electric, telephone, cable television and other similar lines shall be installed underground. All utility junction boxes, access boxes and pad mounted fixtures shall be appropriately screened with landscape materials. 
(e)  Existing vegetation. The following standards shall apply to existing site vegetation whenever compliance is required: 
(1)  Existing healthy trees, of an approved species listed on Appendix 3, shall be preserved and incorporated into the final development plan. 
(2)  Existing healthy trees and shrubs located within required setbacks and areas not required for development shall be preserved. 
(3)  Trees to be preserved shall be pruned to remove dead, diseased or irregular branching, but the crown form characteristic of the respective species shall be maintained. 
(4)  Preserved trees shall be protected with sturdy, highly visible barriers around the tree or group of trees, at approximately thecritical root zone or drip line and a tree preservation plan shall be submitted and approved by the Planning Director. 
(5)  The critical root zone of the tree shall remain undisturbed by cutting, filling or storage of materials and equipment during the development process. 
(6)  Healthy, younger trees on development sites shall be preserved wherever possible to allow normal succession as older trees are lost. 
1372.04 - Screening requirements for parking areas. 
    Except in RC, R-1a, R-1b or R-2 zoning districts, parking areas shall be screened from the alley and from neighboring residential properties whenever parking is developed according to the following: 
(1)  Unless waived by the Planning Director, screening shall be provided within a required setback area and the screening shall establish an opaque screen at least 5 feet in height as measured from the finished parking area grade where it adjoins the setback. 
(2)  Required screening of parking areas shall be achieved through the use of a decorative masonry screenwall, earth berms and landscape plant materials, either in combination or independently. 
(3)  Specific screening elements may be relocated, redesigned or partially eliminated at the direction of the City Engineer to correct clear vision or other safety considerations. 
(4)  Required screening may be interrupted to provide reasonable pedestrian or bicycle access to a property from a public right-of-way. 
1372.05 - Landscape development internal to a surface parking area. 
(a)  Any use providing fewer than 20 parking spaces shall comply with Section 1372.03 (Standards and Materials), Section 1372.04 (Screening Requirements for Parking Areas), and Section 1372.06 (Landscape Requirements for Street Rights-of-Way), as otherwise applicable. Where the parking area is part of a development that requires a site plan, then the provisions of Section 1372.07 (Landscape Plan) also apply. 
(b)  Any use providing or requiring 20 or more parking spaces shall comply with the following standards shall comply with Section 1372.03 (Standards and Materials), Section 1372.04 (Screening Requirements for Parking Areas), and Section 1372.06 (Landscape Requirements for Street Rights-of-Way), as otherwise applicable. Where the parking area is part of a development that requires a site plan, then the provisions of Section 1372.07 (Landscape Plan) also apply. In addition, the applicant: 
(1)  The applicant shall supply internal landscaping not less than 8 percent of the off street parking area, including access and egress drives and such landscape areas. 
(2)  Within the boundaries of the parking area, the applicant shall provide not less than 1 deciduous canopy tree for every 10 parking spaces. The trees shall meet the size and species requirements for Internal Parking Lot Trees in the City's approved Tree List . 
(3)  The required trees shall be planted within landscape islands that meet the following standards: 
a.  No required landscape area shall contain less than 175 square feet or provide any dimension of less than 8 feet. 
b.  Landscaping within the landscape island shall meet the Landscaping definition in Section 1370.03. 
c.  All perimeter and interior landscaped areas must have protective curbs along the edges. Curbs separating landscaped areas from parking areas may allow stormwater runoff to pass through them. Bollards or other protective barriers may be used at the front ends of parking spaces. Curbs may be perforated or have gaps or breaks. Trees must have adequate protection from car doors as well as car bumpers. 
d.  Trees and landscape islands shall be distributed throughout the parking lot and shall be situated and designed to provide tree canopy throughout the parking lot. 
e.  For the purpose of calculating the amount of required internal landscaping in any parking area, pedestrian walks are excluded if the walks are constructed using a separate and contrasting paving material which provides a durable surface. 
(Ord. No. 1070 . Passed 4-2-18) 
1372.06 - Landscape requirements for street rights-of-way. 
    The following landscape requirements for street rights-of-way shall apply when compliance is required: 

(1)  With the approval of the City Forester, canopy trees shall be provided along the public street in a planting area provided in the treelawn and at a maximum distance of 50 feet between trees. The trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with utilities, streets, sidewalks, street lights, sight distances, clear vision areas, and shall not be planted closer than 8 feet to fire hydrants. 
(2)  All trees shall have a minimum size of 2.5 inches caliper diameter at breast height. 
(3)  Subsequent or replacement trees shall conform to the type of existing trees in a given area, provided that, if any deviation is anticipated, it must be done only with the permission of the City Forester. In a newly planted area, only 1 type of tree may be used on a given street unless otherwise specified by the City Forester. 
(4)  Tree varieties which exhibit desirable characteristics such as full symmetrical form, deep non invasive root systems and tolerance of drought and road salt should be utilized. 
(5)  Trees shall be of sufficient size to be pruned to a 7 foot branching height with 1 main stem upon planting. 
(6)  If existing trees can be preserved within the tree lawn, the requirement for additional street tree plantings may be reduced or eliminated by the Planning Director. 
1372.07 - Landscape plan. 
    Where compliance is required, a landscape plan shall be required for any development requiring a site plan and no building or land use permit shall be issued until a landscape plan has been submitted to and approved by the Planning Director. All landscape plans shall utilize the required site plan as a base sheet and shall include the following additional information: 
(1)  A tree survey, sealed by a landscape architect, surveyor, engineer or architect licensed to practice in the State of Michigan. The survey shall establish the location, species and assessment of the general health and condition of all trees with a 6 inch or greater diameter at breast height, their approximate height and spread or crown diameter in the disturbed area of the site. 
(2)  A calculation verifying the minimum percentage of landscape area has been met and the percentage of landscape area dedicated to pedestrian ways and inorganic mulches. 
(3)  A detailed description of either written or graphic form, indicating the applicant's plans to protect the existing trees to be protected from damage during site development and construction. 
(4)  Contour lines at minimum 2 foot intervals shall be shown for sites with grades in excess of 6 percent slope; otherwise, proposed and existing elevations at sufficient locations on the site to clearly show drainage patterns. 
(5)  Description of the type of equipment and methods to be used to irrigate the required landscape areas. 
(6)  Location, height, elevation/section and material of proposed screening walls, fencing, retaining walls and berming. Berms are to be delineated by 1 foot contours and designed with slopes not to exceed 1:3 gradient, a minimum of 2 feet between contour at the top of the berm, and slopes protected with sod, shrubs, or other types of natural ground covers. 
(7)  Complete description of plant materials shown on the plan, including common and botanical names, quantities, container or caliper sizes, heights, spread and spacing at installation. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
Chapter 1374 - Circulation and Parking[26] 
    The purpose of chapter is: 
 To make Traverse City safe and accessible by pedestrians, cyclists, drivers and passengers. 
 To give equal consideration to the pedestrian in the design of all public and private parking areas. 
 To promote site designs that help to reduce crashes and conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles. 
 To maintain the utility of the public rights-of-way to move goods and people safely and adequately. 
 To promote interesting street edges that invite people to walk. 
 To encourage a healthier transportation mix. 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
State Law reference- Handicapped parking restrictions, M.C.L.A.  257.942a 
Cross reference- Parking generally,  410.03, Ch. 480 

1374.01 - Pedestrian travel ways. 
(a)  Compliance required. All developments except for one and two-family dwellings, shall provide clearly defined pedestrian travelways from the public sidewalk to main entrances of the buildings or uses of the land. 
(b)  Requirements. A sidewalk a minimum of 5 feet wide free from obstructions shall be constructed from the public walk to main entries of buildings. On lots where there are multiple principal buildings or main entries, sidewalks meeting the requirements above shall be provided. 
(c)  Construction standards. Pedestrian travelways shall be physically separate from the parking area except where they cross a vehicle maneuvering lane, in which case the travelway shall be defined with a separate and contrasting material such as the use of a textured concrete or brick paver. 
1374.02 - Bicycle parking. 
(a)  Compliance required. Whenever full off-street parking compliance is required, a minimum of 1 bicycle rack or locker is required and shall be located within 50 feet of the main entrance of a building or inside a building in a location that is easily accessible by bicyclists. For sites that require more than 25 motor vehicle spaces, the ratio is 1 rack for every 25 motor vehicle spaces. When units of measurement determining the number of required parking spaces result in a fractional space, any fraction up to and including 1/2 shall be disregarded and fractions over 1/2 shall require 1 parking space. 
(b)  Exception. The requirements of this section do not apply to residential uses in the RC, R-1a, R-1b and R-2 districts or uses in the C-4 district. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Bicycle lockers. Where required bicycle parking is provided in lockers, the lockers must be securely anchored. 
(2)  Bicycle racks. Where required bicycle parking is provided in racks, the racks must meet the following standards: 
a.  The bicycle frame and 1 wheel can be locked to the rack with a high security, U-shaped shackle lock if both wheels are left on the bicycle. 
b.  A bicycle 6 feet long can be securely held with its frame supported so that the bicycle cannot be pushed or fall in a manner that will damage the wheels or components; and 
c.  The rack must be securely anchored. 
(3)  Maneuvering areas. 
a.  Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving another bicycle; and 
b.  There must be an aisle at least 5 feet wide behind all required bicycle parking to allow room for bicycle maneuvering. 
(Ord. 774. Passed. 11-5-07.) 
1374.03 - Motor vehicle parking. 
(a)  Compliance required. In all districts, except the C-4 districts (where the provision of off-street parking is not required) and those properties located within 500 feet of a public parking structure or transit center, off-street parking shall be provided as required by this chapter unless otherwise provided by parking waiver pursuant to this Zoning Code. In the C-4 district and those properties located within 500 feet of a public parking structure or transit center, when private parking is provided, it shall meet all requirements of this chapter with the exception of the parking space requirements of subsection (d). Full off-street parking compliance is required as follows: 
(1)  New construction. For all newly constructed buildings. 
(2)  Enlargement. Whenever a building is expanded to increase its gross floor area. 
(3)  Change in use. Whenever the use of a building or portion of a building is changed to accommodate a use requiring more parking pursuant to this Zoning Code than the former use. 
(4)  Parking area construction and expansion. For all new parking areas and whenever existing parking areas are expanded. Normal maintenance, such as regrading of legal nonconforming gravel parking areas or the addition of top coat or sealer to existing paved parking areas, will not trigger full off-street parking compliance; however, pulverizing an existing asphalt, concrete or other paved parking surface, the outright removal or substantial modification of the paved surface in preparation for paving and demolition by neglect which serves to return a parking area substantially to gravel or other aggregate surface, shall, for the purposes of this code, be considered a new parking area. 
(b)  Land use permits; plans; improvement guarantees. Land use permits shall be required for parking area construction or expansion in all districts. In addition, the following shall be submitted: 
(1)  Plans. For any parking construction or expansion a plan shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer prior to the commencement of construction. Such plan shall include: 
a.  Setbacks, spacing and size of spaces, 
b.  Landscaping and lighting (where applicable), 
c.  Ingress and egress, 
d.  Surfacing and drainage, 
e.  Proposed and existing grades, 
f.  General specifications, and 
g.  Parking details and any other information as shall be deemed necessary by the Planning Director or City Engineer prior to the issuance of a land use permit. 
Except for parking areas and driveways for one and two-family dwellings, such plans shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer or architect who is licensed to do business in the state. Specific plan requirements may be waived by the Planning Director or City Engineer when, in their opinion, the proposed changes do not warrant full compliance. In such cases, a written opinion by the Planning Director must be filed with the application for the permit. 
(2)  Improvement guarantees. For any parking construction, screening or other site development for which a land use permit is required, a certificate of surety, performance bond, or other financial guarantee, as approved by the Planning Director, in the amount of 110 percent of the estimated construction costs, shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a land use permit or building permit and shall be retained until such site development is completed and found to be in full compliance with the site plan approved by the Planning Director. Where landscape materials are required to be provided or mature trees are required to be saved in any development, the financial guarantee shall include the cost of plant materials and the total appraised value of individual trees to be saved and shall remain in effect for not less than 1 growing season after planting or completion of project site work, whichever is last. 
(3)  Leased parking. The owner or occupier of the property to be served shall own or lease all property utilized to meet minimum parking requirements. The lease shall include a provision that the lease may not be canceled without the permission of the Planning Director. The Planning Director may allow cancellation of all or part of a lease where parking compliance is achieved in some other way or a parking exception is granted. 
(c)  Location of parking areas. Off-street parking areas shall be located in the same district as the use they are intended to serve, in a district that allows the use, or as provided by a special land use permit or the granting order of a planned unit development. In addition, parking areas are to meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Front setbacks. Except as otherwise contained in this Zoning Code or as indicated below, parking shall be provided behind or to the side of a principal building as follows: 
a.  R-1a: 3 feet minimum. 
b.  R-1b: 3 feet minimum. 
All other districts: Other than in the R-1a, R-1b and R-2 Districts, a parking area shall be set back a distance equal to the setback of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is greater. For through lots, parking may be provided streetward of the principal building on the street that carries less traffic, but in no case closer than 25 feet from the front property line. 
(2)  Side setbacks. In the R-1a, R-1b and R-2 districts, the side setback shall be 2 feet. In all other districts, any parking area which is contiguous to the side property line of an R-District shall provide a minimum side setback of 10 feet from the side contiguous to the R-District. All other parking areas shall maintain a minimum 5-foot side setback. If shared parking is developed, these setbacks would affect only the perimeter of the combined parcels. See Appendix 2, Figure 1-5. 
(3)  Rear setbacks. In the R-1a, R-1b and R-2 districts, no rear setback is required. In all other districts, a rear setback of 20 feet shall be required for any parking area abutting, adjacent to or across a public alley from an R-District and a 5-foot rear setback shall be required otherwise with the exception of the following: 
a.  A rear setback requirement may be waived by the Planning Director to allow parking designed to back directly into a public alley when it can be demonstrated that the property exhibits site constraints which preclude or render permitted parking configurations impractical. Whenever such parking is approved, an area no less than 10 feet in depth shall be provided immediately in front of the parking and the provided area shall be developed according to the landscaping requirements of Section 1372.05(a) and (b). See Appendix 2, Figure 1-6. 
b.  A required 20 foot rear setback may be reduced in depth by up to 50 percent when a decorative masonry screenwall at least 5 feet in height is constructed along the 10 foot setback line and the area between the wall and the rear property line is landscaped according to the requirements for front yards in Section 1372.05, Landscape Development Internal to a Parking Area. 
(4)  Off-site locations. 
a.  All off-street parking areas, except in R-districts, shall be located on the immediate premises or within 500 feet as measured from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest point of the building intended to be served. 
b.  The required number of parking spaces may be reduced on a 1/1 ratio for permit parking spaces and leased spaces in a public parking area within 500 feet of the building to be served. The termination of such a permit or lease shall require replacement of the parking spaces so reduced. 
(5)  Use of public right-of-way. 
a.  The required number of off-street parking spaces for a specific use may be reduced in recognition of the number of available on-street parking spaces on a curbed street abutting the property. 
b.  Parking is prohibited on the treelawn portion of the right-of-way except where permitted by sign. 
(d)  Requirements. The number of required off-street parking spaces shall be provided by a property owner according to the following schedule. All requirements are minimum unless otherwise noted. 
Residential 1 per dwelling unit Specialized Housing Adult foster care home 1 per 3 residents Child care center 1 per 10 children Residential care and treatment facilities 1 per 3 beds Independent living 1 per unit Institutions High schools, colleges 3 per 10 students All other schools 1.5 per classroom Places of worship 1 per 4 seats in main area of worship Hospitals 1 per 400 square feet gross floor area Governmental offices, post offices 1 per 400 square feet Auditoriums (excluding schools) 1 per 3 seats Commercial Office, financial institutions, retail 1 per 350 square feet gross floor area (Max. 1 per 150 sq. feet) Medical office 1 per 300 square feet gross floor area (Max. 1 per 150 sq. feet) Furniture, antique and bicycle shops 1 per 850 square feet gross floor area Theaters 1 per 3 seats Restaurants Family 0.4 per seat (alt. 2 for every 5 seats)   Fine/Banquet Halls/Fast Food 0.7 per seat (alt. 3 for every 4 seats) Lodging facilities 1 per room or suite Marinas 1 per boat slip Grocery, hardware/all other uses 1 per 325 square feet gross floor area Industrial Office 1 per 350 square feet gross floor area Assembly/Warehouse/Manufacturing 1 per 600 square feet gross floor area  
  Uses not listed. Any use not specifically addressed or referred to in this list shall have parking requirements determined by the Planning Director. 
  Fractional spaces. When units of measurement determining the number of required parking spaces result in a fractional space, any fraction up to and including 1/2 shall be disregarded and fractions over 1/2 shall require 1 parking space. 
  Bicycle rack. In all except R-Districts, 1 on-site bicycle rack accommodating 4 bicycles may replace no more than 1 motor vehicle parking space. 
  Multiple uses. Where a building has a multiple use occupancy of any 2 or more residential, commercial, office or industrial uses, the parking required shall be computed on the basis of the gross floor area in each use. 
  Upper story dwellings. Additional parking is not required for upper story dwellings above a first floor commercial or office use in a C-1, C-2, C-3 or H-1 district, however, any parking area supplied shall conform to the provisions of this Code. 
  Buildings less than 500 square feet gross floor area for non-residential uses are exempt from parking space requirements. 
(e)  Parking exception. The Planning Director may grant a parking exception which reduces parking space requirements or location requirements of this Zoning Code, if it has been clearly demonstrated that the provisions of full parking or location requirements are unnecessary or that such requirements would create a practical difficulty with the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or convenience. Storage areas, other than warehousing space, deemed by the Planning Director to be impractical for the other occupancies, shall require no off-street parking. 
(f)  Limitations on use of parking areas. 
(1)  The required parking area shall be used solely for the parking of private passenger vehicles or vehicles used in the business operation. 
(2)  No commercial repair work or service of any kind, and no sale, display or storage of new or used vehicles which are not for the use of the occupant, employees and patrons, shall be conducted in such required parking area. 
(3)  A parking area in an R-district for a residential use shall be restricted to the use of its owner or lessee and under no circumstances shall such facility be used for a non-residential use or in conjunction with any non-residential use, including the provision of access to a non-residential use or the storage of snow removed from non-residential property or use. 
(4)  No truck, trailer or other vehicle having an auxiliary refrigeration unit shall be parked overnight within 150 feet of any residence district while the refrigeration unit is in operation. 
(g)  Design and construction standards. The following standards for off-street parking areas apply to all uses in all districts except as specifically noted: 
(1)  Layout. Off-street parking areas shall be designed, constructed, and maintained as follows and in accordance with the standards set forth in the table and drawing at the end of this section. 
a.  All maneuvering lanes shall permit only one-way traffic movements, with the exception of the 90 degree pattern where two-way traffic may be permitted. 
b.  Each parking space shall have direct unimpeded access to a maneuvering lane and dead-end maneuvering lanes shall be permitted only with the 90 degree pattern where the maneuvering lane has been extended by a minimum of 4 feet beyond the last parking space to create a back-up area for exiting vehicles. 
c.  Maneuvering lanes shall not be located within a required setback. A driveway may cross a setback from the street to the parking area. 
d.  Stacking of parking spaces may be allowed by the Planning Director for employee parking only. 
(2)  Surfacing. 
a.  All parking areas, other than for a single or two-family residential use, shall be paved with concrete, bituminous asphalt, perforated concrete, brick or other permanent equal as approved by the City Engineer. 
b.  Any parking area for single or two-family residential use shall, at a minimum, be surfaced and the area clearly defined with gravel, crushed stone, concrete, asphalt, brick or equal material, and be maintained substantially free of dust, mud and standing water. 
c.  All parking spaces other than for single and two-family residential use shall be striped with suitable paint, reflective tape or other approved contrasting material which is applied upon or as an integral part of the pavement. 
(3)  Curb types. All parking areas except those for single and two-family dwellings shall have permanent 4 inch minimum high granite, concrete curb or concrete curb and gutter to channel the flow of vehicular traffic, define and contain parking, protect landscaped areas and individual trees and to define and separate pedestrian travelways in the interest of safety and efficient parking area utilization. In the Industrial District, curbing is required only for that portion of a parking area including the approach driveways and parking lot facing the street. See Appendix 2, Figure 1-7. All landscaped islands shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by curbing, however limited areas of the curb may be lowered to parking area grade, as approved by the City Engineer to accommodate the secondary use of landscape areas for the retention of storm-water runoff and snow storage. The Planning Director may approve variations from strict compliance with the curbing requirements when the applicant can provide an alternative design that is equal to or superior in its ability to channel the flow of vehicular traffic, define and contain parking, protect landscaped areas and individual trees and to define and separate pedestrian travelways. 
(4)  Storm-water management. All parking areas shall provide for storm-water management pursuant to Traverse City Code Chapter 1068, Groundwater Protection and Stormwater Runoff Control. 
(5)  Screening. Screening shall be provided pursuant to Traverse City Code Chapter 1372, Landscaping. 
Circulation and Parking   1374.03(g)(l)       PARKING LAYOUT STANDARDS PARKING 
ANGLE 
(DEGREES) MINIMUM 
MANEUVERING LANE 
WIDTH (FEET) PARKING LANE 
WIDTH (FEET) PARKING SPACE 
LENGTH (FEET) TOTAL MINIMUM WIDTH 
OF 1 TIER PLUS 
MANEUVERING LANE (FEET) TOTAL MINIMUM WIDTH 
OF 2 TIERS PLUS 
MANEUVERING LANE (FEET) 0 12 8 20 20 28 30 12 8 18 30 48 45 14 8 18 32 50 60 16 8 18 34 52 75 18 8 18 36 54 90 20 8 18 38 56  

(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord. 537. Passed 6-4-01. Ord. 540. Passed 7-16-01. Ord. 536. Passed 6-4-01. Ord. 569. Passed 7-1-02. Ord. 575. Passed 8-19-02. Ord. 766. Passed 7-2-07. Ord. 923. Passed 10-3-11. Ord 967. Passed. 6-3-13. Ord 1018. Passed 4-6-15; Ord. 1065 . Passed 2-5-18; Ord. 1081 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
1374.04 - Driveways and access requirements. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to regulate the number, location and spacing of driveway entrances to public streets from private property and to encourage the joint use of driveways and alternative access ways wherever possible so as to minimize the frequency of traffic conflict points, increase safety and protect the traffic carrying capacity of arterial and collector streets. 
(b)  Restrictions: 
(1)  No new driveways are permitted on a new primary arterial or new collector street. 
(2)  No new driveways are permitted from streets in the C-4 District, except to service parking areas on properties that do not have access to an alley provided the standards in Section 1346.01 are met. 
(3)  No new driveways are permitted on 8 th Street between Woodmere Avenue and Union Street except to service parking areas on properties that do not have access to an alley or access street. 
(4)  A service driveway for a dumpster(s) in the C-4 District with a minimum capacity of 3 cubic yards is allowed provided the property does not have access to an alley. The driveway width shall not exceed 10 feet. 
(5)  For a single or two-family residential use, parcels without alley access are limited to 1 driveway opening per parcel. 
(c)  Minimum spacing regulations. The following minimum driveway spacing requirements shall apply to arterial and collector streets in all districts. Driveways located in proximity to another driveway on the same side of the street shall not be closer than the linear footage established by the following: 
Street Type Alternate Access Available No Alternate 
Access Available Arterial 200 feet 100 feet Collector 200 feet 100 feet  
(d)  Minimum distance from street intersections. Driveways shall not be located nearer to street intersections than established by the following. Minimum spacing is measured along the street curbline and is determined by the linear footage from the end of the intersection curb radius to the end of the driveway curb radius. 
If a driveway 
enters a street 
classified as: And the 
intersecting street 
is classified as: Minimum spacing for driveways 
entering a lane 
approaching the 
intersection (feet): Minimum spacing for driveways 
entering a lane 
leaving the intersection (feet): Access Access, collector 
or arterial 15 15 Collector Access, collector 
or arterial 50 50 Arterial Access 50 50 Arterial Collector 50 50 Arterial Arterial 50 50  
(e)  Exceptions. In all districts: 
(1)  Improvement and enlargement of existing buildings and sites. 
a.  A building or site existing at the time of adoption of this Zoning Code having driveway access which does not meet the requirements set forth in subsection (c) hereof may be improved, enlarged or structurally altered, provided no additional driveways are constructed. 
b.  A building that is replaced or enlarged or a site which is altered to an extent more than 20 percent of its value, as determined for tax assessment purposes, must comply fully with these public street access regulations. 
(2)  Residential lots. Any residential building or driveway constructed after the effective date of this zoning code which has access to a maintained alley shall not have access to a street nor shall a parking area be located in the front yard. For parcels having alley access, the parking of a boat, motor home, camper, utility trailer or other recreational vehicle is limited to the rear yard. 
(3)  Further exceptions. Further exceptions to driveway minimum spacing regulations in paragraphs (c) and (d) hereof may be granted upon approval of the City Engineer. The distance requirement may be reduced by no more than 50 percent if the City Engineer determines that the requested exception, along with possible additional exceptions in the same area, will meet the following findings: 
a.  The character of the street or neighborhood shall not be diminished or negatively impacted. 
b.  It is necessary for reasonable use of the lot. 
c.  It shall not contravene the intent and purpose of this Zoning Code. 
d.  It meets other conditions the City Engineer may specify regarding the health and safety aspects of the exception. 
(f)  Design standards for single or two-family uses. The minimum width of a driveway measured at the throat is 8 feet and the maximum width is 16 feet on all streets or private streets for single or two-family uses. A parking area and driveway width in the front yard shall be the lessor of 40 percent of the lot width or 32 feet. 
(g)  Design standards for all other uses. For all other uses: 
(1)  Minimum angle to street. The minimum angle of the driveway to the street shall be 60 degrees. 
(2)  Maximum width at throat. 
a.  The maximum width of a driveway measured at the throat shall be 24 feet on arterial and collector streets. 
b.  The maximum width of a drive measured at the throat on all other streets shall be 20 feet. 
c.  Such width may be increased upon approval of the City Engineer to a maximum of 32 feet on major streets so designated under the Major streets Plan pursuant to 1951 Public Act 51. 
(h)  Backing into streets or alleys. Except for one and two-family dwellings located in districts other than the C-4 District, backing from a private parking area directly into a street or private street is prohibited. Under certain circumstances described in this chapter backing into an alley is permitted for all uses. 
(Ord. 766. Passed 7-2-07. Ord. 794. Passed 4-7-08. Ord. 826. Passed 2-2-09; Ord. 1081 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
1374.05 - Delivery truck loading requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of these regulations that the necessary loading and unloading of motor vehicles shall not unduly interfere with the use of public streets and alleys, and that every use which customarily receives or distributes goods by motor vehicles shall provide for the on-site storage and handling of such motor vehicles. 
(b)  Parking spaces for carriers. Except in the C-4 districts where the provisions of this section would be impractical, uses which customarily receive or distribute goods by motor vehicle shall provide, on the premises, in addition to the off-street parking required, sufficient space for that number of carrier vehicles that will be at the premises at the same time on an average day. 
(c)  Design and construction requirements. Except in the C-4 districts where the provisions of this section would be impractical, there shall be provided off-street, on-site space adequate for the standing, docking, loading, maneuvering and unloading of motor vehicles. This area shall not substantially interfere with required off-street parking areas, and shall be designed as follows: 
(1)  Access and maneuvering. Access to a truck standing, loading and unloading space or berth shall be arranged as to provide sufficient off-street maneuvering space without utilizing such street and alley for this purpose. 
(2)  Loading docks and berths; location and screening. Loading docks shall be located so as not to be visible from a public street or from any R-district. Where any loading space or berth adjoins or is visible from a public street or R-District, there shall be provided a masonry wall not less than 6 feet in height and a landscape area providing at least 1 canopy tree to provide screening to a height of 14 feet within 5 years of installation, between such street or R-district and the loading space. 
(3)  Development requirements. Off-street loading spaces and access drives shall be paved and shall conform to all drainage and lighting requirements of this Code. 
(d)  Exception. The Planning Director may grant an exception which changes the loading requirements of this Zoning Code if it has been clearly demonstrated that the provision of loading facilities is unnecessary or that such requirements would create a practical difficulty with the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or convenience. 
(Ord. 987. Passed 1-6-14) 
1374.06 - Drive-through standards. 
    Purpose: The regulations of this chapter are intended to allow for drive-through facilities by reducing the negative impacts they may create. Of special concern are noise from idling cars and voice amplification equipment, and queued traffic interfering with off-site traffic and pedestrian flow. The specific purposes of this chapter are to: 
  Reduce noise and visual impacts on abutting uses, particularly residential uses. 
  Promote safer and more efficient on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation. 
  Reduce conflicts between queued vehicles and traffic on adjacent streets. 
    Standards for all drive-through facilities are as follows: 
(1)  The service lanes shall provide sufficient space so that motor vehicles will not impede the circulation of pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists. 
(2)  Provisions shall be made to safely accommodate customers without motor vehicles at any time the drive-through operation is in service. 
(3)  The drive-through facility shall be accessory to a full-service, indoor, on-site use. 
(4)  The service lanes shall meet the landscape requirement of section 1372.04. 
(5)  The service lanes shall not be located between the associated building and public street. 
(6)  Regardless of the street classification, all driveways must be at least 50 feet from a street intersection. 
(7)  When abutting R zoned land, drive-through facilities with outdoor speakers must document in advance the facility will meet the requirements of the noise control chapter. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99. Ord 529. Passed 4-2-01. Ord. 860. Passed 2-16-10.) 
Chapter 1375 - Outdoor Lighting 
    It is the intent of Outdoor Lighting regulations to: 
  Minimize light trespass and light straying from artificial light sources; 
  Eliminate intrusive artificial lighting that contributes to the "sky glow" phenomenon and disrupts the natural quality of nighttime; 
  Minimize harshly lighted surfaces and direct glare in order to enhance nighttime vision; 
  Encourage lighting practices and lighting systems that are designed to conserve energy; and 
  Provide for adequate nighttime safety, utility, security, and productivity. 
(Ord. No. 1052 . Passed 6-5-17) 

1375.01 - Application of chapter; conflict of laws. 
(a)  All outdoor lighting shall be installed in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. If any of the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any other law presently existing or enacted in the future, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. If any of the provisions of any other chapter of these Codified Ordinances is clearly in conflict with this chapter, this chapter shall apply. 
(b)  This section does not prevent the use of any material or method of installation not specifically addressed. In considering any deviation from the provisions of this section, the Zoning Administrator shall take into consideration any state-of-the-art technology that is consistent with the intent of this section, as new lighting technology develops, that is useful in reducing light above the horizontal plane. 
(Ord. No. 1052 . Passed 6-5-17) 
1375.02 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Bulb or lamp means the source of electrical light as distinguished from the whole assembly (see Luminaire). Lamp is used to denote the bulb and its housing. 
    Cut-off shielding means a technique or method of construction which causes light emitted from an outdoor light fixture to be projected only below and imaginary horizontal plane passing through the fixture below the light source. 
    Direct glare means the visual discomfort resulting from insufficiently shielded light sources in the field of view. 
    Fixture means the assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. It includes the elements designed to give light output control, such as a reflector (mirror) or refractor (lens), the ballast, housing, and the attached parts. 
    Footcandle means the luminance produced on a surface 1 foot from a uniform point source of 1 candela. 
    Full-cutoff fixture means zero intensity at or above a horizontal plane (90 above nadir) and limited to a value not exceeding 10 percent of the lamp lumens at or above 80. 
    IESNA is the acronym for the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. 
    Illuminance means the density of luminous flux incident on the surface measured in units of footcandles. 
    Light source means the bulb which creates the light onto adjacent areas that may affect residential properties. 
    Lumen means a unit of luminous flux, the flux emitted within a solid angle by a point source with a uniform luminous intensity of 1 candela. One footcandle is 1 lumen per square foot. One lux is 1 lumen per square meter. 
    Luminaire means the complete lighting unit, including the lamp, the fixture, and other parts. 
    Nadir means a point on the imaginary celestial sphere directly below the observer, diametrically opposite the zenith. 
    Outdoor light fixture means an illuminating device which is permanently installed outdoors, including, but not limited to, devices used to illuminate signs. 
    Shielding means in general, a permanently installed, non-translucent shade, cowl, hood, baffle or other construction which limits, restricts or directs light or the visibility of a light source to meet the standards of this chapter. 
    Zenith means an imaginary point directly "above" a particular location (latitude and longitude on Earth) that extends on the imaginary celestial sphere. 
(Ord. No. 1052 . Passed 6-5-17) 
1375.03 - Exceptions. 
    The following outdoor lighting types shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Emergency lighting. 
(2)  Any lighting required by the FCC or FAA or any security lighting directly related to the operations of the airport. 
(3)  Correctional facilities. 
(4)  Decorative porch and wall lights, low voltage paths, landscaping and exterior building lighting that emit no more 500 lumens per fixture provided that if any such light is directed toward adjacent residential buildings or nearby land, or creates direct glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, the luminaire shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to mitigate such conditions. 
(5)  Underwater lighting in swimming pools and other water features that emit no more than 1,000 lumens. 
(6)  Temporary lighting for theatrical, television, performance areas, construction sites and community festivals. 
(7)  Seasonal and holiday lighting provided that the lighting does not create direct glare onto other properties or upon the public rights-of-way. 
(8)  Lighted signs, which are regulated by Chapter 1476, Signs. 
(9)  Neon lighting. 
(10)  Fossil fuel light produced directly or indirectly by the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type fuels. 
(11)  Luminaires used to illuminate the flag of the United States of America provided the lighting of the flag or pole shall not create a direct glare beyond the property boundary. 
(12)  Beacon lights that direct mariners into the opening of the Boardman River, marinas and boat launches. 
(13)  Ornamental and architectural lighting for bridges, public art or statuary. 
(14)  Outdoor light fixtures legally installed prior to June 15, 2017 and repairs to existing luminaires not exceeding 25 percent of the total luminaires. 
(Ord. No. 1052 . Passed 6-5-17) 
1375.04 - Prohibited lighting. 
    No person shall install, maintain or use outdoor lighting for which an electrical permit is required and has not been issued for the following types of lighting: 
(1)  Floodlights or swivel luminaires designed to light a scene or object to a level greater than its surroundings unless aimed downward. No fixtures may be positioned at an angle to permit light to be emitted horizontally or above the horizontal plane. 
(2)  Unshielded lights that are more intense than 2,250 lumens or a 150 watt incandescent bulb. 
(3)  Search lights and any other device designed solely to light the night sky except those used by law enforcement authorities and civil authorities. 
(4)  Laser source light or any similar high intensity light when projected above the horizontal plane. 
(5)  Mercury vapor lights. 
(6)  Metal halide lights, unless used for outdoor sport facilities. 
(7)  Quartz lights. 
(Ord. No. 1052 . Passed 6-5-17) 
1375.05 - Design and construction standards for all outdoor lighting except for public street lighting. 
    All outdoor lighting shall be designed and constructed to meet or exceed the following minimum requirements; all measures to be taken at the ground surface level. 
(1)  Direct or reflected outdoor lighting shall be designed and located to be confined to the site for which it is accessory. The maximum lighting levels at the property lines of any other property shall not exceed 0.2 footcandles. 
(2)  Lighting of building facades shall be from the top and directed downward with full cut-off shielding. 
(3)  All lamps and luminaries shall be hooded, louvered or a combination thereof in order to assure the areas beyond the development site boundary including public rights-of-way are protected from direct glare. 
(4)  All outdoor lighting fixtures shall provide a 100 percent cut off above the horizontal plane at the lowest point of the light source. 
(5)  Outdoor public and commercial recreation area and amusement area lighting fixtures shall be equipped with baffling or glare guards so the lighting fixtures' beams fall within the primary playing area, immediate surroundings, or other site amenities. The footcandles at the site boundary shall not exceed 0.80 footcandles on average and 0.01 footcandles on average within 15 feet of the boundary. 
(6)  The average lighting values for areas intended to be lit on commercial, industrial and institutional parcels shall not exceed 1.0 footcandles on average. The uniformity ratio (maximum to minimum) for all parking lots shall not exceed the current IESNA RP-20 uniformity ratio guideline. (Note: Current guideline is 15:1) 
(7)  With the exception of public recreation facilities, the average lighting values intended to be lit in a R-District shall not exceed 1.0 footcandles on average. The uniformity ratio (maximum to minimum) for parking lots shall not exceed the current IESNA RP-20 uniformity ratio guideline. (Note: Current guideline is 15:1) 
(8)  Gas station service areas for filling fuel shall not exceed 12.5 footcandles on average. 
(9)  Outdoor display areas including, but not limited to automobile or equipment dealer displays or storage lots shall not exceed 15 footcandles on average during the hours the business is open to the public or until 12:00 a.m. 
(10)  Site lighting for non-residential uses shall not exceed 1.0 footcandles on average when a use is not open for business. 
(11)  All lamps and luminaries within 200 feet from Grand Traverse Bay, Boardman Lake or Boardman River shall be located, mounted and shielded to direct illumination away from the water surface with the exception that full cutoff fixture dock lights, directed downward with less than 250 lumens are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1052 . Passed 6-5-17) 
1375.06 - Design and construction standards for public street lighting. 
(a)  Streetlights in the public rights-of-way shall be the minimum necessary to provide adequate illumination for public safety and be designed to direct lighting downward onto the public rights-of-way 
(b)  Luminaries installed up to the edge of any bordering property are permitted. 
(c)  Public street illumination shall use the most current American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting ANSI/IESNA RP-08 for all public street lighting. 
(Ord. No. 1052 . Passed 6-5-17) 
1375.07 - Submission requirements. 
    Except for one and two-family dwellings, a site plan shall contain a photometric layout for the exterior lighting. The Planning Director may waive this requirement if there is no parking area. 
(Ord. No. 1052 . Passed 6-5-17) 
Chapter 1376 - Affordable Housing Standards[27] 
    Because the remaining land appropriate for new residential development in the City is limited, and because there is a documented shortage of affordable housing that is available to low-income and very low-income households in the City, it is essential that a reasonable proportion of such land be developed into housing units affordable to the City's workforce. The affordable housing section is for the purpose of accommodating and encouraging diverse and balanced neighborhoods with quality, well-designed housing that is affordable to the City's low-income and very low-income residents. 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of land development and establishment of districts; provisions; uniformity of regulations; limitations, MCL  125.3201 

1376.01 - Compliance required. 
    Any project receiving a density bonus or dimensional modification incentive must meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 822. Passed 1-5-09.) 
1376.02 - Standards. 
    Prior to approval of any site plan including a density bonus, applicants must submit documentation indicating compliance with the following: 
(1)  Integration: Affordable dwelling units shall be constructed on-site dispersed throughout the project. 
(2)  Design: Affordable units shall be comparable in bedroom mix, design, and overall quality of construction to the market-rate units in the development. The exterior appearance of affordable units shall be visually compatible with the market rate units in the development, and exterior building materials and finishes shall be substantially the same in type and quality for affordable and market-rate units. 
(3)  Phasing. Affordable housing units shall be constructed concurrently with the market-rate units. If a project is constructed in phases, affordable housing units shall be integrated proportionately in each phase of the project. 
(4)  Long-term affordability: Affordable housing units shall remain affordable for a period of at least 30 years. 
(5)  Affordability level and pricing: Maximum rental rates and sale prices shall be established annually by the City based on unit size and household income, as follows: 
a.  Sale prices for owner-occupied units shall be calculated based on monthly payment including an available fixed rate 30-year mortgage, a down-payment not exceeding 5 percent of the purchase price, property tax estimates, homeowner's insurance, and any applicable condominium association fees. The monthly payment that is used to calculate the sale price shall be no more than 30 percent of the monthly income of a household earning at or below 80 percent of the area median income, as determined by HUD and adjusted for household size and corresponding number of bedroom units. 
b.  Monthly rental rates shall be calculated on the basis of 30 percent of the gross monthly income of households earning 60 percent of the area median income, as determined by HUD and adjusted for household size and corresponding number of bedroom units. 
c.  In calculating the rental and sales prices of affordable housing units, the following relationship between unit size and household size shall apply. 
1.  Efficiency units: 1-person household. 
2.  One-bedroom units: 2-person household. 
3.  Two-bedroom units: 3-person household. 
4.  Three-bedroom units: 4-person household. 
5.  Four-bedroom and larger units: 5-person household. 
(6)  Sale or rent to eligible households. Affordable housing units shall be sold or rented only to qualified households or eligible nonprofits. 
(7)  Sale of affordable housing units: Affordable housing units for sale as owner-occupied units shall be sold to eligible nonprofits or qualified households as follows: 
a.  Eligible housing nonprofit purchase: An eligible housing nonprofit agency may purchase the affordable housing units for subsequent sale to qualified households. If the affordable housing unit is purchased by an eligible housing nonprofit, the agency shall submit any documents deemed necessary by the City Attorney, including restrictive covenants and other legal documents, to ensure the continued affordability of the units in accordance with this section. 
b.  Private party purchases: In all other sales of affordable housing units, the parties to the transaction shall execute and record such documentation as necessary to ensure the continued affordability of the affordable housing units in accordance with this section. 
(8)  Rental of affordable housing units: Rental units shall be rented to and occupied by eligible very-low income households at an affordable cost in keeping with the requirements of this section. If the owner of affordable rental units regulated by this section converts the development to condominiums, the development shall be subject to the for-sale affordable housing requirements of this section. 
(9)  Affordability agreement. Prior to issuing approval, an agreement in a form acceptable to the City Attorney that addresses price and resale restrictions, homebuyer or tenant qualifications, procedures for determining eligibility, long-term affordability, and any other applicable topics of the affordable housing units shall be submitted to the Planning Department. This agreement shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the assigns, heirs and successors of the applicant. 
(10)  Failure to rent or sell affordable housing units. For affordable housing units constructed under the terms of this chapter, marketing begins on the date when the affordable housing unit is completed and available for viewing. 
a.  If, after 365 days of marketing, an affordable owner-occupied housing unit is not sold to an eligible housing nonprofit or household at or below 80 percent AMI, the unit may be marketed as an affordable housing unit for an eligible household with income at or below 100 percent of the area median income. 
b.  If, after 365 days of marketing, an affordable rental housing unit is not rented to a household at or below 60 percent AMI, the unit may be marketed to a household at or below 80 percent of the area median income. 
c.  Any of the affordable housing units that are marketed under this provision remain subject to the long-term affordability and eligibility criteria included in this chapter. 
(Ord. 822. Passed 1-5-09.) 
1376.03 - Affordable housing incentives. 
(a)  Density bonus. A density bonus shall be provided equal to 1 market-rate unit for each affordable housing unit that meets the standards defined in Section 1376.02. Density shall not exceed the maximum density specified in Chapter 1368, Size and Area Requirements. 
(b)  Dimensional standards modification. The maximum impervious surface percentage, as specified in Chapter 1368, Size and Area Requirements, may be increased by up to 10 percentage points over that percentage permitted without an affordable housing incentive, if necessary to accommodate the density bonus units on-site. 
(c)  Property tax exemption. A property providing affordable housing maybe eligible for a property tax exemption as established in the City Code of Ordinances, Chapter 881, Low Income Housing Tax Exemption. 
(Ord. 822. Passed 1-5-09.) 
Chapter 1377 - Accessory Dwelling Units Overlay Districts[28] 
    The purpose of the Accessory Dwelling Units Overlay Districts in certain areas of the City is to permit small secondary dwellings on single-family zoned parcels to help owners pay expenses, making the house itself more affordable, increase the efficiency of developed land and provide additional housing options. 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Editor's note- Nothing in this ordinance of the repeal of any inconsistent ordinances shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action required or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any charter be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance. 

Chapter 1377 - Acessory dwelling units overalay districts. 
Repealed. 
(Ord. 1019. Passed 4-6-15.) 
Chapter 1378 - Renewable Energy 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations governing renewable energy systems such as wind and solar, to provide for appropriate locations for wind and solar energy systems, to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, and to promote safe, effective and efficient use of renewable energy systems to increase opportunities for generation of renewable energy. 

1378.01 - Definitions. 
    Guy wire means a cable, wire, or rope that is used to brace something. 
    Rotor diameter means the cross-sectional dimension of the circle swept by the rotating blades of a wind energy turbine. 
    Solar energy system means any solar collection system devise (i.e. solar photovoltaic cell, panel, or array, or solar hot air or water collector device) where the primary purpose of which is to provide for the collection, inversion, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation or transfer of stored heat. 
    Solar energy system, freestanding-mount means any solar collection system devise mounted on a pole(s). 
    Solar energy system, structure-mount means any solar collection system devise mounted on a structure or accessory building. 
    Wind energy system means any devise that converts the kinetic energy of wind into mechanical or electrical energy that is either pole-mounted, tower-mounted or building-mounted through the use of equipment includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries or other components used in this system. 
    Wind energy system, height of means the vertical distance to the uppermost vertical extension of any blade, or the maximum height reached by any part of the wind energy system. For tower/pole-mounted wind energy system, height is measured from the ground level at the base of the tower/pole. For building-mounted wind energy systems, height is measured from the highest point of the roof or roof deck, excluding chimneys, antennae and other similar protuberances. 
    Wind energy system, building-mount means a wind energy system mounted on a roof of a building or accessory building. 
    Wind energy system, pole-mount means a wind energy system ground-mounted on a long, cylindrical, often, slender piece of wood, metal, etc. and does not include guy wires. 
    Wind energy system, tower-mount means a wind energy system ground-mounted on steel lattice or tubular steel and may include guy wires. 
(Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12) 
1378.02 - Wind energy systems will be allowed in the following districts with restrictions. 
(a)  Residential Conservation (RC), Single-Family Dwelling (R-1a and R-1b), Two-Family Dwelling (R-2), Multiple Family Dwelling (R-9, R-15 and R-29) subject to the following: 
(1)  Wind energy systems mounted on a building or an accessory building may be erected to a height not exceeding 10 feet above the highest point of the roof, excluding chimneys, antennae and other similar protuberances. Wind energy systems must be spaced at least 10 feet apart and quantity is limited to 2 per parcel. Guy wires are not allowed. 
(2)  Wind energy systems mounted on a pole may be erected to a height not exceeding 10 feet above the height limit of the district and will only be permitted in the rear yard except can be located streetward on lots on navigable water and be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. Pole-mounted wind energy systems shall be setback a distance equal to the height of the wind energy system from any adjoining lot line. The setback can be reduced by up to 50 percent or a minimum of 20 feet from the lot line if it can be demonstrated through a registered architect or professional engineer that the pole is designed to collapse, fall, curl or bend within a distance or zone shorter than the height of the wind energy system. Pole-mounted wind energy systems are limited to 1 per parcel. Guy wires are not allowed. 
(3)  The wind energy pole or tower-mounted system and operating equipment shall comply with the general standards for approval contained in this chapter. Any wind energy system that is not in operation for a continuous period of 12 months is considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City. Failure to remove an abandoned wind energy system within said 90 days may be removed by the City at the owner's expense. 
(4)  The wind energy system will meet the standards set in the City of Traverse City Code of Ordinances, Chapter 652, Noise Control, specifically section 652.04(h). A wind energy system emits a pure tone and would be subject to a reduction of 5 dBA. 
(b)  Hotel Resort (HR), Office Service (C-1), Neighborhood Center (C-2), Community Center (C-3), Regional Center (C-4), Hospital (H-1 and H-2), Development (D), Government/Public (GP), Northwestern Michigan College (NMC-1 and NMC-2) and Transportation (T) subject to the following: 
(1)  Wind energy systems mounted on a building or an accessory building may be erected to a height not exceeding 20 feet above the highest point of the roof deck, excluding chimneys, antennae, rooftop mechanical equipment and other similar protuberances. Wind energy systems must be spaced at least 20 feet apart and quantity is limited to 3 per building. Guy wires are allowed. 
(2)  Wind energy systems mounted on a pole or tower are not allowed in C-1, C-2, C-4, D or HR. 
(3)  Wind energy systems mounted on a pole or tower are allowed in C-3, H-1, H-2, GP, NMC-1, NMC-2 and T. Wind energy systems mounted on a pole or tower may be erected to a height not exceeding 20 feet above the height limit of the district and will only be permitted in the rear yard except can be located streetward on lots on navigable water and be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. Tower-mounted wind energy systems shall be setback a distance equal to the height of the wind energy system from any adjoining lot line. The setback can be reduced by up to 50 percent or a minimum of 20 feet from the lot line if it can be demonstrated through a registered architect or professional engineer that the tower is designed to collapse, fall, curl or bend within a distance or zone shorter than the height of the wind energy system. Pole/Tower-mount wind energy systems must be spaced 1 per parcel if less than 1 acre and 1 per acre on parcels larger than 1 acre. Guy wires are not allowed. 
(4)  Wind energy systems mounted on a building will not be considered rooftop equipment. 
(5)  The wind energy pole or tower-mounted system and operating equipment shall comply with the general standards for approval contained in this chapter. Any wind energy system that is not in operation for a continuous period of 12 months is considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City. Failure to remove an abandoned wind energy system within said 90 days may be removed by the City at the owner's expense. 
(6)  The wind energy system will meet the standards set in the City of Traverse City Code of Ordinances, Chapter 652, Noise Control, specifically section 652.04(h). A wind energy system emits a pure tone and would be subject to a reduction of 5 dBA. 
(c)  Industrial District (I) subject to the following: 
(1)  Wind energy systems mounted on a building or an accessory building may be erected to a height not exceeding 20 feet above the highest point of the roof deck, excluding chimneys, antennae and other similar protuberances. Wind energy systems must be spaced at least 20 feet apart. Guy wires are allowed. 
(2)  Wind energy systems mounted on a pole or tower may be erected to a height not exceeding 120 feet pending FAA review and will only be permitted in the rear yard except can be located streetward on lots on navigable water and be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots. Tower-mounted wind energy systems shall be setback a distance equal to the height of the wind energy system from any adjoining lot line. The setback can be reduced by up to 50 percent or a minimum of 20 feet from the lot line if it can be demonstrated through a registered architect or professional engineer that the tower is designed to collapse, fall, curl or bend within a distance or zone shorter than the height of the wind energy system. Pole/Tower-mount wind energy systems must be spaced 1 per 120 feet radius. Guy wires are allowed. 
(3)  Wind energy systems mounted on a building will not be considered rooftop equipment. 
(4)  The wind energy pole or tower-mounted system and operating equipment shall comply with the general standards for approval contained in this chapter. Any wind energy system that is not in operation for a continuous period of 12 months is considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City. Failure to remove an abandoned wind energy system within said 90 days may be removed by the City at the owner's expense. 
(5)  The wind energy system will meet the standards set in the City of Traverse City Code of Ordinances, Chapter 652, Noise Control, specifically section 652.04(h). A wind energy system emits a pure tone and would be subject to a reduction of 5 dBA. 
(d)  Open Space (OS) District subject to the following: 
(1)  Wind energy systems shall be subject to review from the Parks and Recreation Commission with final approval from the City Commission. 
(Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12. Ord. 953. Passed 10-1-12) 
1378.03 - Solar energy systems will be allowed in the following districts with restrictions. 
(a)  Residential Conservation (RC), Single-Family Dwelling (R-1a and R-1b), Two-Family Dwelling (R-2), Multiple Family Dwelling (R-9, R-15 and R-29) subject to the following: 
(1)  Solar energy systems- structure-mounted on a building or an accessory building are allowed by right subject to the following: 
a.  With a flat or mansard style roof may be erected to a height not exceeding 10 feet above the highest point of the roof, excluding chimneys, antennae and other similar protuberances. 
b.  With a pitched roof style shall not exceed the peak height of the roof. 
c.  Will not be considered rooftop equipment. 
d.  Shall be designed and located in order to prevent reflective glare toward any inhabited structure on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-way. 
(2)  Solar energy systems-freestanding-mount are allowed by right subject to the following: 
a.  Be erected to a height not exceeding 15 feet and area of 150 square feet per unit and will only be permitted in the rear yard except can be located streetward on lots on navigable water and be located streetward of the principal building on the less traveled street on through lots unless deemed impractical by the Planning Director. 
b.  Must be setback 20 feet from side and rear property lines and are limited to 2 per parcel. Guy wires are not allowed. 
c.  Shall be designed and located in order to prevent reflective glare toward any inhabited structure on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-way. 
d.  Shall meet the impervious surface requirements of the district. 
(b)  Industrial District (I), Hotel Resort (HR), Office Service (C-1), Neighborhood Center (C-2), Community Center (C-3), Regional Center (C-4), Hospital (H-1 and H-2), Development (D), Government/Public (GP), Northwestern Michigan College (NMC-1 and NMC-2), Open Space (OS) and Transportation (T) subject to the following: 
(1)  Solar energy systems- structure-mounted on a building or an accessory building are allowed by right subject to the following: 
a.  With a flat or mansard style roof may be erected to a height not exceeding 10 feet above the highest point of the roof, excluding chimneys, antennae and other similar protuberances. 
b.  With a pitched roof style shall not exceed the peak height of the roof. 
c.  Will not be considered rooftop equipment. 
d.  Shall be designed and located in order to prevent reflective glare toward any inhabited structure on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-way. 
(2)  Solar energy systems-freestanding-mount are allowed by right subject to the following: 
a.  Be erected to a height not exceeding 20 feet and area of 200 square feet per unit. 
b.  Must be setback 10 feet from side and rear property lines and shall have no quantity limit. Guy wires are not allowed. 
c.  Shall be designed and located in order to prevent reflective glare toward any inhabited structure on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-way. 
d.  Shall meet the impervious surface requirements of the district. 
(Ord. 953. Passed 10-1-12) 
1378.04 - Exceptions. 
(a)  For wind energy systems that exceed what is allowed by right, the City Commission Special Land Use Permit, Section 1364.08, would apply. 
(b)  Historic Districts. Historic District Commission requires that roof-mounted solar and wind energy systems be located on the rear portion of the roof or an accessory building in the rear yard for designated Historic Districts. Also, structure-mounted solar energy systems must receive aesthetic approval from the Historic District Commission. 
(Ord. 938. Passed 4-2-12. Ord. 953. Passed 10-1-12) 
Chapter 1399 - Transition[29] 
    The purpose of this transistion chapter is to apply the revisted Zoning Code to applications and approvals which may be in progress as of the effective date of this new code. 

Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning and planning in home rules cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4i; Regulation of location of trades, building and uses by local authorities, MCL  125.3101-125.3702; Regulation of buildings, MCL  125.3201; Authority to zone, MCL  125.3301; Regulation of congested areas, MCL  125.3201, MCL  125.3807; Uses of land or structures not conforming to ordinances, MCL  125.3201,  125.3208, MCL  125.3502, MCL  125.3503, MCL  125.3504; Powers of legislative bodies, MCL 125.3301, MCL  125.3603; Acquisition of property, MCL  125.3507 

1399.01 - General transition. 
    The intent of this chapter is to make the Zoning Code fully effective as soon as possible, but to allow for the continuation of all vested rights and approved special land use permits and planned unit developments. 
1399.02 - Zoning permits and building permits. 
    All zoning permits and building permits which have been previously issued, but which have not been acted upon by the permit holder by starting substantial construction, are hereby revoked. Other such permits may be continued if construction is diligently pursued and timely completed. 
1399.03 - Site plans. 
    All site plans, preliminary and final, which have been authorized, but which have not been acted upon by the owner of the site through initiation of substantial construction, are revoked. If substantial construction has been initiated, construction may continue as authorized by the site plan if work is prosecuted diligently and continuously within 1 year from the date hereof or within 1 year from the date of the site plan, unless the site plan approval has authorized a greater time for completion. No further extensions of any previously authorized site plans shall be given. 
1399.04 - Special land use permits. 
    All pending applications for special land use permits which have not been finally approved by the City Commission as of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance shall be returned to the applicant and the applicant shall proceed under this Zoning ordinance. The fee shall be returned to the applicant. All special land use permits which have been finally granted by the City Commission, but which have not been acted upon by the permit-holder through the commencement of substantial construction may timely proceed to completion pursuant to the terms of the permit. All special land use permits which have been finally granted by the City Commission as of the effective date of this ordinance and for which substantial construction has been commenced may proceed to completion pursuant to the terms of the special land use permit. Full construction and use under the terms of the previously issued special land use permit, even if not fully constructed or used at the time of adoption of this ordinance, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use of the appropriate class as outlined in this ordinance. 
1399.05 - Planned unit developments. 
    All pending applications for planned unit developments which have not been finally approved by the City Commission as of the effective date of this ordinance shall be returned to the applicant and the applicant shall proceed under this Zoning Code. The fee shall be returned to the applicant. All planned unit development permits and orders which have been finally granted by the City Commission, but which have not been acted upon by the owner through the commencement of substantial construction, may timely proceed to completion pursuant to the terms of the granting order. All planned unit development permits and orders which have been finally granted by the City Commission as of the effective date of this Code, and for which substantial construction has commenced, may proceed to completion pursuant to the terms of the planned unit development granting order. Full construction and use under the terms of the planned unit development granting order, even if not fully constructed or used at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use of the appropriate class as outlined by this Code. 
1399.06 - Prosecution and litigation. 
    All lawsuits currently filed for enforcement or violation of the prior Zoning Code may continue under the terms of that Code and all right to the City to enforce the prior Zoning Code are hereby preserved and continued. 
1399.07 - Variances and board of zoning appeals matters. 
    Except as may be specifically contrary to this Zoning Code, all previous actions of the Board of Zoning Appeals, including nonconforming use permits, variances and exceptions, are hereby preserved and continued. 
(Ord. 476. Passed 7-6-99) 
Appendix 1 - Zoning Map Changes 
    The following is a list of those ordinances enacted after the initial adoption of this Zoning Ordinance (July 6, 1999) that effect a change in the Zoning Map adopted by Section 1326.02 of these Codified Ordinances, including the ordinance number, its date of passage and a description of the change. 
Ord. No. Passage Date Change No. And Description 499 5-15-00 #1. 417 Munson - Part of the SW1/4 of the SE1/4, Sec. 1, T27N, R11 W, City of Traverse City. C-1 and R-15 to HR. 500 5-15-00 #2. 230 Munson - Lots 123, 124 and 125, Foster Crotsers Addition (also vacated alley), City of Traverse City. C-1 to HR 501 5-15-00 #3. 218 E. 14th - Part of Lot 8 and all of Lot 9, Block 3, Wilhelm's Addition, City of Traverse City. R-9 to C-2. 504 7-17-00 #4. 220/226 E. 16th Street - That part north of the centerline of the alley (extended) of Government Lot 3, Sec. 10, T27N, R11W, lying south of the south line of 16th Street and west of the west line of the railroad right-of-way, from R-1b, Single-Family Dwelling District, to C-1, Office Service District. 515 11-6-00 #6. 1144 Boon - Part of the NW1/4 of Sec. 13, T27N, R11W, des. as comm. at the NW corner of said Sec. 13; th. S8924'E 440' to POB, th. S009'W 153'; th. S8924'E 100'; th. N009'E 55'; thence N8924' W 610' to POB, exc. N33' thereof for street ROW, from T, Transportation, to I, Industrial. 515A 10-2-00 #5. 1212 Veteran's Drive - Part of Block 1, Griffin & Winnie's Addition, des. as comm. at the NE corner of Lot 4, thence N25', thence W211.26', m/l, th. S0041'58"E 94.68', th. E 37.5', m/l, th. S5', th. E 177.5', th. N75 ' to the POB, containing Lots 4,5, 6 and part of Lot 10 and vacant alleys therein, subject to utility and drainage easements. from R-29, Multiple Family, to C-1, Office Service. 516 11-6-00 #7. 1222 Veteran's Drive - Lots 7, 8 and 9, Block 1, Griffin and Winnie's Addition; also the E1/2 of vacated alley from R-29, Multiple Family, to C-1, Office Service and 519 W. 14th Street - The N 70' of Lots 11, 12, 14 and 16, also vacated alley lying N of the above parcel, Block 1, Griffin & Winnie Addition, from R-29, Multiple Family, to C-1, Office Service. 525 2-20-01 #8. 700 E. Front Street. Lots 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21, Block A, Hannah & Lay Company's Seventh Addition to the City of Traverse City, except part of W 300' lying southerly of RR track; Part of Gov. Lot 3 comm. At SE cor. Lot 21, etc.; part of W 300' of Lots 14 to 21, Block A, Hannah & Lay Company's 7th Addition lying south of RR truck, from NMC-1 to NMC-2. 532 6-4-01 #9. 701-727 Eastgate Place. Part of SE1/4 of NE1/4, Sec. 12, T27N, R11W, from R-9 to R-2. 553 12-3-01 #10. 302 Washington Street. The North 165 feet of Block 20, Original Plat. Also the West half of vacated Court Street, Traverse City, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, from R-29 to GP. 567 7-1-02 #11. 220 Circle Drive (Lots 5 and 6 and Lot 4 withexception, Westbrook Addition) 1100 Sixth Street (Lots 9, 10, 11 and 12, Block 2, Lay Park Addition), 1120 Sixth Street (South 25' of Lot 22 and Lots 23 and 24, Block 2, Lay Park Addition) 1212 Sixth Street (Lots 2 and 3, Westbrook Addition), 1224 Sixth Street (Lot 4, Westbrook Addition), and 217 South Madison (Lot 21 and the South 1/2 of Lot 20 and North 1/2 of Lot 22, Block 2, Lay Park Addition) 228 South Madison Street (Lot 1, Westbrook Addition), from H-1 to H-2. 571 8-19-02 #12. 1320 Veterans Drive. Part of the South Half of the East Half of Government Lot 7, Section 10, etc., from R-1b to R-2. 572 8-19-02 #13. 602, 604, 610 and 612 Second Street. Lots 13 through 19, Block 2, Hannah Lay & Co's 4th Addition, from C-2 to R-1b. 605 7-7-03 #14. 217 and 227 Fair Street. That part of Lots 10 and 11 and the North 10 feet of Lot 12, Foster and Crotsers Addition to Traverse City; Lot 12, except the North 10 feet, Lots 13 and 14, except the South 30, Foster and Crotsers addition to Traverse City, from R-1b to R-29. 660 1-3-05 #15. 3963 and 3975 North Three Mile Road. [No legal description on file] from T to I. 673 03-21-05 #16. 600 Front St. Part of Gov't Lots 3 & 4, Sec. 2, T27N, R11W, City of Traverse City, from OS to HR. 678 05-02-05 #17. 1204 Barlow St., Lots 6-8, Hannah Lay & Co's 15th Replat, City of Traverse City 1216 Barlow St., Lots 10-12-14-16, Hannah Lay & Co's 15th Replat, City of Traverse City 1230 Barlow St., Lots 18 & 20, Hannah Lay & Co's Replat of 15th Sub, City of Traverse City 1234 Barlow St., Lots 22 & 24, Hannah Lay & Co's Replat of 15 Sub, City of Traverse City 1242 Barlow St., Lots 26 & 28, Hannah Lay & Co's Replat of 15th Add, City of Traverse City, from I to R-1B 690 10-17-05 #18. far eastern 0.81 acres of the Oakwood Cemetery - That part of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 12, Township 27 North, Range 11 West, described as: Commencing at the North 1/4 Corner of Said Section; thence South 88^30'04" East, along the centerline of Eighth Street, 1728.40 feet; thence South 01^26'00" West, 1306.20 feet to the Southeast Corner of the recorded plat of "Cromwell Terrace" and the Point of Beginning; thence South 88^58'33" East, on the extension of the South line of said plat, 316.82 feet to the westerly right-of-way of Airport Access Road; thence 223.67 feet along said right-of-way on the arc of a 2111.92 foot radius curve to the right a chord bearing of South 55^56'36" West, 223.57 feet; thence continuing along said right-of-way South 58^58'38" West, 159.73 feet; thence North 01^26'00" East, along the extension of East line of said plat, 213.25 feet to the Point of Beginning. Containing 0.81 acres of land. Subject to easements, right-of-ways, reservations and restrictions of record. 695 2-6-06 #19. 1248 Hastings Street - That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-3, Community Center: THE NORTH 140FT OF THE E1/2 OF LOT 13 OF BLK 4, PLAT OF OAKWOOD ADDITION; PART OF THE WEST 112 OF SECTION 12, T27N, R11W. Commonly referred to as 1234 Hastings Street. E 1/2 OF LOTS 13 AND 15, BLK 4 OAKWOOD ADDITION, EXC N 140 FEET OF E 1/2 OF LOT 13. 703 6-19-06 #20. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-3: PRT OF SE 1/4 OF SEC 33 T28N R11W COMM AT THE S 1/4 COR OF SAID SEC TH N 00053'43" E 516.05 FT TH 89037'16" E 36.04FT TO POB TH S 89037'16" E 491.21 FT TO THE C/L OF ABANDONED RR TH ALONG C/L 280.01 FT ALONG THE ARCOF A 2663.21 RAD CURVE TO THE RIGHT (LONG CHORD=N 000039'35"E 279.76FT) TH N 88004'07" W 231.30 FT TH N 01046'19" E 131.76FT TH N 89035'39"W 262.84FT TH S 00036'56"W 417.66FT TO POB. Commonly referred to as 13900 SW Bayshore Drive. 712 10-2-06 #21. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-3: 624-A N 270.6 FT OF W 1/2 OF S 1/2 OF GOV LOT 7 SEC 10 T27N R11W EXC ST ROW ALSO EXC E335 FT OF ABOVE DES PARCEL SUBJ TO EASEMENTS & RESTRICTIONS OF REC. EXTENDED S SUB TO EASEMENTS & RESTRICTIONS OF REC. Commonly referred to as 1329 South Division. 800 6-16-08 #22. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as OS (Open Space District).PART OF THE NW 1/4 OF SEC 4, T27N, R11W, MORE FULLY DES AS: COMM AT THE W 1/4 CORNER OF SAID SEC 4; TH N 054'04" E, 1460.13 FT, ALONG THE W LINE OF SAID SEC 4, TH S 7135'35" E 1361.16 FT TO THE POB; TH S 7135'35" E, 20.92 FT; TH S 049'58" W, 2.3 FT; TH S 2710'02" E, 110.11 FT; TH S 6249'58" W 58.55 FT; TH S 049'58" W, 456.37 FT, ALONG THE W 1/8 LINE OF SAID SEC 4, TO THE APPROX CENTER THREAD OF A CREEK; THENCE N 8910'02" W, 20 FT, ALONG SAID APPROX CENTER THREAD; TH N 049'58" E 445.74 FT, PARALLEL WITH AND 20 FT W OF THE W 1/8 LINE OF SAID SEC 4; TH S 6249'58" W, 118.8 FT; TH N 2710'02" W 110 FT; TH N 6249'58" E, 177.28 FT; TH N 049'58" E, 19.40 FT TO POB. Commonly referred to as 1505 Wayne Street. 802 6-16-08 #23. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as D-1. The W 17 FT of Lot 14 & all of Lots 15, 16,17, 18 & The E 16.5 FT of the vacated alley lying adjacent to Lot 18. ALL IN BLOCK 5 HANNAH LAY AND CO. 1st ADDITION. Commonly referred to as 115 East Eighth Street. 833 5-18-09 #24. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as OS (Open Space District). PRT OF HANNAH LAY & CO'S 11TH ADD COMON S LINE LOT 17 3 FT W'LY OF SE COR TH N'LY PAR WITH E LINE LOT 17 126.5 FT TH TO RIGHT ON A 45 DEG ANGLE 19.8 FT TH N'LY PAR WITH & 11 FT E OF E LINE LOT 17 TO BAY SHORE TH W'LY ALONG WATER TO W LINE OF LOT 18 EXTENDED TO BAY TH S ALONG W LINE LOT 18 TO SW COR LOT 18 TH E'LY ALONG S LINE LOTS 17 & 18 TO POB EXC RR R/W'S. 834 5-18-09 #25. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as OS (Open Space District). LOT 10 ARBUTUS COURT. Commonly referred to as the Arbutus Park, or 1250 Arbutus Court. 835 5-18-09 #26. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as T (Transportation District). E 1/2 OF SW 1/4 SEC 12; SW 1/4 OF SEC 12EXC PARCEL DEEDED TO US GOVT FOR ARMORY SITE. ALSO EXC PROTION N OF PARSONS RD IN NE 1/4 OF SE 1/4. EXC PORTION PLATTED TO TC INDUSTRIAL ARK. ALSO EXC THT PORTION RETAINED BY US TREASURY FOR US COAST GUARD PURPOSED & ALL ST & RR R/W'S. SEC 12 T27N R11W. Commonly referred to as the Coast Guard Pump Station, or located at the southeast corner of Parsons Road and Airport Access Road. 838 6-15-09 #27. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as OS (Open Space District). PRT OF GOV'T LOT 6 SEC1 T27N R11W PLAT OF HIGHLAND PARK CITY OF TRAVERSE CITY, GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY, STATE OF MICHIGAN; DESC AS HIGHLAND PARK PARK A STRIP OF LAND 100FT WIDE &pm; LYING WEST OF LOTS 22 THROUGH 26 OF SAID PLAT WITH TWO 15' WIDE PUBLIC WALKWAYS FOR INGRESS AND EGRESS ONE BEING BETWEEN LOTS 21 AND 22 THE OTHER BETWEEN LOTS 26 AND 27. RECORDED IN LIBER 7 OF PLATS PAGE 21. PARK A, HURON HILLS #3, FURTHER DESCRIBED AS BEG AT NE CORNER OF LOT 57, HURON HILLS #3, TH S20.5255E 164.89 FT, TH S00.3100W 975.70, TH S89.5300E 12 FT, TH N00.3100E 510 FT, TH S89.2900E 125.50 FT, TH N001330E 140 FT, TH S88.1110E 150.93 FT, TH N00.1330E 12.02 FT, TH N88.1110W 150.93 FT, TH N00.1330E 255 FT, TH N62.5947W 138.62+/- FT, TH N20.A5255W 168.61 FT, TH 12.03 FT TO THE POB. The rezoned properties are commonly referred to as the access points to Highland Park and Huron Hills Park. 915 5-16-11 #28. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as R-9A. 10597 East Traverse Highway. Property ID 45-51-033-042-00. 933 2-21-12 #29. That the following described property shallhereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-3 (Community Center). Commonly referred to as 606, 612, 618, 620 and 626 West Front Street. Legal description: 606 W Front St - LOTS 17-18, BLOCK 15, HANNAH LAY & CO'S 10TH ADD. 612 W Front St - LOTS 19-20 BLOCK 15, HANNAH LAY & CO'S 10TH ADD. 618 W Front St - LOTS 21-22 & E 1/2 OF LOT 23, BLOCK 15, HANNAH LAY & CO'S 10TH ADD 620 W Front St - LOT 24 & W 1/2 OF LOT 23 BLOCK 15. EXCEPT RIGHT-OF-WAY RIGHTS OF ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS HANNAH LAY & CO'S 10TH ADD. 626 W Front St - LOTS 25-26-27-28 BLOCK 15, HANNAH LAY & CO'S 10TH ADD. EXCEPT THAT PART OF LOT 28 DESCRIBED AS COMMENCING AT THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 28; THENCE EAST 10 FT; THENCE NORTHWESTERLY TO A POINT ON THE WEST LINE LOT 28, 10 FEET NORTH OF SOUTHWEST CORNER; THENCE SOUTH 10 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING. ALSO EXCEPT THE WEST 3 FEET OF SAID LOT 28. 934 2-21-12 #30. That the following described property shall hereinafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-2 (Neighborhood Center) District. Commonly referred to as 230 East 14th Street. Legal Description: THAT PART OF GOVERNMENT LOT 3, SEC 10, T27N R11W, LYING SOUTH OF 14TH ST & WEST OF PMRR R/W & NORTHEAST OF STATE OF MICH RR SPUR TRACK RIGHT-OF-WAY. 952 10-1-12 #31: That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as R1a.1612 E. Eighth St., 1828 E. Eighth St., 1900 E. Eighth St.503 Terrace Dr., 504 Terrace Dr., 511 Terrace Dr., 519 Terrace Dr., 520 Terrace Dr., 523 Terrace Dr., 524 Terrace Dr., 532 Terrace Dr., 537 Terrace Dr., 539 Terrace Dr., 540 Terrace Dr., 547 Terrace Dr., 548 Terrace Dr., 603 Terrace Dr., 604 Terrace Dr., 611 Terrace Dr., 612 Terrace Dr., 619 Terrace Dr., 620 Terrace Dr., 627 Terrace Dr., 628 Terrace Dr., 635 Terrace Dr., 636 Terrace Dr.504 Woodland Dr., 505 Woodland Dr., 510 Woodland Dr., 511 Woodland Dr., 519 Woodland Dr., 520 Woodland Dr., 523 Woodland Dr., 524 Woodland Dr., 527 Woodland Dr., 531 Woodland Dr., 535 Woodland Dr., 536 Woodland Dr., 542 Woodland Dr., 548 Woodland Dr., 603 Woodland Dr., 604 Woodland Dr., 611 Woodland Dr.,. 612 Woodland Dr., 623 Woodland Dr., 624 Woodland Dr., 627 Woodland Dr., 634 Woodland Dr., 643 Woodland Dr., 644 Woodland Dr.510 Belmont Dr., 511 Belmont Dr., 519 Belmont Dr., 520 Belmont Dr., 526 Belmont Dr., 527 Belmont Dr. 532 Belmont Dr., 537 Belmont Dr., 541 Belmont Dr., 542 Belmont Dr., 547 Belmont Dr., 548 Belmont Dr., 602 Belmont Dr., 603 Belmont Dr., 611 Belmont Dr., 612 Belmont Dr., 619 Belmont Dr., 620 Belmont Dr., 627 Belmont Dr., 628 Belmont Dr., 635 Belmont Dr., 636 Belmont Dr., 643 Belmont Dr. 508 Cromwell Dr., 514 Cromwell Dr., 517 Cromwell Dr., 522 Cromwell Dr., 525 Cromwell Dr., 529 Cromwell Dr., 532 Cromwell Dr., 537 Cromwell Dr., 538 Cromwell Dr., 545 Cromwell Dr., 548 Cromwell Dr., 602 Cromwell Dr., 605 Cromwell Dr., 612 Cromwell Dr., 613 Cromwell Dr., 624 Cromwell Dr., 625 Cromwell Dr., 630 Cromwell Dr., 631 Cromwell Dr., 635 Cromwell Dr., 636 Cromwell Dr., 643 Cromwell Dr., 644 Cromwell Dr. 986 3-18-13 #32. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-3(A). 626 EAST FRONT STREET Property ID 28-51-102-003-10, 636 EAST FRONT STREET Property ID 28-51-102-006-00 980 9-3-13 #33. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-2. 28-51-482-099-00, TBA CREDIT UNION, 1139 E EIGHTH ST, TRAVERSE CITY, 49686, LOTS 42-43-44-45, BLOCK 8 BAYSIDE ADD 981 9-3-13 #34. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as R-29; R-9. (R-29), 28-51-682-015-01, MJLB LAND LLC, 1350 LAKE RIDGE DR, TRAVERSE CITY 49684: WEST PORT ON BOARDMAN CONDO SUB PLAN 368 UNIT1 FORMERLY THT PRT OF LOT 8 HANNAH LAY & CO'S 16TH ADD SEC 10 T27N R11W DES AS COM AT NW COR OF ORIG SAID LOT 8 AT A PT ON S LINE OF VAC 15TH ST TH S8951'51"E 101.13 FT ALONG SAID LINE OF VAC ST TO WSTLY LINE OF LAKE RIDGE DR (FORMERLY RACE ST EXT) & POB TH ALONG SAID LINE S16 15' W 378.18 FT TO N LINE OF 16TH ST TH ALONG SAID N LINE N8958'10"W 58.68 FT TO W LINE OF SAID LOT 8 TH ALONG SAID LOT LINE 403.02 FT ALONG ARC OF 2814.79 FT RADIUS CURVE TO THE RIGHT WITH CHORD = N1014'30"E 402.67 FT TO CTR LINE OF VAC 15TH ST TH ALONG SAID CTR LINE S8951'51"E 102.52 FT TO WSTLY LINE OF LAKE RIDGE DR TH ALONG SAID LINE S1615'W 34.35 FT TO POB EXC FLOWAGE RIGHTS 2014 ROLL SPLIT FROM 28-51-682-015-00 INTO 28-51-682-015-01 & 28-51-682-015-10 - PER MD FILING - WEST PORT ON BOARDMAN MD 28-51-682-015-10: MJLB LAND LLC, 1350 LAKE RIDGE DR, TRAVERSE CITY 49684THT PRT OF LOT 8 HANNAH LAY & CO'S 16TH ADD SEC 10 T27N R11W DES AS COM AT NW COR OF ORIG SAID LOT 8 AT A PT ON S LINE OF VAC 15TH ST TH S8951'51"E 101.13 FT ALONG SAID LINE OF VAC ST TO WSTLY LINE OF LAKE RIDGE DR (FORMERLY RACE ST EXT) & POB TH ALONG SAID LINE S16 15' W 378.18 FT TO N LINE OF 16TH ST TH ALONG SAID N LINE N8958'10"W 58.68 FT TO W LINE OF SAID LOT 8 TH ALONG SAID LOT LINE 403.02 FT ALONG ARC OF 2814.79 FT RADIUS CURVE TO THE RIGHT WITH CHORD = N1014'30"E 402.67 FT TO CTR LINE OF VAC 15TH ST TH ALONG SAID CTR LINE S8951'51"E 102.52 FT TO WSTLY LINE OF LAKE RIDGE DR TH ALONG SAID LINE S1615'W 34.35 FT TO POB EXC FLOWAGE RIGHTS EXPANDABLE AREA - 1 TO 6 UNITS 2014 ROLL SPLIT FROM 28-51-682-015-00 INTO 28-51-682-015-01 & 28-51-682-015-10 - PER MD FILING - WEST PORT ON BOARDMAN MD 28-51-760-001-00: MJLB LAND LLC, 1290 LAKE RIDGE CIRCLE, TRAVERSE CITY 49684 , UNIT 1, MASTER DEED LAKE RIDGE LANDING RECORDED AT GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS #2007C-00043. LOT 7, OF THE PLAT OF HANNAH, LAY & CO'S SIXTEENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY AS RECORDED IN LIBER 3 OF VILLAGE PLATS, PAGES 6 AND 7, GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY RECORDS. 28-51-760-002-00: MJLB LAND LLC, 1280 LAKE RIDGE CIRCLE, TRAVERSE CITY 49684, UNIT 2 , MASTER DEED LAKE RIDGE LANDING RECORDED AT GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS #2007C-00043. LOT 7, OF THE PLAT OF HANNAH, LAY & CO'S SIXTEENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY AS RECORDED IN LIBER 3 OF VILLAGE PLATS, PAGES 6 AND 7, GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY RECORDS. 28-51-760-003-00: NICHOLS GARY G & SUE A, 1260 LAKE RIDGE CIRCLE, TRAVERSE CITY 49684, UNIT 3 , MASTER DEED LAKE RIDGE LANDING RECORDED AT GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS #2007C-00043. LOT 7, OF THE PLAT OF HANNAH, LAY & CO'S SIXTEENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY AS RECORDED IN LIBER 3 OF VILLAGE PLATS, PAGES 6 AND 7, GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY RECORDS. 28-51-760-004-00: MJLB LAND LLC, 1240 LAKE RIDGE CIRCLE, TRAVERSE CITY 49684 , UNIT 4 , MASTER DEED LAKE RIDGE LANDING RECORDED AT GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS #2007C-00043. LOT 7, OF THE PLAT OF HANNAH, LAY & CO'S SIXTEENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY AS RECORDED IN LIBER 3 OF VILLAGE PLATS, PAGES 6 AND 7, GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY RECORDS. 28-51-760-005-00: MARRESE JAMES & JILL, 1210 LAKE RIDGE CIRCLE, TRAVERSE CITY 49684, UNIT 5 , MASTER DEED LAKE RIDGE LANDING RECORDED AT GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS #2007C-00043. LOT 7, OF THE PLAT OF HANNAH, LAY & CO'S SIXTEENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY AS RECORDED IN LIBER 3 OF VILLAGE PLATS, PAGES 6 AND 7, GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY RECORDS. 28-51-760-013-00: DILWORTH TRUST. 1281 LAKE RIDGE CIRCLE, TRAVERSE CITY 49684 , UNIT 13 , MASTER DEED LAKE RIDGE LANDING RECORDED AT GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS #2007C-00043. LOT 7, OF THE PLAT OF HANNAH, LAY & CO'S SIXTEENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY AS RECORDED IN LIBER 3 OF VILLAGE PLATS, PAGES 6 AND 7, GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY RECORDS. 28-51-760-014-00: MUNGER BENSON S & BETTE L, 1291 LAKE RIDGE CIRCLE, TRAVERSE CITY 49684, UNIT 14, MASTER DEED LAKE RIDGE LANDING RECORDED AT GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS #2007C-00043. LOT 7, OF THE PLAT OF HANNAH, LAY & CO'S SIXTEENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY AS RECORDED IN LIBER 3 OF VILLAGE PLATS, PAGES 6 AND 7, GRAND TRAVERSE COUNTY RECORDS. (R-9), 28-51-878-026-00: SNYDER DOROTHY E (LE), 212 E FOURTEENTH ST, TRAVERSE CITY 49684, THE E 16 FT OF LOT 6, ALL OF LOT 7, AND THE W 11.25 FT OF LOT 8 BLOCK 3 WILHELM'S ADD 985 12-2-13 #35. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-4b (Regional Center) District. 
221 Cass Street 
THT PRT OF LOTS 17 & 18 BLK 7 ORIG PLAT DES AS COM AT A POINT 90 FEET SOUTH OF THE NW COR LOT 18; TH N 90 FT; TH E 132 FEET; THENCE S 123.4 FEET; THENCE W 136 FEET TO POB. 
215 Washington Street 
LOT 16 & W 26 FT OF LOT 15 BLOCK 7 ORIGINAL PLAT EXCEPT THAT PART THEREOF SURVEYED FOR STREET BY DEED RECORDED AT LIBER 11, PAGE 237. 
223 Washington Street 
W 1/2 OF LOT 14 & E 40 FT OF LOT 15 BLK 7 ORIG PLAT EXC ST ROW 
229 Washington Street 
111 E 1/2 OF LOT 14 BLK 7 ORIG PLAT. 991 04-07-14 #36. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as R1-b MU. 10597 East Traverse Highway. Property ID 45-51-033-042-00. 1016 04-06-15 #37. That the following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-2 (Neighborhood Center). 
314 East Eighth Street 
THT PRT OF LOT 3 DES AS COM ON S LINE 8TH ST 65 FT E OF NE'LY LINE OF P M R/W TH E 100 FT TH S 150 FT TH TO PM R/W TH NE'LY ALONG R/W TO PT S OF POB TH N TO POB H L & CO'S 16TH ADD 1017 04-06-15 #38. That the following described properties shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-2 (Neighborhood Center). 
1015 Hannah Avenue 
LOT 99 & E 1/2 OF LOT 100 OAK HEIGHTS ADD 
1025 Hannah Avenue 
LOTS 98 97 & W 10 FT OF LOT 96 OAK HEIGHTS ADD 1044 02-13-17 #39. The following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-4b (Regional Center). 
The land referred to in this policy, situated in the County of Grand Traverse, City of Traverse City, State of Michigan, with common addresses of 205 Garland Street, 205 North Union Street, and 211 North Union Street are further described as follows: 
  
PARCEL 1: 
  
That part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, City of Traverse City, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, described as: Commencing at the Southeast corner of Lot 70, HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62; thence South on Street line, 115 feet; thence South 75 degrees 29 minutes West, 222.08 feet (225 feet recorded); thence North 14 degrees 31 minutes West, 111.32 feet (112.04 feet recorded); thence North 75 degrees 29 minutes East, 250.9 feet to point of beginning. 
  
EXCEPT THAT PART LYING WITHIN THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PARCEL; 
  
  
Part of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, in part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, more fully described as: Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot 70 of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, thence South 00 degrees 11 minutes 19 seconds West, 17.00 feet, along the West line of Union Street; thence North 89 degrees 20 minutes 52 seconds West, 72.67 feet; thence North 77 degrees 27 minutes 43 seconds East, 74.50 feet, along the South line of said Lot 70 to the Point of Beginning. 
  
AND ALSO EXCEPT THAT PART LYING WITHIN THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PARCEL, That part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, more fully described as: Commencing at the Northwest corner of Front and Union Street; thence along the West line of Union Street, North, 444.01 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 70 of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62, Grand Traverse County Records; thence returning South 113.53 feet to the Point of Beginning; thence South 76 degrees 51 minutes 37 seconds West, 40.32 feet; thence South 13 degrees 08 minutes 23 seconds East, 2.42 feet; thence South 75 degrees 26 minutes 11 seconds West, 182.00 feet; thence North 13 degrees 24 minutes 50 seconds West, 6.45 feet; thence South 77 degrees 05 minutes 54 seconds West 150.24 feet; thence North 89 degrees 30 minutes 13 seconds West, 25.87 feet; thence South 14 degrees 30 minutes 56 seconds East, 20 feet, more or less, to the Northerly edge of the Boardman River; thence Easterly, along said Northerly edge of the Boardman River, to the Westerly line of Union Street; thence North, 30 feet, more or less, to the Point of Beginning. 
  
PARCEL 2: 
  
That part of Government Lot 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, City of Traverse City, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, described as: Commencing at the Southeast corner of Lot 70, HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62; thence South 75 degrees 29 minutes West, 250.9 feet to point of beginning; thence South 14 degrees 31 minutes East, 105 feet; thence South 77 degrees 07 minutes 12 seconds West, 175.07 feet; thence North 14 degrees 31 minutes West, 100 feet; thence North 75 degrees 29 minutes East, 175 feet more or less to point of beginning. 
  
EXCEPT THAT PART LYING WITHIN THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PARCEL; 
  
That part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, more fully described as: Commencing at the Northwest corner of Front and Union Street; thence along the West line of Union Street, North, 444.01 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 70 of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62, Grand Traverse County Records; thence returning South 113.53 feet to the Point of Beginning; thence South 76 degrees 51 minutes 37 seconds West, 40.32 feet; thence South 13 degrees 08 minutes 23 seconds East, 2.42 feet; thence South 75 degrees 26 minutes 11 seconds West, 182.00 feet; thence North 13 degrees 24 minutes 50 seconds West, 6.45 feet; thence South 77 degrees 05 minutes 54 seconds West 150.24 feet; thence North 89 degrees 30 minutes 13 seconds West, 25.87 feet; thence South 14 degrees 30 minutes 56 seconds East, 20 feet, more or less, to the Northerly edge of the Boardman River; thence Easterly, along said Northerly edge of the Boardman River, to the Westerly line of Union Street; thence North, 30 feet, more or less, to the Point of Beginning. 
  
PARCEL 3: 
  
That part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, City of Traverse City, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, (including Lot 71, HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62), more fully described as: Commencing at the Northwest corner of Front and Union Street; thence along the West line of Union Street, North, 444.01 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 70, HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, and the Point of Beginning; thence South 75 degrees 29 minutes 00 seconds West, 425.87 feet; thence South 14 degrees 30 minutes 56 seconds East, 94.14 feet; thence South 81 degrees 51 minutes 24 seconds West, 186.63 feet; thence North 06 degrees 39 minutes 08 seconds West, 105.74 feet to the Southwest corner of Lot 73 of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY; thence South 77 degrees 21 minutes 27 seconds East, 73.35 feet; thence North 12 degrees 57 minutes 50 seconds East, 20.41 feet; thence South 77 degrees 18 minutes 20 seconds East, 16.01 feet; thence North 12 degrees 50 minutes 10 seconds East, 8.81 feet; thence Easterly, along the arc of a 632.62 foot radius curve to the left, a distance of 33.68 feet (the chord of said arc being North 78 degrees 46 minutes 39 seconds East, 33.68 feet); thence North 12 degrees 44 minutes 52 seconds West, 25.00 feet; thence North 77 degrees 15 minutes 08 seconds East, 331.45 feet; thence South 47 degrees 53 minutes 51 seconds West 51.00 feet; thence North 77 degrees 15 minutes 08 seconds East, 183.50 feet to the Point of Beginning. 
  
EXCEPT: 
  
Part of Lot 71, of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62, Grand Traverse County, being part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, City of Traverse City, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, more fully described as: Beginning at the Easterly corner common to Lots 69 and 71 of said plat; thence South 46 degrees 47 minutes 00 seconds West, 51.60 feet, (previously recorded as South 47 degrees 52 minutes West) along the East line of said Lot 71; thence South 77 degrees 17 minutes 00 seconds West, 43.96 feet, (previously recorded as South 77 degrees 55 minutes West) along the South line of said Lot 71; thence North 13 degrees 32 minutes 22 seconds East, 29.20 feet, along the extended Easterly right-of-way line of Garland Street to the Southwest corner of said Lot 69; thence North 77 degrees 17 minutes 00 seconds East, 75.50 feet, previously recorded as North 77 degrees 55 minutes East) along the line common to said Lots 69 and 71 to the Point of Beginning. 
  
ALSO EXCEPT THAT PART LYING WITHIN THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PARCEL; 
  
Part of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, in part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, more fully described as: Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot 70 of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, thence South 00 degrees 11 minutes 19 seconds West, 17.00 feet, along the West line of Union Street; thence North 89 degrees 20 minutes 52 seconds West, 72.67 feet; thence North 77 degrees 27 minutes 43 seconds East, 74.50 feet, along the South line of said Lot 70 to the Point of Beginning. 
  
PARCEL 4: 
  
Lot 72, HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62, Grand Traverse County Records. 1050 06-05-17 #40. The following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as T (Transportation) District. 
The land referred to in this policy, situated in the County of Grand Traverse, City of Traverse City, State of Michigan, with common addresses of 1146 Boon Street, 1331 South Garfield Avenue, and 1615 South Garfield Avenue are further described as follows: 
1146 Boon 
THT PRT OF NW 1/4 OF SEC 13 T27N R11W DES AS COM AT NW COR OF SAID SEC 13 TH S89 DEG 24' E 400 FT TH S 0 DEG 9' W 153 FT TO POB TH S 0 DEG 9' W 55 FT TH S 89 DEG 24' E 550 FT TH N 0 DEG 9' E 75 FTTH N 89 DEG 24' W 200 FT TH S 0 DEG 9' W20 FT TH 89 DEG 24' W 350 FT TO POB. 
1331 South Garfield 
THT PRT OF NW 1/4 OF SEC 13 T27N R11W DES AS COM 50 FT E & 153 FT S OF NW COR TH S 230 FT TH E 350 FT TH N 230 FT TH W 350 FT TO POB. 
1615 South Garfield 
THT PRT OF SW 1/4 OF NW 1/4 SEC 13 T27N R11W DES AS COM AT W 1/4 COR OF SEC 13 TH N ALG W SEC LN N 00 DEG 27'00" W 600.00 FT TH S 89 DEG 57' 15" E 50 FT TO POB TH S 89 DEG 57'15" E 757.00 FT TH N 00 DEG 27'00" W 96.95 FT TH N 89 DEG 53'25" W 436.05 FT TH N 0 DEG 27'00" W 102.50 FT TH N 89 DEG 53'25" W 320.95 FT TH ALG E'LY LN OF GARFIELD AVE S 0 DEG 27'00" E 199.86 FT TO POB. 1051 06-05-17 #41. The following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as T (Transportation) District. 
The land referred to in this policy, situated in the County of Grand Traverse, City of Traverse City, State of Michigan, are further described as follows: 
28-51-113-007-01 
THT PRT OF SEC 13 T27N R11W DES AS COM AT NW COR TH S8924'E 440 FT TO POB; TH S 0 9'W 153 FT TH S8924' E 310 FT TH N 09'E 20 FT TH S 8924'E 200 FT TH N 09'E 133 FT TH N 8924'W 510 FT TO POB EXC THE N 33 FT THERE OF FOR ST ROW. 
28-51-850-014-10 
RUNWAY EASEMENT ADJACENT TO LOT 14 TRAVERSE CITY AIRPORT INDUSTRIAL PARK 
Portion of 727 Fly Don't Drive, between 2670 and 2750 Aero Park Drive (see attached map). 1055 07-17-17 #42. The following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as R-29 (Multiple Family Dwelling District). 
LOT 14 BLK 12 ORIG PLAT 
415 E. State Street 1060 10-02-17 #43. The following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-4b (Regional Center). 
Parcel 3 
Lot 7, Block 21, of the original plat of Traverse City, according to the recorded plat thereof, as evidenced in Liber 1 of plats, page 1. 
340 E. State Street 1072 05-07-18 #44. The following described property shall hereafter be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Traverse City as C-4a (Regional Center). 
The land referred to in this policy, situated in the County of Grand Traverse, City of Traverse City, State of Michigan, with common addresses of 205 Garland Street, 205 North Union Street, and 211 North Union Street are further described as follows: 
  
PARCEL 1: 
  
That part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, City of Traverse City, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, described as: Commencing at the Southeast corner of Lot 70, HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62; thence South on Street line, 115 feet; thence South 75 degrees 29 minutes West, 222.08 feet (225 feet recorded); thence North 14 degrees 31 minutes West, 111.32 feet (112.04 feet recorded); thence North 75 degrees 29 minutes East, 250.9 feet to point of beginning. 
  
EXCEPT THAT PART LYING WITHIN THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PARCEL; 
  
  
Part of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, in part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, more fully described as: Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot 70 of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, thence South 00 degrees 11 minutes 19 seconds West, 17.00 feet, along the West line of Union Street; thence North 89 degrees 20 minutes 52 seconds West, 72.67 feet; thence North 77 degrees 27 minutes 43 seconds East, 74.50 feet, along the South line of said Lot 70 to the Point of Beginning. 
  
AND ALSO EXCEPT THAT PART LYING WITHIN THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PARCEL, That part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, more fully described as: Commencing at the Northwest corner of Front and Union Street; thence along the West line of Union Street, North, 444.01 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 70 of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62, Grand Traverse County Records; thence returning South 113.53 feet to the Point of Beginning; thence South 76 degrees 51 minutes 37 seconds West, 40.32 feet; thence South 13 degrees 08 minutes 23 seconds East, 2.42 feet; thence South 75 degrees 26 minutes 11 seconds West, 182.00 feet; thence North 13 degrees 24 minutes 50 seconds West, 6.45 feet; thence South 77 degrees 05 minutes 54 seconds West 150.24 feet; thence North 89 degrees 30 minutes 13 seconds West, 25.87 feet; thence South 14 degrees 30 minutes 56 seconds East, 20 feet, more or less, to the Northerly edge of the Boardman River; thence Easterly, along said Northerly edge of the Boardman River, to the Westerly line of Union Street; thence North, 30 feet, more or less, to the Point of Beginning. 
  
PARCEL 2: 
  
That part of Government Lot 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, City of Traverse City, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, described as: Commencing at the Southeast corner of Lot 70, HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62; thence South 75 degrees 29 minutes West, 250.9 feet to point of beginning; thence South 14 degrees 31 minutes East, 105 feet; thence South 77 degrees 07 minutes 12 seconds West, 175.07 feet; thence North 14 degrees 31 minutes West, 100 feet; thence North 75 degrees 29 minutes East, 175 feet more or less to point of beginning. 
  
EXCEPT THAT PART LYING WITHIN THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PARCEL; 
  
That part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, more fully described as: Commencing at the Northwest corner of Front and Union Street; thence along the West line of Union Street, North, 444.01 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 70 of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62, Grand Traverse County Records; thence returning South 113.53 feet to the Point of Beginning; thence South 76 degrees 51 minutes 37 seconds West, 40.32 feet; thence South 13 degrees 08 minutes 23 seconds East, 2.42 feet; thence South 75 degrees 26 minutes 11 seconds West, 182.00 feet; thence North 13 degrees 24 minutes 50 seconds West, 6.45 feet; thence South 77 degrees 05 minutes 54 seconds West 150.24 feet; thence North 89 degrees 30 minutes 13 seconds West, 25.87 feet; thence South 14 degrees 30 minutes 56 seconds East, 20 feet, more or less, to the Northerly edge of the Boardman River; thence Easterly, along said Northerly edge of the Boardman River, to the Westerly line of Union Street; thence North, 30 feet, more or less, to the Point of Beginning. 
  
PARCEL 3: 
  
That part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, City of Traverse City, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, (including Lot 71, HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62), more fully described as: Commencing at the Northwest corner of Front and Union Street; thence along the West line of Union Street, North, 444.01 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 70, HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, and the Point of Beginning; thence South 75 degrees 29 minutes 00 seconds West, 425.87 feet; thence South 14 degrees 30 minutes 56 seconds East, 94.14 feet; thence South 81 degrees 51 minutes 24 seconds West, 186.63 feet; thence North 06 degrees 39 minutes 08 seconds West, 105.74 feet to the Southwest corner of Lot 73 of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY; thence South 77 degrees 21 minutes 27 seconds East, 73.35 feet; thence North 12 degrees 57 minutes 50 seconds East, 20.41 feet; thence South 77 degrees 18 minutes 20 seconds East, 16.01 feet; thence North 12 degrees 50 minutes 10 seconds East, 8.81 feet; thence Easterly, along the arc of a 632.62 foot radius curve to the left, a distance of 33.68 feet (the chord of said arc being North 78 degrees 46 minutes 39 seconds East, 33.68 feet); thence North 12 degrees 44 minutes 52 seconds West, 25.00 feet; thence North 77 degrees 15 minutes 08 seconds East, 331.45 feet; thence South 47 degrees 53 minutes 51 seconds West 51.00 feet; thence North 77 degrees 15 minutes 08 seconds East, 183.50 feet to the Point of Beginning. 
  
EXCEPT: 
  
Part of Lot 71, of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62, Grand Traverse County, being part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, City of Traverse City, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, more fully described as: Beginning at the Easterly corner common to Lots 69 and 71 of said plat; thence South 46 degrees 47 minutes 00 seconds West, 51.60 feet, (previously recorded as South 47 degrees 52 minutes West) along the East line of said Lot 71; thence South 77 degrees 17 minutes 00 seconds West, 43.96 feet, (previously recorded as South 77 degrees 55 minutes West) along the South line of said Lot 71; thence North 13 degrees 32 minutes 22 seconds East, 29.20 feet, along the extended Easterly right-of-way line of Garland Street to the Southwest corner of said Lot 69; thence North 77 degrees 17 minutes 00 seconds East, 75.50 feet, previously recorded as North 77 degrees 55 minutes East) along the line common to said Lots 69 and 71 to the Point of Beginning. 
  
ALSO EXCEPT THAT PART LYING WITHIN THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PARCEL; 
  
Part of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, in part of Government Lots 2 and 3, Section 3, Town 27 North, Range 11 West, Grand Traverse County, Michigan, more fully described as: Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot 70 of HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, thence South 00 degrees 11 minutes 19 seconds West, 17.00 feet, along the West line of Union Street; thence North 89 degrees 20 minutes 52 seconds West, 72.67 feet; thence North 77 degrees 27 minutes 43 seconds East, 74.50 feet, along the South line of said Lot 70 to the Point of Beginning. 
  
PARCEL 4: 
  
Lot 72, HANNAH, LAY & CO'S ELEVENTH ADDITION TO TRAVERSE CITY, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Liber 2 of Plats, page 62, Grand Traverse County Records.  
Appendix 2 - Figures 
FIGURE 1-1 BASEMENT AND STORY 

FIGURE 1-2 AVERAGE GRADE 

FIGURE 1-3 BUILDING HEIGHTS 

FIGURE 1-4 SITE DIAGRAM (SAMPLE) 

FIGURE 1-5 SIDE SETBACK REQUIRED AND REAR SETBACK REDUCTION WHEN SCREEN WALL IS PROVIDED 

FIGURE 1-6 REAR SETBACK WAIVER FOR BACKING INTO ALLEY 

FIGURE 1-7 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT CURBING 

Appendix 3 - Approved Regional Landscape Character Plant List 
    In order to be successful, plant materials need to be suited to the conditions found on a specific development site. The conditions are numerous and individual sites will likely exhibit multiple conditions. 
    Listed below are examples of varying conditions which dictate plant materials chosen for a development site. 
1.  SOIL CONDITIONS: 
 Sandy soils Light  Loam soils Medium  Clay soils Heavy  
2.  LIGHT CONDITIONS: 
 Full sun 8 or more hours  Partial sun/shade 3-8 hours  Shade 3 or less hours  
3.  TOPOGRAPHICAL CONDITIONS: 
 Low damp areas Poor drainage common  High areas Exposure to winds common  Retention/detention areas Areas designed to accommodate varying amounts of water and serve to store plowed snow during winter months  
4.  ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS: 
 Proximity to high traffic streets 
 Potential damage from snow removal 
 Salt tolerance 
 Proximity to parking areas 
 Proximity to building exhaust 
5.  ZONE HARDINESS OF PLANT MATERIALS: 
The City's location adjacent to Grand Traverse Bay provides an opportunity to utilize plant species that would not be hardy further inland. 
6.  PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF PLANT MATERIALS: 
Species selection will be limited for some sites, e.g. nut and fruit-bearing trees would not be suitable for parking areas, over pedestrian walkways and the areas to buildings, due to the potential for damage to vehicles and the messy litter. Individual growth habit of plant materials must be considered to assure the selected plant will fit the confines of the planting bed. 
The following is a partial list of plant materials which is preferred to exotic plants when the location is visible from public rights-of-way or adjacent to areas of natural vegetation. This list is not necessarily a guideline for interior courtyards and single family residential development. 
WET TO MEDIUM MOISTURE SITES: 
LARGE TREES:   Abies balsamea Balsam Fir   Acer rubrum Red Maple   Acer saccharum Sugar Maple   Fraximus nigra Black Ash   Larix laricina Larch   Picea mariana Black Spruce   Pinus strobus White Pine   Prunus serotina Black Cherry   Salix nigra Black Willow   Tilia americana Basswood SMALL TREES:   Amelanchier laevis Serviceberry   Betula lenta Sweet Birch   Betula nigra River Birch   Cornus altemifolia Alternate-Leaved Dogwood   Thuja occidentalis White Cedar LARGE SHRUBS:   Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry   Cephalanthus occidentalis Buttonbush   Cornus racemosa Gray Dogwood   Cornus sericea Redosier Dogwood   Hamamelis virginiana Common Witchhazel   Ilex verticillata Michigan Holly   Sambucus canadensis American Elderberry   Vaccinium corymbosum Highbush Blueberry   Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood   Viburnum lentago Nannyberry   Viburnum trilobum American Cranberry Bush SMALL SHRUBS:   Juniperus communis Common Juniper   Potentilla fruticosa Bush Cinquefoil   Taxus canadensis Canada Yew  
DRY, SANDY SITES: 
LARGE TREES:   Abies balsamea Balsam Fir   Acer saccharum Sugar Maple   Fagus grandifolia American Beech   Fraxiwus americana White Ash   Pinus resinosa Red Pine   Quercus alba White Oak   Quercus rubra Red Oak SMALL TREES:   Amelanchier laevis Serviceberry   Crataegus crus-galli Cockspur Hawthorn   Crataegus mollis Downey Hawthorn   Crataegus punctata Dotted Hawthorn   Crataegus viridus Green Hawthorn   Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar   Malus Ioensis Prairie Crab   Morus rubra Red Mulberry   Ostrya virginiana Ironwood   Prunus pensylvanica Pin Cherry   Prunus virginiana Choke Cherry   Rhamnus carolinianus Carolina Buckthorn   Sorbus americana Mountain Ash   Viburnum lentago Nannyberry LARGE SHRUBS:   Corylus americana American Filbert   Hamamelis virginianna Common Witchhazel   Ilex verticillata Michigan Holly   Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac SMALL SHRUBS:   Ceanothus americanus New Jersey Tea   Dievilla lonicera Bush Honeysuckle   Rubus allegheniensis Blackberry  
PART FOURTEEN - BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE 
TITLE TWO - BUILDING STANDARDS 
Chapter 1420 - State Construction Code[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption by reference,  33 
State Law reference- Building codes in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3; State Construction Code, M.C.L.A. 125.1501 et seq. 
Cross reference- Joint enforcement,  1440.02; Conflicts with State Housing Law,  1484.03; Application of State Construction Code to rental housing,  1482.04 

1420.01 - Adoption; application. 
    The State Construction Code, consisting of the State Construction Code Act of 1972, as amended, and all applicable administrative regulations adopted thereunder, is hereby acknowledged as the applicable construction code in the City. 
(Ord. 122. Passed 5-18-81.) 
1420.02 - Adoption for Floodplain; Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code. 
    The provisions of Appendix G to the State Construction Code are hereby specifically adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter by reference, and shall be mandatory. A copy of Appendix G is on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 1078 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
1420.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
TITLE FOUR - BUILDING ADMINISTRATION 
Chapter 1440 - Administration and Enforcement[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal building licenses and permits, M.C.L.A.  125.54 
State Law reference- Building permits, M.C.L.A.  125.1510 et seq.; Inspection of building construction, M.C.L.A.  125.1512; Permits for swimming pools, M.C.L.A.  333.12525 
Cross reference- Site plans to accompany building permits,  1252.01; Building permits for parking lots,  1298.04; Inspectors, Ch. 1444; Building permits in Historic Districts,  1462.03(c)(12) 

1440.01 - Authority of protective inspection division. 
    The City hereby assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the State Construction Code Act of 1972, as amended (M.C.L.A. 125.1501 et seq.; M.S.A. 5.2949(1) et seq.), and hereby designates the Protective Inspection Division of the City as the enforcing agency that shall discharge the responsibility of the City under such Act. 
(Ord. 122. Passed 5-18-81.) 
1440.02 - Joint enforcement. 
    By agreement approved by the City Commission, the City may join together with any other county, city, village or township for the joint enforcement of the State Construction Code or any provision of this Building and Housing Code. Upon approval of the Michigan Department of Labor, the City may contract with a public or private entity to provide enforcement. 
(Ord. 122. Passed 5-18-81. Ord. 495. Passed 5-1-00.) 
1440.03 - Conflict of laws. 
    If any of the provisions of this Building and Housing Code are inconsistent with the provisions of any state statute, state administrative regulation or ordinance of the City, presently existing or enacted in the future, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. 122. Passed 5-18-81.) 
1440.04 - Fees. 
    All fees and charges to be paid to the City under the State Construction Code or this Building and Housing Code shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(Ord. 122. Passed 5-18-81.) 
1440.05 - Building permits. 
    No person shall commence any construction, repair or other activity for which a permit is required by this Building and Housing Code without first obtaining such permit. 
    Whoever commences any such construction, repair or other activity without first obtaining such a permit shall, if legally authorized and subsequently allowed to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee established by resolution of the City Commission. 
1440.06 - Liability for defective installation. 
    Nothing contained in this Building and Housing Code shall be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical construction, equipment, devices or material for damage to persons or property caused by any defect therein; nor shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection or licensing authorized or certificate of compliance issued. 
(Ord. 122. Passed 5-18-81.) 
1440.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1442 - Construction Board of Appeals[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Building codes in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3; Management and control of municipal buildings and grounds, M.C.L.A.  117.4j; State Construction Code, M.C.L.A.  125.1501 et seq. 
Cross reference- Building Authority, Ch. 296; Board of Zoning Appeals, Ch. 1254; State Construction Code, Ch. 1420; Administration and enforcement, Ch. 1440; Inspectors, Ch. 1444 

1442.01 - Establishment; composition; terms of office; compensation; rules; quorum. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby established in and for the City a Construction Board of Appeals in accordance with the State Construction Code. If the City contracts with a public agency to provide enforcement of the State Construction Code, then that public agency's Construction Board of Appeals shall serve as the Construction Board of Appeals for the City. 
(b)  Composition. The appointment and operation of the Board shall be as follows: 
(1)  The Board shall have seven members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Commission. 
(2)  Voting membership of the Board shall consist of individuals from the following categories: 
a.  Registered architect; 
b.  Registered professional engineer; 
c.  Master electrician; 
d.  Master plumber; 
e.  Unlimited heating contractor (must also serve as a member of the Board of Heating Examiners); 
f.  Building contractor; and 
g.  Member of the public. 
(c)  Terms of office. The term of a member shall be for three years, except that for the first Board two members shall be appointed for one-year terms and two members for two-year terms. 
(d)  Officers. The Board shall designate one of its members as Chairperson on a biennial basis. The City Engineer and the Fire Marshal of the City shall serve as members ex-officio without voting rights. The Building Inspector of the Protective Inspection Division shall be the recording secretary of the Board. 
(e)  Compensation. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed reasonable expenses. 
(f)  Rules. The Board shall establish its own governing rules and is authorized to appoint other technical boards consisting of not more than three members each with regard to specialty items, such as building, plumbing, mechanical or electrical problems, on which the Board feels it needs additional input prior to a decision. 
(g)  Quorum. Four members shall be considered a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. 122. Passed 5-18-81. Ord. 496. Passed 5-1-00.) 
Chapter 1444 - Inspectors[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Building codes in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.3; Management and control of municipal buildings and grounds, M.C.L.A.  117.4j; State Construction Code, M.C.L.A.  125.1501 et seq.; Inspection of building construction, M.C.L.A.  125.1512 
Cross reference- Right of entry of Municipal employees,  266.01; Sewer inspections,  1042.16; State Construction Code, Ch. 1420; Right of entry of Fire Chief,  1610.02(a) 

1444.01 - Appointment. 
    Any reference in the Traverse City Code of Ordinances to "Building Inspector," "Plumbing Inspector," or similar officials shall be deemed to mean the City Manager or the designee of the City Manager. The City Manager may designate a Building Inspector, a Plumbing Inspector, an Electrical Inspector, a Mechanical Inspector and a Rental Housing Inspector for indefinite terms who, for the purposes of enforcement of the provisions of this Building and Housing Code relating to their activities, shall have the powers of a police officer. The City Manager may designate a State or county inspection official to perform these services. The City Manager, with approval of the City Commission, may contract with a government or a private entity to provide the services of the Protective Inspections department. 
(Ord. 286. Passed 10-15-90. Ord. 493. Passed 5-1-00) 
1444.02 - Building Inspector. 
    The Building Inspector shall have the qualifications required by state law, as set forth in Act 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, as amended. 
1444.03 - Electrical Inspector. 
    The Electrical Inspector shall have the qualifications required by state law, as set forth in Act 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, as amended. 
1444.04 - Plumbing Inspector. 
    The Plumbing Inspector shall have the qualifications required by state law, as set forth in Act 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, as amended. 
1444.05 - Mechanical Inspector. 
    The Mechanical Inspector shall have the qualifications required by state law, as set forth in Act 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, as amended. 
1444.06 - Plan reviewer. 
    The Plan Reviewer shall have the qualifications required by state law, as set forth in Act 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, as amended. 
Chapter 1446 - Licensing of Contractors[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- State Construction Code, M.C.L.A.  125.1501 et seq. 
Cross reference- Building Authority, Ch. 296; State Construction Code, Ch. 1420; Building permits and fees,  1440.04, 1440.05; Sign permits,  1476.06, 1476.20 

1446.01 - State license and city registration required of mechanical and sewer contractors. 
(a)  No person shall be issued a permit to perform any mechanical work until a license has been obtained as required by the laws of this state and this chapter. For purposes of this section, "mechanical work" shall be defined as the installation, alteration or servicing of work classifications as set forth in Act 192 of the Public Acts of 1984, as amended (M.S.A. 18.86 et seq.; M.C.L.A. 338.971 et seq.). The holder of a state license required for mechanical work shall register said state license on an annual basis with the City before performing any work in the City. The holder of such license shall pay an annual fee to the City for each such registration. Said fee shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(b)  No person shall be issued a permit to perform any installation, alteration or connection of building sewers who is not licensed as a master plumber with this state and who is not registered with this City. Acceptable verified experience for registration shall be of a nature and type which is adequate, as determined by the Plumbing Inspector. If the Plumbing Inspector denies the granting of registration, the applicant for registration may appeal the decision of the Plumbing Inspector to the Construction Board of Appeals. The Board may overturn the decision of the Plumbing Inspector and order the granting of the registration to an individual. Individuals to be registered shall pay an annual fee to the City and shall furnish an annual bond made out to the City for each such registration. Said fee and bond shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. Said bond shall be submitted in accordance with Section 230.06 of the Administration Code. 
(c)  All registrations required by this chapter shall expire December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. 326. Passed 2-18-92.) 
Editor's note- 4-1-99. Former Section 1446.02 was technically repealed by Ord.326. Passed 2-18-92 and incorrectly included in 1992-A replacement pages. 
TITLE SIX - MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS 
Chapter 1454 - Dangerous Structures[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- State Construction Code, M.C.L.A.  125.1501 et seq.; Ch. 1420 
Cross reference- Building Authority, Ch. 296; State Construction Code, Ch. 1420; Construction Board of Appeals, Ch. 1442 

1454.01 - Prohibitions. 
    No person shall maintain any structure which is unsafe or which is a menace to the health, morals or safety of the public. 
(1976 Code Sec. 6.031) 
1454.02 - Notice to correct. 
    The City Commission may, after investigation, condemn such structures and give notice to the owner or owners thereof, or if the owner or owners cannot be found, to the party in possession or control of the land upon which such structure is located, specifying in what respect the structure is a public nuisance and requiring the owner or occupant to alter, repair, tear down or remove the same within 30 days after service of the notice. 
(1976 Code Sec. 6.032) 
1454.03 - Enforcement. 
    If, at the expiration of the time limit in the notice, the owner has not complied with the requirement thereof, the City Manager may carry out the requirements of the notice after preparing photographs or diagrams of the condition to be abated. 
(1976 Code Sec. 6.033) 
1454.04 - Immediate action. 
    If the public safety requires immediate action, the City Manager or a person performing the functions of his or her office may abate such public nuisance without preliminary order of the City Commission. 
(1976 Code Sec. 6.034) 
Chapter 1456 - Property Maintenance[7] 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the exterior maintenance of all non-residential properties and structures. 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- State of Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act definition of hazardous substance, MCL 324.20101(t) 
Cross reference- Penalty,  202.99 

1456.01 - Determination of necessity. 
    The City Commission finds that there are non residential properties in the City that are poorly maintained and neglected by their owners. These properties adversely affect citizens who own or occupy nearby properties by lowering property and rental values. The City Commission finds that elimination and prevention of these conditions is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and is in the best interest of the City and its citizens. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.02 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the chapter is to maintain, preserve and improve the non residential properties in the City. To accomplish this, this chapter sets out minimum standards for the exterior maintenance of all nonresidential properties and structures. In carrying out this purpose, it is the intention of the City Commission to exercise its full powers to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.03 - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall mean: 
(1)  Accessory improvements includes, but is not limited to, walkways, driveways, parking areas, storm drains, parking bumpers, steps, handrails, guardrails, signs, lighting fixtures, poles, fences, walls, tanks, antennae and all other freestanding or made structures. 
(2)  Basic structural elements means the parts of a building that provide the principal strength, stability, integrity, shape and safety of the building, including but not limited to, plates, studs, joists, rafters, stringers, stairs, sub flooring, flooring, sheathing, lathing, roofing, siding, window frames, door frames, porches, railings, eaves, chimneys, flashing, masonry and all other essential components. 
(3)  Correct the violation means substantial steps taken towards remedying a violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Deterioration means the fact or process of decay or degeneration that has progressed to the point where it has resulted in or will soon result in making an object or mechanism unsafe, unsanitary, inoperable, unusable or unsuitable for its intended use, including the advanced stage of rot, rust, mold, vermin infestation or destruction. 
(5)  Emergency means a condition that is a violation of this chapter and constitutes an imminent danger calling for immediate action in order to avoid death, injury or illness to a human or the destruction or severe damaging of real or personal property. 
(6)  Exterior attachments means gutters, down spouts, screening, vents, antennae, tanks, awnings, canopies, marquees, signs, lighting fixtures, handrails, guardrails and utility connections. 
(7)  Garbage means any spoiled or discarded animal or vegetable material resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food for humans or animals, as well as other organic waste material subject to rapid decomposition, including trash to which such material has adhered. 
(8)  Good repair means to be properly installed, stable and maintained sufficiently free of defects or deterioration so as to be functional for its present use and to be safe and sanitary. 
(9)  Hazardous substance means those substances identified at MCL 324.20101(t). 
(10)  Non-residential property means any property without a primary building that is used or intended for use as a single or two-family residential unit. 
(11)  Responsible person means any person owning, occupying, managing or controlling any non residential property in the City. 
(12)  Safe means a condition that is not likely to do harm to human, animals, or real or personal property, including free of hazardous substances improperly disposed or stored on the property. 
(13)  Sanitary means free of grease, excrement, dirt, food residue, garbage, rust or similar matter that can harbor bacteria or viruses unsafe to humans or animals, or that produces strong odors or provides for, or is an available source of food for, animals or insects. 
(14)  Storage means to place or leave in a location in excess of 30 days. 
(15)  Trash means waste materials and items that are not in good repair or are discarded and that are of little or no value, including plaster, paper, wrappings, plant cuttings, household furnishings, building materials, packing and clothing, appliances, equipment, machinery or parts thereof. 
(16)  Verbal notice means notice of the existence of an emergency given directly or by telephone to a responsible person. 
(17)  Vermin means rodents, birds and insects that are destructive of real or personal property or injurious to health. 
(18)  Workmanlike means executed in a skilled manner and generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.04 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person owning, occupying, managing or controlling any non-residential property in the City. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.05 - Property maintenance required. 
    All property regulated by this chapter, whether occupied or unoccupied, and all property including vacant property or formerly occupied property shall meet or exceed the standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.06 - Structural integrity. 
    Basic structural elements, foundations, foundation walls and supporting columns shall be in good repair. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.07 - Exterior surfaces. 
(a)  All exterior surfaces of any structure shall be weather tight and in good repair and shall not have any holes, cracks or deterioration that would allow water or vermin to reach any basic structural element or to enter the interior of any building. 
(b)  Any unauthorized writing or drawing on a visible exterior surface shall be removed within ten days from the day the writing or drawing first appeared. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.08 - Protection of exterior surfaces. 
    All exterior surfaces of a building or structure made of a material that may deteriorate from exposure to weather shall be protected by a properly applied weather resistant paint, stain or other waterproof finish. Primers shall be properly covered with a water resistant finish coating. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.09 - Exterior windows, doors, and openings. 
(a)  All exterior windows and doors shall be weather tight, in good repair, intact and functioning as originally intended and designed or shall be secured against weather by boarding, which shall be painted. 
(b)  Any exterior opening large enough for human or animal entry shall be secured by use of exterior grade plywood of at least 3/8 th inch thickness, cut to the size of the opening and secured by Phillips headed two-inch long screws on all first story or ground accessible entry points or 16d common nails on entry points above the first story or where not accessible from ground level. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.10 - Exterior attachments. 
    Any exterior attachment to basic structural elements shall be in good repair. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.11 - Accessory improvements. 
    All accessory improvements shall be in good repair. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.12 - Outdoor storage. 
    Outdoor storage of materials of value shall not be permitted to be located between the street and a building or closer than four feet to any side or rear lot line. Materials of value shall be stored in a safe and sanitary manner, shall not be scattered about and shall not have openings nor be stacked in a manner that may provide harborage for vermin. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.13 - Trees, shrubs, and other vegetation. 
    No tree, shrub or other vegetation shall be allowed to damage a building or block safe vision of a sidewalk, drive or street. No dead tree, trees, or parts thereof shall be permitted. Trees, shrubs, or other vegetation that endangers property shall be removed. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.14 - Health and sanitation. 
    All exterior areas shall be sanitary and free of trash and garbage. A responsible person shall dispose of all trash and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such in approved containers. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.15 - Workmanlike. 
    Additions, replacement, repairs or changes made to buildings, accessory buildings, appurtenances, structures, improvements, or facilities shall be done in a workmanlike manner. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.16 - Vacant property identification. 
    An identification sign in good repair and visible from the street shall be affixed to a vacant unoccupied property. Such sign shall provide the name(s), phone number(s), and address(es) of the property owner or other responsible person to be contacted regarding the property. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.17 - Enforcement. 
    This chapter shall be enforced as follows: 
(a)  Inspections. The City Manager or his or her designee shall be authorized to enter property subject to this chapter at reasonable times to inspect the property. 
(b)  Notice of violation. When the City Manager or his or her designee determines that there has been a violation of this chapter or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given to a responsible person. Said notice shall be in writing and include a description of the property, a statement of the violation or violations, and require correction of the violations within a reasonable time. Property tax records shall be conclusive proof of ownership for purposes of the notice. 
(c)  Abatement of violation. If the responsible person fails to correct the violation within the time period provided in the notice, the City may correct the violations and the cost of correction shall be billed to the responsible person as a personal debt which, if unpaid, may be assessed as a lien upon the property involved. 
(d)  Administrative extensions. For good cause shown, the City Manager or his or her designee may extend the time in which to correct the violation provided that the responsible person remits the fee identified in Section 1456.18 and upon such other conditions that the City Manager or his or her designee deems advisable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.18 - Fees. 
    In addition to other penalties and fees provided by law or this chapter, a responsible person shall pay the following fees: 
(1)  $175.00 for any violation within ten days of the issuance of a notice of violation. 
(2)  $150.00 for an administrative extension of the time in which to correct the violation(s). 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.19 - Emergencies. 
(a)  Notice. If the City determines that a condition exists or is likely to exist that is an emergency, the City shall immediately attempt to verbally inform the responsible person and all occupants of the building of the nature of the condition. The City shall immediately attempt to give verbal notice to the responsible person to correct the condition. Such an order shall be effective immediately. A written notice of violation called for by this chapter shall be prepared and mailed or personally served to the responsible person as soon as practicable after the verbal notice. If notice is attempted to be served in good faith but cannot be completed prior to having to take action necessary to abate an emergency condition, such notice shall be posted upon the subject property in a prominent location. 
(b)  Abatement. If the responsible person cannot be contacted or fails to correct an emergency condition within the time ordered, the City Manager or his or her designee may authorize corrective actions to abate the emergency. The cost of abatement shall be billed to the owner as a personal debt which, if unpaid, may be assessed as a lien upon the property involved. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.20 - Penalty. 
    In addition to the fees set forth in Section 1456.18, whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is subject to the civil infraction sanctions according to Traverse City Code Section 202.99, injunctive relief, nuisance abatement, surcharges and equitable remedies as provided in the Traverse City Code of Ordinances or as otherwise available under the law, as well as any damages resulting from such violation. A separate offense is deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
1456.21 - City costs. 
    Upon a finding of responsibility for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the Court shall order the defendant to reimburse the City for all of the costs of enforcement of this chapter attributable to the violations for which the defendant is found responsible, including but not limited to the costs of inspection, prosecution and administration. 
(Ord. 706. Passed 8-21-06) 
Chapter 1458 - Flood Plain Management[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate watercourses,  150, 151 
State Law reference- Flood control in home rule cities, M.C.L.A.  117.4a, 117.4e; Municipal bond issues, M.C.L.A.  135.1 et seq.; Drains and drainage; flood control projects, M.C.L.A.  280.429, 280.431; Floodplain easements, M.C.L.A.  281.628 
Cross reference- Harbor and waterfront, Ch. 1062; Ground-water protection and storm-water runoff control, Ch. 1068; Subdivisions in flood plains,  1246.05; Zoning of water areas,  1256.05 

1458.01 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to minimize losses due to floods, to control flood plains, to qualify for the National Flood Insurance Program and to meet all Federal requirements for flood plain management. 
(Ord. 146. Passed 11-15-82; Ord. 218. Passed 4-6-87.) 
1458.02 - Definitions. 
    Words and terms not defined herein shall have meanings as defined by applicable federal statutes, regulations and orders. As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Area of special flood hazard means the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
(2)  Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, manufactured home development, excavating or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard. 
(3)  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
(4)  Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. 146. Passed 11-5-82; Ord. 218. Passed 4-6-87.) 
1458.03 - Areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled the Flood Insurance Study for Grand Traverse County and the Flood Insurance Study for Leelanau County, dated August 28, 2018, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM panels 26055CIND0A, 26089CIND0A, 26055C0094C, 26055C0113C, 26055C0114C, 26055C0207C, 26055C0226C, 26055C0231C, and 26089C0520D) and Flood Boundary Floodway Maps, are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter by reference. The Flood Insurance Study and Maps are on file at the office of the Administrative Official. 
(Ord. 146. Passed 11-5-82; Ord. 218. Passed 4-6-87; Ord. 1079 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
1458.04 - Planning and zoning administrator as administrative official. 
    The Planning and Zoning Administrator of the City is hereby appointed as the Administrative Official to review all development and subdivision proposals for compliance with this chapter, to be responsible for all reporting to appropriate federal offices and to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source as criteria for requiring new construction, substantial improvement or other development. 
(Ord. 146. Passed 11-15-82; Ord. 218. Passed 4-6-87.) 
1458.05 - Regulatory floodway. 
    A regulatory floodway is hereby adopted in the City, which regulatory floodway shall consist of the channel of any stream plus adjacent 100-year flood plain areas that must be kept free of encroachments in order that the 100-year flood may be carried without substantial increase in flood height. 
(Ord. 146. Passed 11-15-82; Ord. 218. Passed 4-6-87.) 
1458.06 - Encroachments. 
    All encroachments within the regulatory floodway, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, which encroachments would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the flood base discharge are prohibited, except by variance. 
(Ord. 146. Passed 11-15-82; Ord. 218. Passed 4-6-87.) 
1458.07 - Manufactured homes. 
    All manufactured homes within the regulatory floodway are prohibited. 
(Ord. 146. Passed 11-15-82; Ord. 218. Passed 4-6-87.) 
1458.08 - Mechanical and utility equipment. 
    Service facilities and equipment, including, but not limited to, electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning shall be designed and/or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within components during conditions of flooding. 
(Ord. 146. Passed 11-15-82; Ord. 218. Passed 4-6-87.) 
1458.09 - Variances. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter consistent with the standards and procedures of the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program, 44 CFR, Parts 59-60. 
(Ord. 146. Passed 11-15-82; Ord. 218. Passed 4-6-87.) 
1458.10 - Adoption for Floodplain; Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code. 
    The provisions of Appendix G to the State Construction Code are hereby specifically adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter by reference, and shall be mandatory. A copy of Appendix G is on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 1079 , Passed 9-4-18.) 
1458.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1462 - Historic Areas[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Management and control of municipal buildings and grounds, M.C.L.A.  117.4j; State Construction Code, M.C.L.A.  125.1501 et seq.; Building permits, M.C.L.A.  125.1510 et seq.; Historic districts, sites and structures, M.C.L.A.  399.201 et seq. 
Cross reference- State Construction Code, Ch. 1420; Building permits,  1440.04, 1440.05; Historic Districts Commission, Ch. 272; Building Authority, Ch. 296 

1462.01 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Safeguard the heritage of the City and the Grand Traverse area by preserving districts which reflect elements in the City's cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history and by preserving historic landmarks; 
(2)  Stabilize and improve property values in such districts; 
(3)  Foster civic beauty; 
(4)  Strengthen the local economy; 
(5)  Identify and promote the use of historic resources for the education, pleasure and welfare of the residents of the City; 
(6)  Provide advice and/or management of public historical properties and resources; 
(7)  Unify historic preservation efforts in the area; and 
(8)  Satisfy all other purposes, expressed or implied, contained in Act 169 of the Public Acts of 1970, as amended (M.C.L.A. 399.201 et seq.). 
(Ord. 124. Passed 6-15-81.) 
1462.02 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Alteration means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its basic size or shape. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource. 
    Commission means the Traverse City Historic Districts Commission. 
    Conservation district means an area or group of areas, not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, created by the City Commission for purposes of this chapter, but possessing architectural or historical significance to a lesser degree than a historic district, while still worthy of recognition and historical preservation, and which reflects elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history. 
    Conservation landmark means a building, structure or object significant in history, architecture, archeology or culture, but possessing architectural or historical significance to a lesser degree than a historic landmark, while still worthy of recognition and historical preservation, and which reflects elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history. 
    Construction of a new building or new construction means and includes any construction or renovation that adds to or subtracts from existing floor space on the property to an extent greater than 50 percent, or that replaces floor space in a structure that has been destroyed, demolished or otherwise rendered obsolete or unusable to an extent greater than 50 percent, and that affects the exterior appearance of a new or existing structure. 
    Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect. 
    Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
    Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
    Historical preservation means the protection, rehabilitation, restoration or reconstruction of districts, archeological and other sites, buildings, structures and objects. 
    Historic district means an area or group of areas, not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, established by the City Commission for purposes of this chapter, having a singular identity, which area reflects elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history and is worthy of recognition and historical preservation. 
    Proposed historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an established historic district. 
    Historic landmark means a building, structure or object which reflects elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history and is worthy of recognition and historical preservation. 
    Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture. 
    Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this state or a community within this state, or of the United States. 
    Historic site means a site on which a building with historical significance stood or some historical event occurred, which building or event reflects elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history and is worthy of recognition and historical preservation. 
    Owner means any person who has equitable or legal title to any structure. In the case of a land contract, "owner" means the purchaser. 
    Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for purposes of chapter. 
    Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or non-historic buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces located within a historic district 
    Structure means any building over 200 square feet in gross floor area designed or built for the enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Work means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or demolition. 
(Ord. 263. Passed 12-19-88. Ord. 464. Passed 4-20-98. Ord. 574. Passed 8-19-02.) 
1462.03 - Historic districts commission. 
(a)  Establishment; composition; compensation; terms of office. A Historic Districts Commission is hereby established in and for the City. Such Commission shall consist of seven members of legal age who reside in the City. Members shall be appointed by the City Commission and shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in Commission activities. Members shall be appointed for three-year terms, except the initial appointments shall be three members for a term of three years, two members for a term of two years and two members for a term of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be for three-year terms, and members shall be eligible for reappointment. 
In the event of a vacancy on the Historic Districts Commission, interim appointments shall be made by the City Commission to complete the unexpired term of the position. One member shall be a registered architect and two members shall be selected from a list submitted by duly organized and existing preservation societies or historical groups. Neighborhood associations, merchants' groups and other groups with preservation interests may also submit names to the City Commission. 
(b)  Meetings; rules. The Historic Districts Commission shall meet monthly, or more frequently at the call of the Chairperson, and shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business. The business that the Commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the Commission held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, 1967 PA 1976, as amended. (MSA 15.261, et seq.) Public notice of the time, date and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by the Open Meetings Act. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the Commission. 
(c)  Duties; authority. 
(1)  Protection of designated areas. The City Commission may designate, by ordinance, historic districts and historic landmarks in which enforced historical preservation will occur. Protection shall be by a Historic Districts Commission review of a building, demolition or other permit application request. The City Commission may designate, by ordinance, historic sites, conservation districts and conservation landmarks in which property owners and occupants shall be given information and assistance on historical preservation. 
(2)  Designation of historic districts. The Historic Districts Commission shall investigate and recommend to the City Commission those areas it deems valuable for designation as historic districts. No area shall be designated as a historic district without the written consent of 51 percent of the property owners. Work covered by the review process shall include: 
a.  Construction of a new building; 
b.  Moving or demolition of a structure; and 
c.  Alteration or repair affecting the exterior appearance of a structure for which a permit is required. 
(3)  Designation of historic landmarks. The Historic Districts Commission may investigate and recommend to the City Commission those structures it deems valuable for designation as historic landmarks. No property shall be designated as a historic landmark without the written consent of the property owner of record. Work covered by the review process shall include: 
a.  Moving or demolition of the structure; 
b.  Construction of a new building; and 
c.  Alteration or repair affecting the exterior appearance of a structure for which a permit is required. 
(4)  Designation of conservation districts. The Historic Districts Commission may investigate and recommend to the City Commission those areas it deems valuable for designation as conservation districts. When designation of a conservation district is approved by the City Commission, the Historic Districts Commission will notify the property owner of the conservation district, in writing, and inform him or her of the advice and guidance available to him or her from the Historic Districts Commission with respect to new construction and remodeling. To ensure the continuation of this assistance in conservation districts, the Planning Director shall notify the Historic Districts Commission of all permit applications in conservation districts for: 
a.  Construction of a new building; and 
b.  Moving or demolition of a structure. 
The Historic Districts Commission shall then contact the owner and offer him or her any advice and guidance desired. The Historic Districts Commission shall have no authority to deny or delay the issuance of any such permit. 
(5)  Designation of conservation landmarks. The Historic Districts Commission may investigate and recommend to the City Commission those areas it deems valuable for designation as conservation landmarks. No property shall be designated as a conservation landmark without the written consent of the property owner of record. When designation of a conservation landmark is approved by the City Commission, the Historic Districts Commission will notify the property owner of the conservation landmark, in writing, and inform him or her of the advice and guidance available to him or her from the Historic Districts Commission with respect to new construction and remodeling. To ensure the continuation of this assistance in conservation landmarks, the Planning Director shall notify the Historic Districts Commission of all permit application in conservation landmarks for: 
a.  Construction of a new building; and 
b.  Moving or demolition of a structure. 
The Historic Districts Commission shall then contact the owner and offer him or her any advice and guidance desired. The Historic Districts Commission shall have no authority to deny or delay the issuance of any such permit. 
(6)  Designation of historic sites. The Historic Districts Commission may investigate and recommend to the City Commission those sites it deems valuable for designation as historic sites. No property shall be designated as a historic site without the written consent of the property owner of record. The Historic Districts Commission shall have no authority to deny or delay the issuance of any permit pertaining to a historic site. 
(7)  Erection of historic markers. The Historic Districts Commission may, with the written consent of the property owner of record, erect historic markers on any of the properties, structures or sites described in this subsection. 
(8)  Commendation and recognition. The Historic Districts Commission may issue appropriate commendation and recognition to individuals, firms or areas promoting preservation values and may recognize now the landmarks of the future by commending good examples of contemporary buildings. 
(9)  Maintenance of historic roster. The Historic Districts Commission shall maintain a roster of historic districts, historic landmarks, historic sites, conservation districts and conservation landmarks. 
(10)  Advisory capacity. The Historic Districts Commission shall render advice and guidance with respect to any proposed work to a property within the jurisdiction of this chapter and shall promote historical consciousness in educational programs. In addition, it may undertake any advisory duty deemed appropriate by the City Commission. 
(11)  Acceptance of gift or grant. The City Commission may accept public or private gifts for historic purposes or may accept grants from the state or federal government for historic restoration purposes. The City Commission may authorize the Historic Districts Commission to administer on its behalf grants and gifts for historic restoration purposes. 
(12)  Review of building permit applications. The Historic Districts Commission shall review all building or other applicable permit applications and plans coming under its authority as stated in this chapter. The Historic Districts Commission shall then approve or disapprove such applications as hereinafter provided. No permit or other authorization shall be granted until the Commission has acted thereon. 
(13)  Budget. The Historic Districts Commission expenses for stationery, clerical services, historic markers and other appropriate activities shall be provided in a budget submitted to and approved by the City Commission in the usual budget procedures. 
(Ord. 124. Passed 6-15-81; Ord. 136. Passed 5-17-82; Ord. 144. Passed 10-18-82. Ord. 464. Passed 4-20-98. Ord. 497. Passed 5-1-00.) 
1462.04 - Designation or removal of designation of historic districts, landmarks and sites. 
(a)  Designation or removal of designation of a historic district, historic landmark, historic site, conservation district or conservation landmark may be initiated by the Historic Districts Commission, or upon written petition signed by 20 percent of the landowners of the district or by the owner of the landmark or site. Such petition should designate clearly the land to be included or excluded. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a petition or upon its own motion, the Historic Districts Commission shall conduct studies and research and make a report on the historical significance, features, sites, objects and surroundings in the district, landmark or site. The report shall contain recommendations concerning the area to be included or excluded in the district, landmark or site. 
(c)  Copies of the report shall be transmitted for review to the Planning Commission, the Michigan Historical Commission and the State Historical Advisory Council. 
(d)  Written consent of all property owners of record of property to be included in a historic landmark, historic site or conservation landmark shall be obtained and on file with the Historic Districts Commission as a prerequisite to the public hearing and to any designation by the City Commission. Written consent of at least 51 percent of the property owners of record to be included in a historic district shall be obtained and on file with the Historic Districts Commission as a prerequisite to the public hearing and to any designation by the City Commission. 
(e)  The Historic Districts Commission shall hold a public hearing 60 days after such transmittal and shall give due notice of such public hearing, including written notice, to the property owners of record of all property proposed for inclusion in or exclusion from the district, landmark or site. 
(f)  The Historic Districts Commission shall submit a final report to the City Commission after the public hearing stating its recommendations and those of the Planning Commission, together with a draft of any proposed ordinance change. 
(g)  The City Commission shall act upon this final report and may amend this chapter and roster in the required ordinance amendment procedure. 
(h)  After the initial adoption of this chapter, the Historic Districts Commission shall have all the authority and duties of a historic districts study committee to recommend additions to or subtractions from existing districts, landmarks or sites pursuant to statute and this chapter. 
(Ord. 124. Passed 6-15-81. Ord. 136. Passed 5-17-82.) 
1462.05 - Historic preservation permits. 
(a)  Application and plans. An application for a building permit for a building or structure over 200 square feet in gross floor area in a historic district or that is a historic landmark shall be accompanied by a historical preservation permit application and plans. The plans shall describe the proposed changes, showing the structure in question and its relationship to adjacent structures. The application shall be made by the owner or by any person authorized to act on behalf of the owner. 
(b)  Notification. Upon the filing of such application, the Planning Director shall immediately notify the Historic Districts Commission of the receipt of such application and shall transmit it, together with accompanying plans and other information, to the Historic Districts Commission. 
(c)  Review. The Historic Districts Commission shall meet within 30 days after notification by the Planning Director, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Commission. In reviewing the plans, the Historic Districts Commission shall give consideration to: 
(1)  The historical or architectural value and significance of the structure and its relationship to the historical value of the surrounding area; 
(2)  The relationship of the exterior architectural features of such structure to the rest of the structure and to the surrounding area; 
(3)  The general compatibility of the exterior design, arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used; 
(4)  Any major improvement program; 
(5)  The economic feasibility of preservation of the structure; and 
(6)  Any other factor, including aesthetic, which it deems to be pertinent and within the purpose of this chapter. 
To aid in making this decision, the Historic Districts Commission shall use the "Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation" and any other preservation guidelines agreed upon by the Commission and available to all applicants. In reviewing the plans, the Historic Districts Commission may confer with the applicant for the permit and shall have the power to call in experts to aid in its deliberations. 
The Commission shall also consider all of the following: 
(1)  The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area. 
(2)  The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area. 
(3)  The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used. 
(4)  Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the Commission finds relevant. 
(d)  Approval. The Historic Districts Commission shall approve or disapprove such application and plans. If the same are approved, the Commission shall issue a certificate of approval, which certificate shall be signed by the chairperson, attached to the application for the building or other permit and immediately transmitted to the Planning Director. The chairperson shall also stamp all plans submitted to the Historic Districts Commission signifying its approval or disapproval. 
    Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a notice to proceed by the Commission if any of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the Commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the structure's occupants. 
(2)  The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing and environmental clearances. 
(3)  Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner. 
(4)  Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community. 
(e)  Conditions. The Historic Districts Commission may impose reasonable conditions to its approval. Standards for imposing such conditions are as follows: 
(1)  Any condition imposed must be reasonable and economically feasible. 
(2)  Any condition imposed must be designed to protect the natural resources and the health, safety and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being, of those who will use the land under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent and the community as a whole. 
(3)  Any condition imposed must be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed construction. 
(4)  Any condition imposed must also be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this chapter, be related to the standards established in this chapter for historical preservation and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
(f)  Disapproval. If the Historic Districts Commission disapproves of such application and/or plans, it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such actions and specific objections, in writing, to the Planning Director and to the applicant. Thereafter it shall endeavor to work out with the applicant an economically feasible plan for the repair, alteration or preservation of the structure. The applicant may make modifications to the application and/or plans and may resubmit his or her application at any time after so doing. If disapproved, no building or other permit shall be issued. 
    In evaluating applications for moving or demolition, the Historic Districts Commission shall give careful consideration to the conditions set forth in subsection (d) hereof. 
(g)  Appeals. An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the State Historic Preservation Review Board of the Michigan Historical Commission within the Department of State. The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The applicant may submit all or part of the appellant's evidence and arguments in written form. The review board shall consider an appeal at its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal, but may not charge a fee for considering an appeal. The Review Board may affirm, modify or set aside a Commission's decision and may order a commission to issue a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State Historic Preservation Review Board may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court having jurisdiction over the Historic Districts Commission. 
    Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the City of Traverse City, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District Commission may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision rendered under Section 1462.05(d) may not appeal to the court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board under this section. 
(h)  Filing. The Commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices to proceed and denials of applications for permits with the Planning Director or other delegated authority. A permit shall not be issued until the Commission has acted as prescribed above. If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the inspector or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied with a written explanation by the Commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for commission review when suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also include notification of the applicant's rights of appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board and to the Circuit Court. The failure of the Commission to act within 60 calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the Commission unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the commission shall be considered to constitute approval. 
(i)  Inspection and compliance. After the certificate and the building or other permit is issued, the Planning Director or his or her representative shall inspect the construction, alteration, repair, moving or demolition in accordance with the procedures established by the Planning Director, and shall take such action as is necessary to ensure compliance with the approved plans. The applicant and those acting under the building or other permit shall construct, move, demolish, alter and repair only in conformity with the certificate, the approved application and plans and any conditions imposed. 
(j)  Work done without a permit; findings of nonqualification; restoration. When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission may require an owner to restore the resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the Commission may seek an order from the Circuit Court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that is qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the Court, the Commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the Court's order. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the City unit as a special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to an order of the Circuit Court, a Commission or its agents may enter a property for the purposes of this section. 
(k)  Moratorium declaration for irreparable harm. If the legislative body of a City determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to resources located within an established historic district or a proposed historic district, the legislative body may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium of such work for a period not to exceed six months. The legislative body may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six months upon finding that a threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied. 
(l)  Violation; penalty. 
(1)  A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this chapter is responsible for a civil violation and may be fined not more than $5,000.00. 
(2)  A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this chapter may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource, unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated or demolished. 
(Ord. 124. Passed 6-15-81. Ord. 464. Passed 4-20-98. Ord. 498. Passed 5-1-00.) 
1462.06 - Demolition by neglect. 
    Upon finding by the Commission that a historic resource within a historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the Commission may do either of the following: 
(1)  Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect. 
(2)  If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the Commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the City of Traverse City as a special assessment against the property. The Commission or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the Circuit Court. 
(Ord. 464. Passed 4-20-98.) 
1462.07 - Roster. 
    The following properties are hereby designated as historic districts, historic landmarks, historic sites, conservation districts and conservation landmarks, as respectively indicated: 
(1)  Central Neighborhood Historic District. All areas and structures that fall inside the boundary starting at the southeast corner of the intersection of Division Street and the alley north of Fifth Street; thence south along the east right-of-way line of Division Street to the northeast corner of the intersection of Division Street and the alley south of Eighth Street; thence east along the north right-of-way line of the alley to the northwest corner of Locust Street and the alley south of Eighth Street; thence north along the west right-of-way line of Locust Street to the north right-of-way line of Sixth Street; thence east along the north right-of-way line of Sixth Street to the west right-of-way line of Union Street; thence north along the west right-of-way line to the south edge of the Boardman River; thence northwesterly along the edge of the Boardman River to a point where the south right-of-way line extended of the alley to the north of Fifth Street would intersect; thence east along the south right-of-way of the alley north of Fifth Street to the point of beginning. 
a.  Lots 15-28, Block 16; lots 22-42, Block 11; lots 25-42, Block 3 of Hannah Lay and Company's 10th Addition. 
b.  Lots 1-8 of Hannah Lay and Company's First Addition. 
c.  Lots 1-28, Block 17; lots 1-42, Block 10; lots 1-42, Block 4; lots 1-30, Block 18; lots 1-42, Block 9; lots 1-42, Block 6; lots 1-42, Block 5; lots 1-21, Block 7; lots 1-40, Block 8; lots 1-31, Block 19; Public School Block of the Hannah Lay and Company's 6th Addition. 
d.  Lots 1-16, Block 6; lots 1-21, Block 3; lots 1-16, Block 5; lots 1-21, Block 2 of Perry Hannah's Third Addition. 
e.  Lots 1-21, Block 6; Public School Lot Block; lots 1-21, Block 5; lots 1-21, Block 2 of Perry Hannah's First Addition. 
f.  Lots 15-38, Block 1; lots 15-38, Block 2; lots 27-38, Block 3 of Hannah Lay and Company's First Addition. 
g.  Public Library and Hannah Park Property. 
Such property is commonly known as: 
406, 407, 410, 411, 412, 415, 420, 423, 426, 427, 431, 432, 435, 438, 441, 441 1/2, 442, 502, 506, 507, 508, 511, 511 1/2, 512, 515, 516, 518, 519, 520, 521, 524, 525, 528, 529, 532, 533, 537, 538, 541, 542, 601, 602, 605, 611, 612, 613, 614, 615, 619, 620, 624, 625, 629, 629 1/2 and 630 Fifth Street; 
205, 209, 213, 217, 223, 305, 319, 322, 325, 330, 333, 339, 340, 403, 404, 409, 410, 415, 416, 419, 422, 425, 428, 429, 433, 436, 439, 440, 441, 441 1/2, 442, 501, 502, 509, 510, 512, 513, 516, 517, 520, 521, 524, 525, 528, 529, 532, 535, 537, 539, 540, 601, 604, 605, 609, 612, 615, 619, 620, 627, and 628 Sixth Street; 
202, 203, 206, 207, 210, 211, 215, 216, 217, 217 1/2, 219, 220, 223, 224, 301, 308, 312, 312 1/2, 316, 318, 320, 324, 326, 330, 330 1/2, 336, 340, 402, 406, 407, 410, 411, 411 1/2, 412, 414, 414 1/2, 415, 417, 418, 422, 423, 426, 427, 430, 431, 433, 433 1/2, 434, 437, 437 1/2, 438, 441, 442, 501, 502, 507, 508, 510, 511, 512, 516, 516 1/2, 517, 517 1/2, 518, 521, 522, 525, 526, 529, 530, 531, 534, 534 1/2, 535, 536, 536 1/2, 540, 541, 602, 603, 605, 607, 608, 616, 617, 619, 620, 621, 622, 625, 626, 628, and 629 Seventh Street; 
201, 202, 206, 207, 209, 210, 210 1/2, 212, 214, 215, 216, 219, 223, 224, 303, 307, 311, 311 1/2, 315, 319, 321, 321 1/2, 325, 331, 335, 341, 402, 403, 407, 408, 409, 409 1/2, 412, 414, 415, 416, 419, 419 1/2, 422, 425, 426, 428, 430, 431, 432, 435, 435 1/2, 437, 441, 441 1/2, 442, 502, 503, 504, 506, 507, 511, 512, 513, 518, 519, 521, 522, 524, 525, 528, 529, 532, 533, 536, 537, 540, 604, 606, 607, 611, 612, 613, 615, 618, 621, 622, 623, 626, 627, 629, 630, and 630 1/2 Eighth Street; 
116, 218, 311, 315, 508, 511, and 512 South Maple Street; 320, 324 and 511 Pine Street; 112, 115, 206, 211, 212, 312, 411, 513 and 515 South Oak Street; 202, 203, 208, 208 1/2, 209, 212, 214, 214 1/2, 317, 318, 319, 320, 402, 406, 410, 412, and 515 Wadsworth Street; and 515 Division Street. 
(b)  Boardman Neighborhood Historic District. All residential structures located in that part of the original plat of the City and that part of the plat of Hannah, Lay and Co's 5th Addition in the area of Boardman Avenue to Railroad Avenue and State Street to Webster Street, as described as follows: 
(1)  Lots 9 and 10 of Block 12, the south 65 feet of lot 1 and the south 65 feet of the west 8 feet of lot 2, Block 13; lots 7 through 16, Block 13; lots 1 through 16, Block 14; lot 8 and the east 33 feet of lot 7, Block 15; lots 1, 2 and 3 and the west 33 feet of lot 4, Block 16; the north 90 feet of lot 8 and the north 90 feet of the east 21 feet of lot 7, Block 16; lots 1 through 16, Block 17; lots 1 through 16, Block 18; lots 9 through 16, Block 19, all being a part of the original plat of the City; and 
(2)  The north 80 feet of lots 1, 2 and 3, Block 6 and lots 4 through 23, Block 6; lots 1 through 38, Block 7; lots 1 through 29, Block 8; lots 1 through 8, Block 9, all being part of the plat of Hannah, Lay and Co's 5th Addition to the City. 
Such property is commonly known as 440, 441, 444, 445, 448, 505, 508, 509, 511, 515, 516, 522, 528, 529, 530, 534, 535, 538, 539, 542, 544, 547, 601, 604, 605, 610, 611, 615, 616, 617, 620 and 624 State Street; 401, 402, 410, 413, 414, 421, 422, 427, 428, 431, 435, 436, 448, 502, 515, 516, 521, 526, 529, 534, 536, 538, 543, 547, 601, 602, 612, 613, 616, 617, 619, 622, 623, 626, 625, 628, 629, 632, 633 and 634 Washington Street; 325, 413, 417, 421, 425, 433, 435, 439, 444, 446, 447, 502, 508, 512, 515, 516, 517, 518, 519, 521, 523, 524, 525, 531, 537, 539, 542, 545, 546, 602, 605, 608, 609, 611, 612, 615, 616, 618, 619, 622, 623, 624, 626, 627, 628, 630, 631, 636, 637, 641, 642 and 644 Webster Street; 215, 221 and 325 Boardman Avenue; 205, 212, 214-216, 224-226, 229, 230, 317, 318, 321, 325 and 415 Wellington Street; 115, 119, 120, 213-215, 214, 216, 217, 319 and 320 Franklin Street; and 210, 312 and 314 Railroad Ave. 
(c)  Downtown Historic District. All structures in that part of the Original Plat of Traverse City as described as follows: 
(1)  Lots 1 through 17, plus the east 44 feet of Lot 18, Block 5; Lots 4 through 10, plus the east 52 feet of Lot 3, Block 4; Lots 1 through 20, Block 6; Lots 1 through 13, Block 7; Block 11 except Lots 9, 10, 11 and 12; Block 21, except Lots 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and the east 39 feet of Lot 14; Lots 1 and 2 of Block 12 and Block 23; plus a parcel of land described as commencing at the Northeast corner of the intersection of East Front Street and Boardman Avenue, which is the point of beginning, thence east 75 feet along the north right-of-way line of East Front Street, thence North to the thread of the Boardman River, thence west along the thread of the Boardman River to a point due North of the point of beginning, thence south the point of beginning, plus Hannah, Lay and Company's Second Subdivision, being the replat of Block 25 of the Original Plat of Traverse City, plus Hannah Lay and Company's Third Subdivision being the replat of Block 24 of the Original Plat of Traverse City. 
Such property is commonly known as 101, 102, 104, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 114, 115, 117, 118, 120, 121, 122, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 134, 135, 136, 137, 140, 143, 144, 145, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 161, 201, 202, 203, 204, 207, 208, 209, 210, 212, 216, 217, 219, 220, 221, 224, 225, 227, 228, 229, 230, 232, 235, 236, 237, 238, 240, 241, 242, 247, 250, 251, 302, 308, 309, 311, 314, 315, 321, 322, 332, 336, 340, 346, 401 and 402 East Front Street; 125, 129, 131, 133, 142, 160, 202, 213, 214, 216, 217, 222, 223, 227, 232, 300, 302, 315 East State Street; 109, 113 South Union Street; 116, 118, 122, 124, 216 Cass Street; 100, 104 North Park Street; 106, 110, 111, 115, 117, 120, 140 Park Street; 111, 116 Boardman Avenue, 
(2)  All City lands north of East Front Street and east of the east right-of-way line of Union Street extended northerly to West Grand Traverse Bay and east of the east right-of-way line of Boardman Avenue extended northerly to the thread of the Boardman River, thence easterly along said thread to the north right-of-way lines of US 31 where the Murchie Bridge crosses the river, thence easterly along the north right-of-way line of US 31 to the southwest property corner of the Holiday Inn, thence northerly along the west property line to West Grand Traverse Bay. 
(Ord. 288. Passed 12-3-90. Ord. 509. Passed 9-5-00.) 
Chapter 1468 - Moving of Buildings[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Removal of obstructions and encroachments from highways and roads, M.C.L.A.  247.171 et seq.; Abatement of street and highway obstructions, M.C.L.A.  600.2937; Indemnity agreements, M.C.L.A.  691.991 
Cross reference- Street obstructions,  1020.03 

1468.01 - Permit required; route. 
    No person shall move any building upon any street, alley or other public space without first obtaining a permit therefor. The moving of the building shall be continuous as long as the building remains upon a street or alley. The route chosen and the time of movement shall be such as, in the opinion of the City Manager, offers the least public inconvenience consistent with the greatest public safety. 
(1976 Code Sec. 9.05) 
1468.02 - Civil infraction. 
    A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and subject to the penalties of Section 202.99. 
(Ord. 640. Passed 5-3-04.) 
1468.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1470 - Numbering of Buildings[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- City Plan, Ch. 1222; Signs, Ch. 1476 

1470.01 - Street numbering plat. 
    All premises and street mail boxes shall bear a distinctive street number in accordance with, and as designated upon, the property tax plats on file in the office of the City Assessor. Such plat, and any revision thereof authorized by the City Commission, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference as if fully set forth at length herein. 
(Ord. 294. Passed 3-18-91.) 
1470.02 - Placement of numbers; size. 
    Every person owning or occupying any premises shall place the correct street number upon the street side of such premises, adjacent to the principal entrance, and on street mail boxes in such a position as to be plainly visible from the street. If premises has no street side, or where, in the City Assessor's discretion, the street side does not provide access to the premises, the right of way providing the access shall be considered a street for purposes of street numbering. Numbers in block or script displayed on building sides shall be of a contrasting color to their background and shall be not less than three inches in height. Numbers on mailboxes on the premises shall be displayed in such a manner as to be plainly visible from traffic lanes in either direction of approach. The numbers shall be of a contrasting or reflectorized color to their background and shall be not less than one inch in height. 
(Ord. 294. Passed 3-18-91.) 
1470.03 - Multifamily dwellings; multiple-occupancy buildings. 
    In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, all multifamily dwellings and multiple-occupancy buildings shall have each individual unit clearly and permanently identified in numerical or alphabetical order without duplication. 
(Ord. 331. Passed 5-4-92.) 
1470.04 - Civil infraction. 
    A person who violates this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and subject to the penalties of Section 202.99. 
(Ord. 638. Passed 5-3-04.) 
1470.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1476 - Signs[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- This sign ordinance is adopted pursuant to MCL 117.4i of the Home Rule Cities Act to preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Traverse City. 

1476.01 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the Sign Ordinance. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1476.02 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(a)  Protect property values by improving the City's image, 
(b)  Acknowledge that signs help locate goods, services and facilities, 
(c)  Promote safe travel by minimizing sign hazards, obstructions and driver distractions, 
(d)  Recognize the contribution business signs make to sales, job opportunities and the City's tax base, 
(e)  Recognize that well-designed signs create attractive business districts, 
(f)  Further visibility and effectiveness of all signs by instituting reasonable standards, 
(g)  Protect scenic views, landscapes, architecture and the night sky, 
(h)  Provide flexible regulations for diverse needs, 
(i)  Preserve public health, safety and welfare. 
(j)  Provide time, place and manner regulations for signs; the provisions of this chapter are intended to have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing regulations on the content of signs. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04. Ord. 798. Passed 6-16-08.) 
1476.03 - Application of chapter; conflict of laws. 
    This chapter shall apply to the display, construction, erection, alteration, use, location and maintenance of all signs in the City. No person shall display, construct, enlarge, erect, alter, use or maintain any sign, except in conformity with this chapter. Furthermore, if any of the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any other law presently existing or enacted in the future, the more restrictive requirement will apply. If any of the provisions of any other chapter of these Codified Ordinances is clearly in conflict with this chapter, this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1476.04 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Awning means a retractable or fixed shelter constructed of materials on a supporting framework that projects from the exterior wall of a building. An awning sign is considered a "wall sign." 
    Banner means a sign made of vinyl, cloth, plastic or other flexible material. 
    Building means any structure designed or built for the enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Canopy means a permanently roofed shelter projecting over a sidewalk, driveway, entry, window or similar area, which shelter may be wholly supported by a building or may be wholly or partially supported by columns, poles or braces extended from the ground including gas pump shelters. 
    Commercial use means a use for the sale of products or services. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign principally supported independent of any building. 
    Frontage, street. "Street frontage" means that side of a parcel which is adjacent to a street. 
    Grade means: 
(1)  For buildings having walls within 25 feet of a street: The average elevation of the sidewalks, curbs or centerlines of streets, whichever is closest to the building walls adjoining the streets. 
(2)  For buildings more than 20 feet from the street: The average of the lowest and highest ground surface elevations in an area within six feet of the foundation line of a building or structure. 
    Height means the vertical distance measured from the grade. 
    Illumination, indirect. "Indirect illumination" means lighting a sign by means of a light source which is directed at its front surface, or a light source which is primarily designed to illuminate the entire building facade upon which a sign is displayed. "Indirect illumination" does not include lighting which is primarily used for purposes other than sign illumination, e.g. parking lot lights, or lights inside a building which may silhouette a window sign but which are primarily installed to serve as inside illumination. 
    Illumination, internal. "Internal illumination" means lighting by means of a light source which is within a sign having an opaque background or silhouetting opaque letters or designs, or within letters or designs which are themselves made of a translucent material. 
    Industrial use means a use for the manufacture of products. 
    Institutional use means a school, church, hospital or any other public or quasi-public use. 
    Joint identification sign means a sign which serves as a common or collective identification for two or more commercial or industrial uses on the same parcel. Such sign may contain a directory to such uses as an integral part thereof, or may serve as general identification only for such developments as shopping centers, industrial parks and the like. 
    Landmark means an older sign designated by the Historic Districts Commission that by virtue of its age, rarity, historical significance, special design qualities, and characteristics of an earlier era, merits special regulatory treatment under this chapter. 
    Light source means any artificial illumination and any reflecting surface which, by reason of its construction and/or placement, becomes, in effect, the light source. 
    Marquee sign means a sign depicted upon, attached to or supported by a marquee a permanently roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting from the building. 
    Parcel means a portion of land under one ownership or one tax parcel identification number, whether or not part of a platted subdivision, occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or use. 
    Parcel width means the width of the parcel at the front building line. 
    Person means a corporation, association, partnership, trust, firm or similar activity as well as an individual. 
    Portable sign means a sign of A-frame or similar construction which can be easily removed on a daily basis. 
    Projecting sign means a sign which is attached directly to the building wall, and which extends more than 15 inches from the face of the wall. 
    Recreational use means a use designed for activities such as picnicking, sports, swimming, biking, etc. 
    Residential use means a use primarily designed for non-commercial dwellings. 
    Roof sign means a sign erected, constructed or maintained upon, or which projects above, the roof surface of a building. 
    Sign means any writing, letter, word, symbol, pictorial representation, form light or structure which, by reason of its shape, bulk, color, message, wording, symbol, design, illustration, motion or otherwise, attracts or is designed to attract attention or to communicate a visual message, including any back lighted translucent, roof, wall, canopy or other architectural element. 
    Sign area means the total surface area of a sign that can be seen from one vantage point exclusive of supports and masonry encasing. 
    Sign face means the surface of a sign where the message is displayed or illustrated. 
    Sign structure means any supports, uprights or internal framework and bracing of a sign. 
    Sign, temporary means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited period and associated with a temporary event and one which is without permanent foundations or attached to the exterior of a building. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground above grade, but not including poles, lines, cables or other transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities. 
    Suspended sign means a sign attached to and hanging below the ceiling of an eave, arcade, marquee or canopy. 
    Traffic directional sign (private) means a sign erected on private property for the purpose of guiding vehicular and pedestrian traffic only. 
    Trailer-mounted sign means a sign designed to be easily relocated to a different site to draw attention. 
    Wall, building means a side of a building lying in an uninterrupted plane. 
    Wall sign means a sign which is painted on or attached directly to a building wall with the face of the sign parallel to and extending not more than 15 inches from the face of the wall. Wall signs include awning signs. 
    Wind sign means a sign consisting of one or more pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, captive balloons, air pressure stabilized bags, or other objects or materials fastened or supported in such a manner as to provide movement when subjected to wind. 
    Window sign means a sign which is applied, affixed or attached to the interior of any building window. 
    Zoning Administrator means the Traverse City Zoning Administrator or other person charged with the administration of this chapter, or that person's duly authorized deputy. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) (Ord. 697. Passed 3-20-06. Ord. 869. Passed 7-6-10.) 
1476.05 - Prohibited signs. 
    No person shall display, erect, use or maintain a sign for which a permit is required and has not been issued, or a: 
(1)  Electronic message sign capable of changing any message or graphic and which does so more than once an hour. 
(2)  Imitation traffic sign which, by reason of its shape, color, use of lighting, or other factor, is similar in both size and appearance to any official traffic signal or traffic sign or railroad sign or signal in a way that may, in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, interfere with traffic movement or safety. 
(3)  Internally illuminated sign in a predominately residential area. 
(4)  Motor vehicle with a sign which is parked in a position visible to traffic on a public road or parking area for the primary purpose of displaying the sign to the public. 
(5)  Obsolete sign. Any sign that does not meet the provisions of this Code, together with its supporting structure which is still standing 180 days or more after the premises have been vacated. This provision shall not apply to permanent signs accessory to businesses which are open only on a seasonal basis, provided there is a clear intent to continue operation of the business. 
(6)  Portable sign along Front Street between Union Street and Boardman Avenue except for governmental directional signs. 
(7)  Revolving sign or sign with movable parts or which give the illusion of movement by means of illumination or otherwise, are not permitted, except barber poles less than eight feet in height are allowed. 
(8)  Roof sign. 
(9)  Searchlights, lasers or other high intensity lights sources to light the night sky. 
(10)  Sign on public property, without the public property owner's approval. 
(11)  Trailer-mounted or similar portable sign, such as a wheeled device. 
(12)  Unsafe sign. Any sign or structure which is structurally unsafe, constitutes a hazard to the public health, welfare and safety or is not kept in a state of good repair, or any sign which obstructs free access to or egress from a required door, window or fire escape or other required exit way. 
(13)  Wind sign as defined in Section 1476.04. 
(Ord. 632, Passed 4-19-04; Ord. 869, Passed 7-6-10; Ord. 1031 , Passed 3-21-16) 
1476.06 - Signs authorized without a sign permit. 
    Subject to any other applicable requirements and permits, the following are authorized without a sign permit: 
(1)  Banners within the public right-of-way with the public property owner's permission. 
(2)  Copy changes to bulletin boards, display cases or marquees, or maintenance where no structural changes are made, or copy changes on signs using interchangeable letters. 
(3)  Cornerstones and commemorative tablets identifying a building or building complex that are an integral part of the building. 
(4)  Directional signs, two entrance/exit directional signs per driveway, each four square feet or less, and limited to 42 inches in height. These signs may be illuminated. 
(5)  Flag signs not exceeding 15 square feet in area with no dimension greater than five feet. Flag signs are limited to one per business front or parcel. Flag signs shall be installed in a manner that will not impede pedestrian traffic. 
(6)  Inconspicuous signs which are not readable beyond the boundaries of the parcel upon which they are located or from any public or private street or alley. 
(7)  Landmarks and historical site signs at least 50 years old which may no longer advertise an existing business activity, but are designated "Landmark Signs" by the Traverse City Historic Districts Commission because of their historical significance and ongoing value to the community. The owner of any sign 50 years or older may submit a written request for designation as a "Landmark Sign" to the Historic Districts Commission and a list of "Landmark Signs" shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator. 
(8)  Neighborhood identification signs which identify a commercial district or recognized residential neighborhood when located on public land or within a public right of way with the public property owner's approval. 
(9)  Official governmental notices and notices posted by governmental officers in the performance of their duties; governmental-owned directional signs, signs to control traffic, identify municipal boundaries, or for other regulatory purposes, to identify streets or to warn of danger; however, identification or bulletin board signs accessory to governmental buildings or other governmental facilities are not exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
(10)  Small signs, one wall or projecting sign per one or two-family residential parcel. The sign shall not be illuminated, shall not exceed two square feet in area and shall not exceed a height of eight feet above ground level. 
(11)  Temporary signs such as those associated with construction projects, real estate sales or leases and other such temporary signs in connection with: 
a.  Commercial, industrial, multiple family, recreational and institutional uses. These signs shall not be illuminated, are limited to two per parcel and limited to a maximum area of 32 square feet and eight feet high each. These signs shall be set back ten feet from the front property line. These signs shall be removed within 14 days after the conclusion of the project, sale or event. 
b.  One and two-family residential uses. These signs shall not be illuminated, are limited to a maximum area of six square feet each and 42 inches in height. These signs shall be located on private property. These signs shall be removed shall be removed within 14 days after the conclusion of the project, sale or event. 
c.  Temporary signs shall not be arranged to create a sign with a single message exceeding the size and area requirement of this section. 
d.  Temporary signs shall be adequately secured and must be taut or made of a rigid material. 
(12)  Vehicle mounted signs with a permanent message displayed on trucks, buses, trailers or other vehicles which are being operated or stored in the normal course of a business, such as a sign indicating the name of the owner or business, which sign is located on a moving van, delivery truck, rental truck, trailer or the like, provided that the primary purpose of such vehicle is not for the display of signs, and provided, further, that such vehicle is parked or stored in an area appropriate to its use as a work vehicle; 
(13)  Warning signs exclusively devoted to warning the public of dangerous conditions and unusual hazards. 
(14)  Window signs for commercial, industrial, institutional and recreational uses, not exceeding 25% of each window area. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04. Ord. 797. Passed 06-02-08. Ord. 869. Passed 7-6-10.) 
1476.07 - Signs authorized with a permit. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall display, erect, relocate or alter, excluding maintenance, any sign or allow the same to occur on his or her property without first obtaining a sign permit. A sign permit is required before the following types of signs may be displayed, erected, relocated or altered: 
(1)  Freestanding signs. 
(2)  Wall signs, including awning signs. 
(3)  Canopy signs. 
(4)  Projecting signs. 
(5)  Suspended signs. 
    If all requirements of this chapter and all other laws are met, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a sign permit. 
(b)  Applications. The owner or tenant of the property on which the sign is to be located, or his or her authorized agent, shall complete and sign an application for a sign permit on forms furnished by the City. The application shall be accompanied by a Master Sign Plan according to Section 1476.09. The Zoning Administrator shall, within ten working days of the date of the application, either approve or deny the application or, if sufficient information has not been furnished, refer the application back to the applicant. 
(c)  Fees. Each sign permit application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable permit fee, in an amount determined by resolution of the City Commission. This fee shall be in addition to any electrical permit fee or building permit fee. Where any sign is displayed without the required sign permit, the fee for the sign permit shall be doubled. When any permit has been revoked, permit fees shall not be refunded. 
(d)  Display. Each sign requiring a sign permit shall contain a clearly legible identification plate, no larger than 15 square inches in area, stating the name of the person responsible for its construction and erection, along with the installation date and permit number. 
(e)  Modifications. When a sign permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator, no person shall change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of such permit without the prior written approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
(f)  Expiration. 
(1)  If actual work is not commenced under a sign permit issued within one year from the date of such permit of if substantial building operations under any permit issued under this chapter are suspended for 180 consecutive days, the permit shall automatically become null and void. 
(2)  Upon written request stating the reasons therefore, the Zoning Administrator may extend the permit for one additional year upon good cause shown. All requests for extensions and approval thereof shall be in writing. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1476.08 - Specific sign regulations. 
(a)  Applicability. The regulations contained in this section apply specifically to signs authorized with a permit. 
(b)  Schedule of regulations. Freestanding, wall, canopy, awning, projecting, suspended, window signs, and portable signs must comply with the place, area, height, number and location requirements in the Schedule of Regulations contained in this section. In addition to any other regulations contained in this Code, the following specific regulations apply: 
(1)  Freestanding and wall signs. 
a.  Freestanding signs area computations are computed as shown in Appendix A. 
b.  Freestanding signs shall be set back in conformity with clear vision triangle standards if located near intersections and driveways. See Appendix B. 
c.  Freestanding signs are not allowed in the downtown area,described on Appendix C. 
d.  A multiple family residential use in a predominately one or two family residential area shall be limited to one wall or projecting sign per parcel, shall not be illuminated, shall not exceed two square feet in area and shall not exceed a height of eight feet above ground level. 
e.  A commercial, industrial, or institutional use utilizing a freestanding or wall sign located in a predominately one or two family residential area shall be limited to the following: 
1.  No freestanding sign shall exceed six feet in height 
2.  No sign shall exceed 24 square feet in area. 
3.  No sign shall be internally illuminated. 
f.  In no case shall the area of a wall sign or signs exceed 15% of the area of the wall upon which the sign or signs are displayed. 
(2)  Projecting and suspended signs: 
a.  Shall not project over a building's roofline. 
b.  May project over public property only with the public property owner's permission. 
c.  May be excepted from the maximum sign area requirements by the Zoning Administrator for theater marquees in cases where necessary copy and standard changeable letter sizes clearly necessitate such an exception. 
d.  The owner of a sign projecting over City property shall provide comprehensive general liability insurance in an amount determined by the City Clerk. Proof of such insurance shall be submitted upon application for a sign permit, shall name the City as an additional insured, and shall provide no less than 30 day advance notification of cancellation to the City. 
e.  Shall not be internally illuminated, except for signs made of metal with individual routed letters or logos. 
(3)  Portable signs: Portable signs during hours of operation only. 
(c)  Sign bonuses. Bonuses in height and area for freestanding and wall signs may be granted by the Zoning Administrator for the following: 
(1)  Freestanding signs. The base area for freestanding signs may be increased up to a maximum total sign area of 40 square feet for the following: 
a.  Height. A sign eight feet or less in height: an additional ten square feet in sign area is allowed. 
b.  Background. A sign having a dark or opaque sign face of at least 60 percent: an additional ten square feet is allowed. (See Appendix D) 
(2)  Wall signs. The base area or height for wall signs may be increased up to a maximum total sign area of 65 square feet for the following: 
a.  Background. A sign having a dark or opaque sign face of at 60 percent: an additional 15 square feet is allowed. 
b.  No freestanding sign. If there is no freestanding sign on the premises, an additional 15 square feet is allowed. 
c.  Single individual letters or logos that appear integral to the architecture and made of metal or masonry may exceed the maximum height requirement provided the letters meet the area requirements as outlined in the Schedule of Regulations. The letters and logos shall not be internally lit. 
(3)  Canopy signs. For a commercial, industrial, institutional or recreational use, an additional sign is allowed on a canopy if there is no freestanding sign on the parcel or if the freestanding sign on the parcel is less than 24 square feet in area and no taller than eight feet in height. The sign on the canopy shall be no larger than 12 square feet and on a canopy no taller than 18 feet. Two such signs per parcel are allowed on the canopy. 
(d)  Time-temperature-date devices. Clocks and thermometers may be incorporated into any sign provided such device does not exceed nine square feet. 
(Ord. 696. Passed 3-20-06. Ord. 869. Passed 7-6-10. Ord. 984. Passed 11-4-13) 
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 
Sign Place Size Height 1 Number Location Base area Area bonus 1 Freestanding 2 Commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational (Except not allowed in the "downtown" area shown on Appendix C) 20 square feet For a lower sign: 10 additional square feet. 
For a dark or opaque background: 10 additional square feet. 15 feet or the height of the principal building, whichever is less Street frontage per parcel : 
0' - 200': 1 sign 
201' -399': 2 signs 
400' or more: 3 signs per parcel Set back minimum of 10 feet from any property line (Not allowed in the "downtown" area shown on Appendix C) Multiple family 
residential 12 square feet N/A 6 feet 1 per street frontage per parcel Wall and awning 2 Commercial, industrial, institutional, 
recreational Business front width feet  1.5 feet or 35 square feet, whichever is less but not more than 15% of wall area For a dark or opaque background: 15 additional square feet 
If no freestanding sign: an additional 15 square feet 18 feet or one foot below the second floor window trim, except as in Section 1476.08(c)(2), Specific Sign Regulations N/A First floor of building wall, except as provided in 1476.08(c)(2), Specific Sign Regulations Multiple family residential 12 square feet 1 N/A 18 feet or one foot below the second floor window trim, except as in Section 1476.08(c)(2), Specific Sign Regulations 1 sign per parcel First floor of building wall, except as provided in 1476.08(c)(2), Special Sign Regulations Canopy 2 Commercial, industrial, institutional, 
recreational 6 square feet For a dark or opaque background: an additional 6 square feet 18' maximum 2 per canopy 2 See Section 1476.08(c)(3) for conditions Projecting/Suspended 2 Commercial, industrial, 
institutional and recreational 12 square feet, except theater marquees may be excepted (see 1476.08(b)(2)) N/A Minimum 8' 
Maximum 15' 1 sign per business front 1. Projecting - not more than 4 feet from the face of the building 
2. Suspended - not beyond the outside limits of the arcade, marque or eave to which it is attached. Window Commercial, industrial, institutional and 
recreational Twenty-five percent of each window area is authorized without a sign permit. See Section 1476.06(l). Portable Commercial, industrial, institutional and 
recreational 6 square feet with no dimension greater than 3 feet N/A Maximum 4' 1. One sign per business front 
2. If no business front, one per parcel. 1. On private property within 10 feet of building face. 
2. If no building face, 10 feet from any property line.  
1 For commercial, industrial, multiple family dwellings, recreational or institutional users in a predominantly residential block, see Section 1476.08. 
2 See Section 1476.08 for conditions. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04. Ord. 641. Passed 5-17-04. )(Ord. 696. Passed 3-20-06. Ord. 869. Passed 7-6-10.) 
1476.09 - Signs in planned areas. 
    Any sign located in a planned unit development, a zoning district requiring a Master Site and Facilities Plan, or a planned redevelopment district shall conform to the requirements of this chapter unless specifically exempted therefrom in the approved Master Signage Plan as a part of a Master Site and Facilities Plan, an order granting the planned unit development or as part of a formal project approval by the Grand Traverse Commons Redevelopment Corporation. 
    A sign located on the Grand Traverse Commons Planned Redevelopment District shall conform to the guidelines of the site graphics section of the Grand Traverse Commons District Plan, pages 141-143. No signs shall be erected or displayed in this Planned Redevelopment District without a sign permit and no sign permit shall be issued until the design, illumination and location of the proposed sign is approved by the Planning Director. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1476.10 - Master sign plan. 
(a)  Plan required. No permit shall be issued for an individual sign unless a Master Sign Plan for the site upon which the sign is to be erected has been submitted to and approved by the Zoning Administrator as conforming with this ordinance. No sign shall be erected on any site unless it is shown on an approved Master Sign Plan. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. A Master Sign Plan submitted for approval shall include the following: 
(1)  An accurate site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed location of each freestanding sign and the location of all buildings and driveways on the parcel. 
(2)  An accurate elevation of each building wall intended to accommodate a sign, including window signs, showing the location, dimensions, and height of each sign above grade level. 
(3)  A computation of the area of each sign on the parcel. 
(4)  An illustration depicting each proposed sign, its size and proportions, color scheme, construction material and type of illumination. 
(c)  Amendment. A Master Sign Plan may be amended by filing a new plan which conforms to all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Binding effect. Upon approval of a Master Sign Plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, attached or maintained, except as shown on such plan and a violation of the approved plan may be enforced in the same manner as any provision of this ordinance. In the case of a conflict between the provisions of the Master Sign Plan and any other provision of the Sign Ordinance, the ordinance shall control. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1476.11 - Sign illumination regulations. 
    Illuminated signs shall be designed, constructed, and installed to comply with the following standards in order to reduce glare and the general overwash of light to public rights-of-way and residential uses and to promote the protection of the dark sky. 
(1)  Flashing, rotating and intermittent lighting is prohibited except for marquee signs on buildings used solely for theaters for the general public subject to the following conditions. 
a.  Only permitted in area shown in Appendix E, which is located at the end of this chapter. 
b.  The marquee shall be designed as to not be dangerous or confusing to motorists on the public right-of-way by its color, wording, design, location or illumination that would resemble or conflict with any official traffic-control device or which impedes the safe and efficient flow of traffic. 
c.  The marquee lights shall be lit only during times the theater is in operation. 
(2)  Back-lighted individual opaque channel letterforms shall be softly silhouetted against their background. 
(3)  Internally illuminated channel letters and logos with translucent faces, shall contain soft, diffused light sources inside each letter or logo. 
(4)  With the exception of directional and "no vacancy" signs, no sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless the premises are open for business. 
(5)  Externally lit signs associated with multiple family residential uses are allowed. 
(6)  Electronic message signs shall not exceed a light intensity of 10 percent of the day time use between dusk and dawn. 
(Ord. 632, Passed 4-19-04; Ord. 797, Passed 6-02-08; Ord. 1032 , Passed 3-21-16) 
1476.12 - Sign structures. 
    The following requirements apply to all signs requiring a permit: 
(1)  General design. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to meet any requirements of the Michigan State Construction Code, as amended, and with all applicable regulations adopted thereunder. 
(2)  Maintenance. Every sign, including those specifically exempt from this chapter with respect to permits and permit fees, shall be maintained in good repair and sound structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not galvanized or constructed of rust resistant metals. 
(3)  Safety. All signs must remain safe and secure during the period of use. All parts of the signs, including bolts and cables, shall remain painted and free from corrosion. The Zoning Administrator shall inspect and may order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which constitutes a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1476.13 - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Description. A legal nonconforming sign is any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the enactment of this chapter, and any amendments thereto, and which does not conform to all the applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter and any amendment thereto. 
(b)  Continuation. 
(1)  A legal nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition, but it shall not be: 
a.  Converted to another nonconforming sign by changing the sign face. 
b.  Expanded or altered so as to increase the degree of nonconformity of the sign. 
c.  Re-established after damage or destruction, ordinary wear or obsolescence, if the estimated cost of the reconstruction or renovation exceeds 50 percent of the replacement sign cost as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
d.  Continued in use following construction of a new building, reconstruction, substantial addition to or improvement of an existing building when the value of such construction exceeds $50,000.00 in a 12-month period. 
(2)  If there are multiple nonconforming signs on a parcel and only the face of any one of the signs is changed, only the changed sign or signs must be brought into compliance with this Code. 
(3)  Any legal nonconforming sign designed for changing the sign's message on a regular basis (such as a bulletin or message board, joint identification sign, or gasoline pricing sign where individual letters, numerals or name panels are readily interchangeable) may be changed without having to be brought into compliance with this Code. 
(c)  New additional signs. On parcels where a sign or signs is a legal nonconforming sign, no new additional sign shall be erected until all such nonconforming sign or signs on the parcel are brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04. Ord. 642. Passed 5-15-04.) 
1476.14 - Violations. 
(a)  Notice. If the Zoning Administrator finds that a sign violates this chapter, he or she shall give written notice to the owner of the sign or to the owner of the property where the sign is located and an order ordering that the violation be corrected. 
(b)  Order. The order shall specify those sections of this chapter violated, and shall state the amount of time from the date of the order in which to either correct the alleged violation or appeal the order to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(c)  Compliance. If such person fails to bring the sign into compliance within the time given in the notice, the Zoning Administrator may, in addition to the other remedies provided in this Code, cause such sign to be brought into compliance at the expense of the owner or the owner of the property where the sign is located and cause the permit to be revoked. 
(d)  Dangerous signs. If the Zoning Administrator finds that a sign endangers public or private property or public safety, the Zoning Administrator may, after notice given to the owner of the sign and of the property where the sign is located, immediately remove or alter such sign at the expense of the sign owner or property owner. 
(e)  Forfeiture of fees. When any permit has been revoked, permit fees shall not be refunded. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1476.15 - Appeals. 
(a)  Board. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall serve as the appeals board for the purposes of this Chapter. 
(b)  Powers. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to empower the Board of Appeals to substantially change the terms of this Chapter, or to significantly add to the types of signs permitted on any premises. Upon an affirmative vote of the majority of the members present, the appeals board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Modify or reverse, wholly or partly, the notice or order of the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  Grant an extension of time for the performance of any act required of not more than three additional months, where the appeals board finds that there is practical difficulty or undue hardship connected with the performance of this chapter or by applicable rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto, and that such extension is in harmony with the general purpose of this chapter to secure the public health, safety and welfare. 
(3)  Grant exceptions only in cases involving unique circumstances when the evidence in the official record of the appeal supports all of the following affirmative findings: 
a.  That the alleged circumstances are exceptional and peculiar to the property of the person requesting the exception, and result from conditions which do not exist generally throughout the City. 
b.  That the alleged consequences resulting from a failure to grant the exception include substantially more than mere inconvenience, or mere inability to attain a higher financial return. 
c.  That allowing the exception will result in substantial justice being done, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this chapter, the individual hardships that will be suffered by a failure of the Board to grant an exception, and the rights of others whose property would be affected by the allowance of the exception, and will not be contrary to the public purpose and general intent and purpose of this chapter. 
d.  The above findings of fact shall be made by the Board of Appeals, which is not empowered to grant an exception without an affirmative finding of fact in each of the categories above. Every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of the proceedings of the Board. 
(4)  Interpret this chapter in such a way as to carry out its intent and purpose. 
(c)  Initiating appeals. Appeals shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an application form determined by the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by a fee established by the City Commission. Appeals shall be filed within 45 days after written notice is given of the action being appealed. An appeal must be submitted at least 21 days before the Board meeting at which it will be considered. 
(d)  Application. The application form shall be signed by the owner or someone acting upon written consent of the owner, which written consent must be submitted with the application. Applications shall be accompanied by a Master Sign Plan and any other information the Zoning Administrator deems pertinent. All previous appeals involving the property noted on the application as to the subject, date and outcome of the appeal. 
(e)  Notices. The Zoning Administrator shall give notice of a hearing on an appeal to all owners of record of real property within 300 feet of the parcel on which the sign is located. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners at the address given in the last assessment roll at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
(f)  Advertisements. One advertisement in a local newspaper of general circulation indicating the nature of the appeal and the date of the hearing will be placed between seven and 20 days before the hearing. A minor deviation in the notice published in the newspaper or in the time of appearance of such notice in the newspaper shall not affect the validity of the proceedings of the Board unless there is a clear demonstration of prejudice as a result of such minor deviation. 
(g)  Representation at hearing. The applicant or the applicant's authorized agent must be present at the public hearing to properly answer questions concerning the appeal. If the applicant or agent is not present, the appeal may be deferred until the next meeting or dismissed, at the discretion of the Board. 
(h)  Reconsideration. An applicant may re-appeal a decision after 12 months from the decision of the Board. The Board will not reconsider any appeal within 12 months from the date of the decision unless it can be shown by the applicant that there has been substantially changed circumstances affecting the appeal, which circumstances were not known to the Board at the previous hearing. The substantial change in circumstances shall be described, in writing, by the applicant at the time of the application. Before rehearing the matter, the Board shall decide whether there is a substantial change in circumstances allowing the rehearing. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1476.16 - Enforcement. 
    The Zoning Administrator or his or her designee shall enforce this chapter. He or she shall appear for and on behalf of the City in all matters regarding the interpretation and application of this chapter and shall resist and oppose any deviations from this chapter. 
    The Zoning Administrator and his or her designees, or such other officials as are designated by the City Manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to any violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1.f Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (MCLA 764.9(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and shall be in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
    The Zoning Administrator or his or her authorized representative may enter at reasonable times any land, building, structure or premises in the City to perform any duty imposed upon the Zoning Administrator by this chapter. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1476.17 - Transition. 
    The intent of this chapter is to make the Sign Ordinance fully effective as soon as possible, but to allow for the continuation of all sign permits. All sign permits which have been previously issued, but which have not been acted upon by the permit holder by starting substantial construction, are hereby revoked. Other such permits may be continued if construction is diligently pursued and timely completed. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 
1476.99 - Penalty. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is subject to the civil infraction sanctions according to Traverse City Code Section 202.99, injunctive relief, nuisance abatement, surcharges and equitable remedies as provided in the Traverse City Code of Ordinances or as otherwise available under the law, as well as any damages resulting from such violation. A separate offense is deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 632. Passed 4-19-04.) 




APPENDIX "E" 

(Ord. 1032 , Passed 3-21-16) 
TITLE EIGHT - HOUSING 
Chapter 1480 - Mobile Homes[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate,  149 
Cross reference- Presumption of vehicle weight,  410.03 (UTC 2.59); Use of house trailers for living purposes,  1320.12; House trailers in floodways,  1458.07 

1480.01 - Use as offices; water, sewer and electrical connections. 
    No person shall use an automobile trailer or mobile home as an office or for the transaction of any business. No person shall connect any water or sewer service to any automobile trailer. No person shall connect any trailer to any public utility electrical power source, except for displaying a trailer for sale. Notwithstanding the above, a Mobile Food Vending Unit with a valid license issued under Chapter 865 may operate an automobile trailer and hookup to a public utility electrical power source if authorized by their permit. 
(1976 Code Sec. 26.27 Ord. 964. Passed 5-6-13) 
1480.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
Chapter 1482 - Rental Housing Regulations[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- State Housing Code, M.C.L.A.  125.401; Municipal Housing Act, M.C.L.A.  125.651 et seq.; Municipal housing commissions, M.C.L.A.  125.653 et seq.; Adoption, promulgation and publication of rules, M.C.L.A.  125.694b; Acquisition and maintenance of housing projects, M.C.L.A.  125.731 et seq. 
Cross reference- Hotels, boarding and lodging houses, M.C.L.A.  427.1 et seq.; Ch. 836, Ch. 868; Housing Commission, Ch. 274; Numbering of multifamily dwellings,  1470.03; State Housing Law, Ch. 1484; Smoke detectors in dwellings,  1610.14(b), (c) 

1482.01 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Approved means approved by the local or state authority having administrative authority. 
    Building means a structure or part thereof. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating. 
    Emergency escape window or door means an outside window or door, operable from the inside without the use of tools, and providing a clear opening of not less than 20 inches (50.8 cm.) in width, 24 inches (61 cm.) in height and 5.7 square feet (.53 sq. m.) in area. The bottom of the opening shall not be more than 44 inches (112 cm.) off the floor. Such means of escape shall be acceptable if: 
(1)  The window is within 20 feet (6.1 m.) of the grade. 
(1)  The window is directly accessible to an approved rescue apparatus. 
(3)  The window or door opens onto an exterior balcony. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and utility rooms of less than 50 square feet of floor space, foyers or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and workshops. 
    Housing administrator means that person appointed by the City Manager who is charged with the administration of this chapter, or the Housing Administrator's duly authorized representative. 
    Occupant means any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit. 
    Owner means any person who has equitable or legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit. 
    Premises means a platted lot or part thereof, or an unplatted lot, parcel of land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, and includes any building, accessory structure or other structure thereon. 
    Rental dwelling unit means all dwellings, dwelling units and habitable rooms which are leased or otherwise made available for rental purposes, except: 
(1)  Hotels and motels; 
(2)  Any dwelling unit or mobile home which the state has exclusive authority under state law to inspect and regulate; 
(3)  The principal residence of the owner which is temporarily occupied by persons other than the owner for not more than two years; and 
(4)  Dwellings in a dormitory operated by an institution of higher education. 
    Renter means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, has the right to occupy a premises and pays compensation therefor, and includes a tenant. 
    Rooming house means a residential building where rooms or suites of rooms are rented and where the renters use common facilities, such as hallways and bathrooms. A rooming house shall not include hotels, motels, apartment houses, two and multi-family dwellings or fraternity and sorority houses. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the ground or an attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but not limited to, advertising signs, billboards, back stops for tennis courts and pergolas. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.02 - Scope. 
    This chapter is enacted to protect the public health, safety and welfare for all dwelling units which are not owner occupied. Toward that goal, this chapter establishes the following: 
(1)  Minimum standards for the maintenance of rental structures and the surrounding premises; 
(2)  Responsibilities of owners, renters, operators and occupants of such structures; and 
(3)  Administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.03 - Interpretation. 
    This chapter shall be construed liberally to ensure the public health, safety and welfare as they are affected by the maintenance of rental structures and premises. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed cumulative and shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances or regulations or the utilization of other remedies. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.04 - Application of state construction code. 
    In the event of a conflict between this chapter and the State Construction Code, any repair or alteration to a structure, or change of use therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this chapter, shall be done in accordance with the State Construction Code. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.05 - Duties of housing administrator. 
    The Housing Administrator shall see that this chapter is enforced. The City Manager shall appoint the Housing Administrator. The Housing Administrator, with the consent of the City Manager, may appoint subordinates to exercise all or part of the authority of the Housing Administrator. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.06 - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Housing Administrator to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board may interpret this chapter. After a public meeting, the Board may grant a specific variance to a substantive requirement of this chapter if the literal application of such substantive requirement would result in an exceptional, practical difficulty to the applicant, and if the performance of the particular item or part of the building or structure with respect to which the variance is granted shall be adequate for its intended use and shall not substantially deviate from performance required by this chapter of that particular item or part for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Conditions. The Board of Appeals may attach, in writing, any condition in connection with the granting of a variance that, in its judgment, is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The breach of a condition shall automatically invalidate the variance and any permit, license and certificate granted on the basis of it. In no case shall a variance from the provisions of this chapter be granted that is more than the minimum necessary to alleviate the exceptional, practical difficulty. The Board may not modify, subtract from or add to this chapter, except as may be incidental in its interpretation and grant of a variance. Decisions of the Board shall be final. 
(Ord. 343. Passed 4-5-93. Ord. 599. Passed 4-21-03.) 
1482.07 - Application of chapter to existing structures. 
    This chapter establishes the minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy and use of every dwelling unit which is not owner occupied. Such structures and premises existing on the effective date of this chapter (Ordinance 259, passed October 3, 1988) shall be brought into full compliance not more than 12 months from such effective date or such earlier or later date as may be ordered by the Housing Administrator for good cause involving health and safety. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.08 - Exterior requirements. 
(a)  Scope and responsibility. The owner of the rental dwelling unit shall maintain such structures and exterior premises in compliance with the requirements of this section. A person shall not rent to another for occupancy or use premises which do not comply with this section after notice of code violation has been sent or communicated. (Ord. 390. Passed 9-6-94.) 
(b)  Premises conditions. 
(1)  Sanitation. All exterior premises shall be maintained in a safe condition and shall not be initially rented for occupancy unless in a sanitary condition as described by Section 1482.15. 
(2)  Grading and drainage. All exterior property shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon. 
(c)  Structural conditions. 
(1)  Generally. The exterior of a building shall be structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of the occupants, neighbors or the general public, and so as to protect the occupants from the outside environment. 
(2)  Structural members. All supporting structural members of buildings shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and maintained so as to be capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads imposed upon them. 
(3)  Exterior surfaces. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and other exterior surface shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to exclude rodents and birds. 
(4)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry the safe design and operating dead and live loads and shall be maintained sound and free from open cracks and breaks. 
(5)  Exterior walls. Exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers and other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior surface materials, including wood, composition or metal siding, shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be properly surface 
(6)  Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and shall not have defects which might admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(7)  Chimneys. All chimneys and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(8)  Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch and balcony, and any appurtenance attached thereto, shall be constructed to be safe for use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(9)  Window and door frames. Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible and to substantially exclude wind from entering the dwelling or structure. 
(10)  Weathertight. Windows and exterior doors shall be fitted reasonably in the frames and shall be weathertight. Weather stripping shall be used to exclude wind or rain from entering the dwelling or structure and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
1482.09 - Interior requirements. 
(a)  Scope and responsibility. The owner and the renter of a rental dwelling unit shall maintain the interior of a structure and its equipment in a safe, structurally sound and sanitary condition and in compliance with the requirements of this section. Both the owner and the renter shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance. 
(b)  Structural members. The supporting structural members of every building shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound and shall not show any evidence of deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior conditions. 
(1)  Surfaces. Floors, walls, including windows and doors, ceilings and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in a good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be eliminated. 
(2)  Lead-based paint. Lead-based paint with a lead content of more than 0.5 percent shall not be applied to any interior or exterior surface of a dwelling, dwelling unit or child care facility, including fences and outbuildings at these locations. Existing interior and exterior painted surfaces of dwelling units and child care facilities that contain an excess of 0.5 percent lead shall be removed or covered with paneling or other suitable covering approved by the Housing Administrator. 
(3)  Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(4)  Decay. Every dwelling unit and common space shall be maintained reasonably free from mold, mildew, standing water and other conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure. 
(d)  Exit doors. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being opened easily from the inside without the use of a key. 
(e)  Exit facilities. All interior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or that are broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads. 
(Ord 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.10 - Light and ventilation. 
(a)  Scope and responsibility. The owner of the rental dwelling unit shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with the requirements of this section. A person shall not rent to another for occupancy or use any premises which do not comply with such requirements after notice of code violation has been sent or communicated. (Ord. 391. Passed 9-6-94). 
(b)  Alternative devices. In place of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, alternative arrangement of windows, louvers or other methods and devices that will provide the equivalent minimum performance requirements shall be permitted when complying with the State Construction Code. 
(c)  General requirements. 
(1)  All spaces or rooms shall be provided sufficient light and ventilation so as not to endanger health and safety. 
(2)  Every habitable room shall have at least one window of an approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room, except in rooms where artificial light may be provided in accordance with the State Construction Code. 
1482.11 - Plumbing. 
(a)  Scope and responsibility. The owner of a building in which there is a rental dwelling unit shall provide and maintain plumbing facilities and fixtures in compliance with the requirements of this section. A person shall not rent to another for occupancy or use any structure or portion thereof or premises which do not comply with such requirements after notice of code violation has been sent or communicated. (Ord. 392. Passed 9-6-94.) 
(b)  Required facilities. Every rental dwelling unit shall have its own plumbing facilities which are in proper operating condition, which can be used in privacy and which are adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste. All plumbing facilities shall be supplied and maintained in a sanitary and safe working condition. 
(c)  Water closet and lavatory. Every rental dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room, separate from habitable rooms, which room affords privacy and a water closet supplied with cold running water. The lavatory may be placed in the same room as the water closet or, if located in another room, the lavatory shall be located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water. 
(d)  Bathtub or shower. Every rental dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person in such room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower supplied with hot and cold running water. 
(e)  Kitchen sink. Every rental dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the lavatory required under this section, and such sink shall be supplied with hot and cold running water. 
(f)  Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved water and sewerage system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house wherever such facilities are shared. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. A kitchen sink need not be provided for rental dwelling units in a rooming house. 
(g)  Water system. 
(1)  Generally. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other facility shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All lavatories, bathtubs, showers and required sinks shall be supplied with hot and cold running water. 
(2)  Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the overflow rim of the fixture. 
(3)  Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable them to function satisfactorily. 
(4)  Water heating facilities. Where hot water is provided, water heating facilities shall be installed in an approved manner, properly maintained and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to be supplied with the hot water. Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower, laundry facility or other similar unit at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43.33 degrees Centigrade). 
(h)  Sewerage system. 
(1)  Generally. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other facility shall be properly connected to either a public sewerage system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
(2)  Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, waste and sewer line shall be so installed and maintained as to function properly and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the State Construction Code. 
1482.12 - Mechanical requirements. 
(a)  Scope and responsibility. The owner of a building in which there is a rental dwelling unit shall provide and maintain such mechanical facilities and equipment in compliance with the requirements of this section. A person shall not rent to another for occupancy any premises which do not comply with the requirements of this section after notice of code violation has been sent or communicated. (Ord. 393. Passed 9-6-94.) 
(b)  Heating facilities. Every dwelling shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18.33 degrees Centigrade) at a point three feet (0.91 m.) above the floor and three feet (0.91 m.) from any exterior wall. 
(c)  Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating equipment, components and accessories in every heating, cooking and water heating device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions and shall be kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health and accident hazards. All installations and repairs shall be made in accordance with the State Construction Code or other law or ordinances applicable thereto. 
(d)  Portable cooking equipment. Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited, except for approved residential type food trays or salvers which are heated by a candle or alcohol lamp. 
(e)  Installations. All mechanical equipment shall be properly installed and safely maintained in good working condition and shall be capable of performing the function for which it was designed and intended. 
(f)  Flues. All fuel-burning equipment shall be connected to an approved chimney, flue or vent, and all required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. All chimneys shall be free of excessive creosote buildup. 
(g)  Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(h)  Combustion air. A supply of air for the complete combustion of fuel and for ventilation of the space shall be provided to the fuel-burning equipment. 
(i)  Fireplaces. A fireplace or other construction or device intended for a use similar to a fireplace shall be stable, structurally safe and connected to an approved chimney. 
1482.13 - Electrical requirements. 
(a)  Scope and responsibility. The owner of a building in which there is a rental dwelling unit shall provide and maintain electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with the requirements of this section. A person shall not rent to another for occupancy any premises which do not comply with the requirements of this section after notice of code violation has been sent or communicated. (Ord. 394. Passed 9-6-94.) 
(b)  Outlets. Every room, except a closet, shall contain at least two separate and remote outlets, one of which may be a ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. In a kitchen, three separate and remote wall-type electric convenience outlets or two such convenience outlets and one ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture shall be provided. Every public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one electric light fixture. In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be at least one electric outlet. 
(c)  Installations. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type. 
(d)  Defects. Where it is found, in the opinion of the Housing Administrator, that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or to the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the Housing Administrator shall require that the defects be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(e)  Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters. Accessible elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to safely sustain the loads to which they are subject, to operate properly and to be free of physical and fire hazards. 
1482.14 - Fire safety. 
(a)  Scope and responsibility. The owner of a rental dwelling unit shall provide and the renter shall maintain fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with the requirements of this section, other ordinances and state law. No person shall rent to another for occupancy any premises which do not comply with the requirements of this section after notice of code violation has been sent or communicated.(Ord. 395. Passed 9-6-94.) 
(b)  Egress. A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall be provided from the interior of a structure to the exterior at a street, or to a yard, court or passageway leading to a public open area at grade. 
(c)  Direct exit. Every dwelling unit or room shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. 
(d)  Locked doors. All doors in the required means of egress shall be readily openable from the inside without the use of keys. Exits from dwelling units shall not lead through other such units or through toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
(e)  Fire escapes. All required fire escapes shall be provided and maintained in working condition and shall be structurally sound. 
(f)  Emergency escapes. 
(1)  Windows or doors. Every sleeping room shall have a safe means of emergency escape to the outside consisting of an emergency escape window or door. 
(2)  Maintenance. Emergency escape windows and doors shall be maintained operational and available to occupants of sleeping rooms in residential uses. 
(3)  Security. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices shall not be installed in a required emergency escape window except when such devices are equipped with approved release mechanisms which are openable from the inside without the use of a key, special knowledge or excessive force. 
(g)  Accumulation and storage. 
(1)  Waste materials. Waste, refuse or other materials shall not be allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes or other means of egress. 
(2)  Flammable and explosive matter. Highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or combustible refuse, such as waste paper, boxes and rags, shall not be accumulated or stored on residential rental premises except in reasonable quantities consistent with normal usage. 
(3)  Flammable liquids. A rental dwelling unit shall not be located within a structure containing an establishment handling, dispensing or storing flammable liquids with a flash point of 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43.33 degrees Centigrade) or lower, except as provided for in the State Construction Code. 
(4)  Generally. Floors, walls, ceilings and other elements and components, when provided to meet a fire resistant rating, shall not be altered so that the respective fire resistant rating of the enclosure, separation or construction is diminished. 
(h)  Fire protection systems. 
(1)  Generally. All fire protection systems and equipment shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all times. 
(2)  Fire alarms. Fire alarms and detecting systems shall be maintained and shall be suitable for their respective purposes. 
(3)  Fire extinguishers. All portable fire extinguishers shall be visible, accessible and maintained in an efficient and safe operating condition. 
(4)  Smoke detectors. Smoke detectors shall be provided as required by City ordinances. 
1482.15 - Sanitation. 
(a)  Cleanliness. Every renter shall keep that part of the structure or premises thereof which that renter occupies, controls or uses in a clean and sanitary condition and in accordance with the requirements of this section. Every owner of rental premises shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition and in accordance with this section, the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof, and the rented portion if the occupant fails to do so. 
(b)  Disposal of rubbish and garbage. Every renter shall dispose of rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in a suitable covered container, or if such is not available, by removing all such matter. 
(c)  Garbage and rubbish storage facilities. The renter shall supply suitable containers and covers for the storage of rubbish and shall be responsible for the removal of garbage and rubbish. 
(d)  Extermination. If necessary, the owner of any structure shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rats or other pests within the structure prior to renting the structure. The renter of a single-family dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rats or other pests in the structure or on the premises occurring during the occupancy. 
(e)  Vermin or rat infestation. Continuing or repeated incidents of rat infestation shall require the installation of rat and vermin-proof walls by the owner. The rat and vermin-proof walls shall be installed in accordance with the State Construction Code. The renter shall be responsible for the continued rat-proof condition of the dwelling unit, and if the renter fails to maintain the rat-proof condition, the cost of extermination shall be the responsibility of the renter. 
(f)  Insect and rat control. The exterior of the property shall not be infested by insects, rats, vermin or other pests. Whenever infestation exists, extermination shall be the immediate responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.16 - Rooming houses. 
(a)  Application. This chapter is applicable to rooming houses whether or not owner occupied. 
(b)  Additional requirements. Rooming houses shall meet license requirements or other requirements of these Codified Ordinances or other applicable laws and statutes. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.17 - Amendments. 
    Any amendment to this chapter shall be made by the City Commission in accordance with the procedure established for amending any other portion of these Codified Ordinances. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.18 - Conflict of laws. 
    If any of the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any other statute, State administrative regulation or ordinance of the City presently existing or enacted in the future, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.19 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The City Manager may, as may be necessary in the interest of the public safety, health and general welfare, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret and implement this chapter. 
(b)  Notices. The Housing Administrator shall issue all necessary notices and orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  Inspections. The Housing Administrator is authorized to inspect upon the consent of the person in charge of the area to be inspected or upon the issuance of a warrant. 
(d)  Obstruction of inspections. No owner, renter, occupant or other person in charge of a structure or premises subject to this chapter shall refuse, impede, inhibit, interfere with, restrict or obstruct entry and free access to any part of a structure or premises where an inspection authorized by this chapter is sought. The Housing Administrator may seek an order to cease and desist with such interference from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Obstruction of repairs. No renter or occupant of any structure or premises shall refuse access to the owner or operator thereof, at reasonable times, for the purpose of making inspections, maintenance, repairs or alterations as necessary to comply with this chapter. 
(f)  Appearance tickets. The Housing Administrator, or his or her authorized representative is hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to any violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A. 764.9c(2); M.S.A. 28.868(3)(2)). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney in conformity with all statutory requirements. 
(g)  Order to vacate. In the event of an emergency and a situation causing danger to persons or property, the Housing Administrator may order that the property be vacated after determining, in writing, that a provision of this chapter has been violated and that a danger and emergency exist. 
(h)  Alternate responsibility. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter assigning responsibility, a person who is an occupant, renter or owner and who repeatedly causes violations of this chapter is also responsible and subject to the penalties herein provided. 
(Ord. 259. Passed 10-3-88.) 
1482.99 - Penalty. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. 450. Passed 7-7-97.) 
Chapter 1484 - State Housing Law[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- State Housing Code, M.C.L.A.  125.401; Municipal Housing Act, M.C.L.A.  125.651 et seq.; Municipal housing commissions, M.C.L.A.  125.653 et seq.; Adoption, promulgation and publication of rules, M.C.L.A.  125.694b; Acquisition and maintenance of housing projects, M.C.L.A.  125.731 et seq.; Hotels, boarding and lodging houses, M.C.L.A.  427.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Housing Commission, Ch. 274; Hotels, boarding and lodging houses, Ch. 836, Ch. 868; Numbering of multifamily dwellings,  1470.03; Rental housing regulations, Ch. 1482; Smoke detectors in dwellings,  1610.14(b), (c) 

1484.01 - Application. 
    It is acknowledged that Act 167 of the Public Acts of 1917, as amended (the Housing Law of the State of Michigan), being M.C.L.A.  125.401; MSA 5.2771 et seq., applies within the City except for private dwellings and two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. 274. Passed 11-6-89.) 
1484.02 - Board of appeals. 
    Section 8 of the Housing Law of the State of Michigan provides for decisions of the Board of Appeals, but that Act does not establish or regulate such Board (M.C.L.A. 125.408; MSA 5.2778). All powers and obligations of a board of appeals under the State Housing Law are hereby conferred on the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. 274. Passed 11-6-89. Ord 599. Passed 5-1-03.) 
1484.03 - Conflicts with state construction code. 
    It is recognized that conflicts between the State Housing Law and the State Construction Code may occur from time to time. If such a conflict occurs regarding new construction, that new construction need only comply with the State Construction Code. If such a conflict occurs regarding existing construction, and if that construction occurred since November 6, 1974, the effective date of the State Construction Code, that construction need comply with either the Housing Law of 1917 or the applicable construction code at the time of the construction. If any other such conflict exists, it shall be resolved by executive order of the City Manager or by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Housing Administrator to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board may interpret this chapter. After a public meeting, the Board may grant a specific variance to a substantive requirement of this chapter if the literal application of such substantive requirement would result in an exceptional, practical difficulty to the applicant, and if the performance of the particular item or part of the building or structure with respect to which the variance is granted shall be adequate for its intended use and shall not substantially deviate from performance required by this chapter of that particular item or part for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Conditions. The Board may attach, in writing, any condition in connection with the granting of a variance that, in its judgment, is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The breach of a condition shall automatically invalidate the variance and any permit, license and certificate granted on the basis of it. In no case shall a variance from the provisions of this chapter be granted that is more than the minimum necessary to alleviate the exceptional, practical difficulty. The Board may not modify, subtract from or add to this chapter, except as may be incidental in its interpretation and grant of a variance. Decisions of the Board shall be final. 
(Ord. 274. Passed 11-6-89. Ord. 599. Passed 4-21-03.) 
1484.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
PART SIXTEEN - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
Chapter 1610 - Fire Prevention Generally[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fires and fire protection generally, M.C.L.A.  29.1 et seq.; Arson, M.C.L.A.  750.71 et seq.; Construction or possession of explosive devices, M.C.L.A.  750.211a 
Cross reference- Fire Department, Ch. 254; Weapons and explosives, Ch. 690; Fire hydrants,  1044.12; Fires in parks,  1064.07; Fire safety in rental dwellings,  1482.14 

1610.01 - State laws and regulations. 
    No person shall violate any law of the state or any rule or regulation adopted by any duly authorized agency of the state pertaining to fire, fire hazards, fire prevention or fire waste. 
(1976 Code Sec. 22.01. Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.02 - International Fire Code. 
    That a certain document, two of which are on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Traverse City, being marked and designated as The International Fire Code, 2009 edition, including Appendix Chapters A through G as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set forth herein, except as may be hereinafter amended, as the Fire Prevention Ordinance of the City of Traverse City for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Traverse City are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this section. 
    Section 101.1 This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Prevention Ordinance of the City of Traverse City, hereinafter referred to as this code. 
    Section 102.6 This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 45, except the building, mechanical, electrical and plumbing codes referred to throughout this code shall mean the State Construction Code and its parts pertaining to building, mechanical, electrical and plumbing activity. Such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this Code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this Code shall apply. 
    Section 103.1. General. This section is added to read in its entirety as follows: 
The department of fire prevention is established within the jurisdiction of and under the direction of the City Manager or his or her authorized representative. The duly appointed Fire Chief for the City of Traverse City, Traverse City Fire Department, (and/or his designate(s)) shall be named Fire Code Official. The function of the Fire Department or Fire Code Official shall be the implementation, administration, and enforcement of the provisions of this code. 
    105.1.2. Types of Permits. This section is changed to read in its entirety as follows: 
There shall be two types of permits as follows: 
(1)  Operational permit. An operational permit allows the applicant to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by Section 105.6 for either: 
1.1  A prescribed period; not to exceed one year. 
1.2  Until renewed or revoked. 
(2)  Construction permit. A construction permit allows the applicant to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by Section 105.7. 
    105.6.30 Open Burning and Recreational fires. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Open burning is prohibited. An operational permit is required for the kindling or maintaining of a recreational fire on any public or private ground. Instructions and stipulations of the permit shall be adhered to. 
    105.7.15. New Construction. This section is added to read in its entirely as follows: 
Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any fire alarm and detection system and related equipment, fire suppression system and related equipment including fire pumps, standpipe systems and water supply piping and hydrants, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the fire code official and obtain the required permit. 
    Exceptions: 
(1)  One and two-family residential (Residential Group R-3) 
(2)  Utility and Miscellaneous Group U structures. 
    Section 106.1 This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Inspection authority. The Code Official is authorized to enter and examine any building, structure, marine vessel, vehicle, or premises, in accordance with Section 104.3, for the purpose of enforcing this Code, except single-family dwellings and dwelling units in two-family dwellings. 
    Section 106.1.1 This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Responsibility of inspections. The owner and any other person or persons having charge or control of the structure shall apply for, arrange and pay all established fees and costs in connection with the inspection. The owner and such person or persons shall be jointly and severally responsible for inspection, fees and costs. 
    106.1.2. Cost of Inspections. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
The Commission of the City of Traverse City by resolution shall establish all fees and costs in connection with inspections. In addition to any other remedy, the City of Traverse City may bring suit against the owner and any other person or persons occupying the structure for payment of all such fees. Such fees may be assessed as a lien on the property. 
    Section 106.1.3 This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Occupancy with inspection. No person shall occupy or use a structure or allow the occupancy or use of a structure unless that structure has been currently inspected and all inspection fees have been paid in full, and unless a certificate of inspection is prominently displayed on the premises. 
    106.1.4 Frequency of Inspections. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Inspections shall be arranged for and conducted prior to any person occupying a structure and biennially thereafter. However, such scheduled inspections shall not limit the Fire Code Officials right of entry in accordance with Section 104.3. 
    Section 108.1 This section is changed to add the following sentence: 
The composition of the Board of Appeals is contained in Appendix A. 
    Section 108.4 Application for Appeal. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
An aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Fire Code Official to the Board of Appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better method of fire prevention is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the Fire Code Official within twenty (20) days after the notice was served. 
    109.2.3. Prosecution of Violations. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Fire Code Official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the City of Traverse City to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. The Fire Code Official or his designate(s) is hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to any violation of this chapter pursuant to Section 1 of Act 147 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended (M.C.L.A. 764.9c(2). Appearance tickets shall be in such form as determined by the City Attorney and in conformity with statutory requirements. 
    Section 111.4 This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Failure to comply. Any person or persons who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation of the stop work order continue after due notice has been given shall be deemed a separate offense. 
    307. Recreational Fires. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
307.1 Recreational fires. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any recreational fire unless conducted and approved in accordance with this section. 
    307.1.1. Prohibited Recreational Fires. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: Recreational fires that are offensive or objectionable because of smoke or odor emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. 
    307.2. Permit Required. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Code Official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a recreational fire. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the recreational fire is to kindled. 
    307.3 Extinguishment Authority. This section has been changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
The Fire Code Official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department of recreational fires that creates or adds to a hazard or objectionable situation. 
    307.4 Location. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Recreational fires shall be conducted at a location approved by the Fire Code Official. 
    307.4.1 Bonfires. This section is removed in its entirety. 
    307.5 Attendance. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Recreational fires shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as a water barrel, garden hose, or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
    506.1 Where Required. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or firefighting purposes, the Fire Code Official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an approved accessible location. Such boxes shall be installed on all structures of the Use Group A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E, F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, H-5, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2, R-4, S-1, S-2 or any mixture of these uses, or an R-3 where it is part of a structure or area containing any of the listed use groups, or when the R-3 occupancy is equipped with a fire protection system. Approved lock box containers shall be in the location that is designated by the Fire Code Official. The key box shall be of an approved type and shall contain all required materials and information as requested by the Fire Code Official. 
    506.3 Location. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
The key box shall be at or near the recognized public entrance of a building, five (5) feet (1524 mm) above the final grade on the exterior of the building, unless otherwise specified by the Fire Code Official. No steps, displays, signs, or other fixtures, structures or protrusions shall be located around or under the box. 
    506.4 Contents. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
The box shall contain keys for all of the following applicable locations, and shall be labeled so as to be easily identified: 
1.  Main entrance door 
2.  Fire Command Center 
3.  Alarm Rooms 
4.  Mechanical rooms 
5.  Sprinkler control rooms 
6.  Fire alarm panels 
7.  Electrical rooms 
8.  Special keys to reset fire alarm pull stations or other fire protection devices 
9.  Elevator keys 
10.  All other keys specified by the Fire Code Official 
Other items as required by the Fire Code Official shall also be provided (i.e., floor plans, MSDS sheets, emergency contact information) 
    605.11. Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupters (GFCI). This section shall be added to read in its entirety as follows: 
All new and existing electrical receptacles installed in the locations specified shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupting protection. 
1.  Within 6 feet (1828 mm) from an established water supply. (Sinks, tubs, faucets, etc.) 
2.  Outside. 
    903.3.7.1 Fire Department Connection Caps. This section is added in its entirety to read as follows: 
All fire department connections on new and existing buildings shall be required to be equipped with locking caps for the couplings. These caps shall be of a type approved by the Fire Code Official. 
    903.4.2 Alarms. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Approved audible or visual devices shall be connected to every automatic fire sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the building in a location approved by the Fire Code Official. The visual device shall be a white strobe light; the audible device shall be a horn device capable of producing a minimum sound pressure level of 115 dBa. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic fire sprinkler system shall also actuate the building fire alarm system. 
    3204.1.1 Locations (Outdoor Storage). This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits established by the Zoning Ordinances established by the City of Traverse City. 
    3304.1 General (Storage of Explosive Materials). This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: Storage of explosives and explosive materials, other than Division 1.4G fireworks, small arms ammunition, small arms primers, propellant-actuated cartridges and smokeless propellants in magazines, shall conform to the provisions of this section. The storage of explosives and explosive materials is prohibited in all areas except the Cherry Capital Airport and within industrial districts established by the City of Traverse City Zoning Ordinance. This prohibition shall not apply to temporary storage of such materials for use in connection with approved blasting operations. 
    3308.2.2.1 Proximate Audience Displays-Where Allowed. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: Proximate audience displays may be allowed only in Group A-1 occupancies containing a legitimate stage. Such occupancy shall be equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system designed and installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 of this code. 
    3404.2.9.5.1 Locations Where Above-Ground Storage Tanks are Prohibited. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: Storage of Class I and II flammable liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits established by the City of Traverse City Zoning Ordinance wherein the storage occurs or is proposed. 
    3406.2.4.4 Locations Where Above-Ground Storage Tanks are Prohibited. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: Storage of Class I and II flammable liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits established by the Zoning ordinances established by the City of Traverse City wherein the storage occurs or is proposed. 
    3804.2 Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits (Liquefied Petroleum Gases). This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: Within the limits established by the City of Traverse City Zoning Ordinance wherein the storage occurs or is proposed restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570 L). 
    A101.2 Membership. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
The Board of Appeals for this International Fire Code, 2006 edition, shall be the State authorized Construction Code Board of Appeals of Grand Traverse County created under the State Construction Code or its successor and one additional person appointed by the Board of Commissioners in the same manner as other members of the Construction Code Board of Appeals and who has experience in design, installation and operation of fire suppression systems. 
    Appendix A, Section 101.3 through 101.5 
These sections are deleted. 
    Appendix D, 
    D103.5 Road gates. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
Gates securing fire apparatus access roads and other roads shall comply with all the following criteria: 
1.  The minimum clear access opening for two-way traffic shall be 20 feet (6096 mm). 
a.  The minimum clear access opening for single lane, one way traffic shall be 12 feet (3657 mm). 
2.  Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type. 
3.  Construction of gates shall be materials that allow manual operation by one person. 
4.  Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and replaced or repaired when defective. 
5.  Gates that are inoperative or out-of-service shall be secured in the open position. 
6.  Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening devices shall be approved by the Fire Code Official. 
7.  Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain and padlock unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tool or when a key box containing the key(s) to the lock is installed at the gate location. 
8.  Locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval by the Fire Code Official. 
    D103.6.2 Roads more than 26 feet in width. Fire apparatus access roads more than 26 feet wide (7925 mm) to 32 feet wide (9754 mm) shall be posted on one side of the road as a fire lane unless parking density less than 20% of the available parking has been demonstrated by an appropriate study conducted by the City. 
    D503.21 Unless otherwise allowed under the terms of this code, fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet exclusive of shoulders. 
    D503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Unless otherwise allowed under the terms of this code, fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including parking of vehicles. The minimum widths in 503.2.1 shall be maintained at all times. 
(Ord. 430. Passed 9-18-95. Ord. 518. Passed 11-6-00. Ord. 521. Passed 2-5-01. Ord. 541 Passed 8-6-01. Ord. 558. Passed 2-29-02. Ord. 563. Passed 5-20-02. Ord. 587. Passed 11-04-02. Ord. 600. Passed 4-21-03. Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08. Ord. 909. Passed 4-4-11. Ord. 948. Passed 7-16-12) 
1610.03 - Authority at fires and other emergencies. 
(a)  Authority. The Fire Code Official or duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The Fire Code Official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any persons, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. The Fire Code Official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the Fire Code Official. 
(b)  Compliance with order. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any order or direction of the Fire Code Official or to interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual. 
(Ord. 430. Passed 9-18-95. Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.04 - Interference with fire department. 
(a)  False alarms. No person shall turn in, sound or cause to be communicated to the Fire Department a false alarm of fire. 
(b)  Interference with equipment. No person shall interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, injure, remove or molest any firefighting equipment or apparatus or anything pertaining to the fire fighting alarm system. 
(c)  Driving over fire hose. No person shall drive any vehicle upon, over or against any equipment or hose of the Fire Department. 
(d)  Obstructing fire hydrants and fire lanes. No person shall place any building material or other obstruction within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or within a designated fire lane. No person shall obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department connections located on public or private streets or on private property. No person shall obstruct or restrict fire lanes or access lanes on public or private property. No person responsible for such material or obstruction shall permit it to remain in such a position. The City Fire Chief or his or her designee may cause such obstructions to be removed from the fire lane or fire hydrant area and may institute appropriate action to recover costs incurred by the City to remove any such obstruction. 
(e)  Damage to equipment. No person shall damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface, any fire department emergency vehicle, or to injure, or attempt or conspire to injure, fire department personnel while performing departmental duties. 
(f)  Unlawful boarding or tampering with equipment. This section is changed in its entirety to read as follows: 
No person without proper authorization from the Fire Code Official shall cling to, attach himself or herself to, or climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or to manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(g)  Penalty. In addition to any other penalty set forth in this code, whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Section may be subject to civil infraction sanctions, according to Traverse City Code Section 202.99, as well as any damages resulting from such violation 
(Ord. 446. Passed 3-17-97 Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.05 - Operation of vehicles. 
    Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the Fire Code Official or a police officer. 
(Ord. 430. Passed 9-18-95. Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.06 - Vehicles following fire apparatus. 
    No person shall follow closer than 500 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm or drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Ord. 430. Passed 9-18-95. Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.07 - Maintenance of fire suppression equipment. 
    No person shall obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of this code except for the purpose of extinguishing a fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs or when permitted by the Fire Code Official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and non-approved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the Fire Code Official. 
(Ord. 430. Passed 9-18-95. Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.08 - Sale of defective fire extinguisher. 
    No person shall trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the Fire Code Official, or which is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the requirements of the Fire Code Official. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk. 
(Ord. 430. Passed 9-18-95. Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.09 - Street obstructions. 
    No person shall erect, construct, place or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on any street. Street as used in this chapter shall mean any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as public streets or highways. 
(Ord. 430. Passed 9-18-95. Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.10 - Emergency vehicle operation. 
    The driver of any emergency vehicle shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights on or disobey any traffic regulation except when said vehicle is responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire. Tactical strategies such as, but not restricted to, "move-ups" do not constitute an emergency call. The driver of an emergency vehicle may: 
(a)  Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of traffic regulations; 
(b)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(c)  Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not endanger life or property; 
(d)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions; 
(e)  The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(Ord. 430. Passed 9-18-95. Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.11 - Aerial wires. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or use any radio wire or antenna, any part of which is over or under any public utility line or wire which carries voltage in excess of 300 volts. 
(b)  No person shall place, maintain or use any radio wire or antenna which is attached to any pole owned by a public utility company. 
(1976 Code Sec. 22.13 Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.12 - Smoke detectors. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  Approved smoke detectors means all devices or systems which comply with the specifications of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or any other nationally recognized laboratory standards, and which bear a label indicating that the detector has been so listed and approved. 
(2)  Dwelling is specifically defined as follows: 
a.  Boarding house means a building, other than a hotel where lodging and meals for three or more persons are served for compensation. 
b.  Lodging house means a building, other than a hotel, where lodging only is provided for at least three, but not more than 20 persons. 
c.  Multiple dwelling means a building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units and designed for, or occupied as, the home of three or more families living independently of each other. 
d.  Mixed occupancy dwelling means a building containing one or more dwelling units and a business other than a home occupation. 
e.  One-family dwelling means a detached building containing one dwelling unit and designed for or occupied by only one family. 
f.  Two-family dwelling means a building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, two families living independently of each other. 
g.  Tourist home means a single-family building owned and occupied by a person renting out not more than three rooms for compensation to persons who do not stay for more than seven consecutive days. 
(3)  Sale or transfer means to convey an interest in a dwelling, except by lease, mortgage, gift, devise, bequest or lien foreclosure. A sale or transfer shall be deemed to occur upon the transfer of title, the execution of a land contract or the exercise of an option to purchase a dwelling. 
(4)  Single station alarm device means any assembly incorporating an approved smoke detector, control equipment and a signaling device in one unit, operating from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation. 
(5)  Smoke detection system means one or more smoke detectors in any system composed of self-supervised smoke detection and signaling device operating on an approved, permanently wired electric circuit, and so arranged that the activation of any one smoke detection device will activate all signaling devices throughout the building. 
(6)  Smoke detector means an instrument which detects visible or invisible particles of combustion and activates a signaling device. 
(b)  Multiple dwellings; mixed occupancy dwellings; lodging houses; boarding houses; tourist homes. All existing multiple dwellings, mixed occupancy dwellings, lodging houses, boarding houses or tourist homes shall have installed one or more approved smoke detectors in accordance with this subsection: 
(1)  A minimum of one approved smoke detector shall be required to be installed in each such dwelling within fifteen feet of any doorway leading to a room used for sleeping purposes. In addition, approved smoke detectors shall be required to be located at the uppermost ceiling of all interior stairwells. The installation shall be either on the ceiling, at least six inches from any wall, or on a wall in a position located six to twelve inches from the ceiling. 
(2)  The installation and maintenance of approved smoke detectors shall be in accordance with the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association's Pamphlet No. 74, as amended. Such Pamphlet is incorporated in this section by reference, as if fully rewritten herein, and shall apply except where otherwise superseded by this section. 
(c)  One and two-family dwellings. No person shall sell, transfer or act as a broker for the sale or transfer of a dwelling, or occupy or allow the dwelling to be occupied after the sale or transfer thereof, or where any structural change or repair of a value in excess of $3,000.00 has been done to a dwelling, unless the dwelling meets the following requirements: 
(1)  One or more approved smoke detectors shall be installed in all one-family dwellings. At least one approved smoke detector shall be installed on the first living level. Approved smoke detectors shall also be installed at the top of each stairwell leading to any occupied area. If the location at the top of the stairwell is more than 15 feet from the doorway leading to a room used for sleeping purposes, additional units shall be installed within a 15-foot radius of such doorway. 
(2)  One or more approved smoke detectors shall be installed in all two-family dwellings. A minimum of one approved smoke detector shall be required to be installed in each such dwelling within 15 feet of any doorway leading to a room used for sleeping purposes. In addition, approved smoke detectors shall be required to be located at the uppermost ceiling of all interior stairwells. 
(3)  The installation and maintenance of approved smoke detectors shall be in accordance with the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association's Pamphlet No. 74, as amended. Such Pamphlet is incorporated in this section by reference, as if fully rewritten herein, and shall apply except where otherwise superseded by this section. Installation shall be either on the ceiling at least six inches away from any wall or on a wall in a position located six to 12 inches from the ceiling. 
(d)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system that complies with the State Construction Code, as amended, and National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 13, as amended, are not required to comply with this section. 
(2)  The Fire Chief may waive the requirements of this section and approve an alternative form and installation of smoke detectors or systems upon submission of adequate proof that the alternative method adequately safeguards the occupants of the particular dwelling in question. 
(3)  Single station alarm devices may be voluntarily installed in one or two-family buildings without having to secure the approval of the Fire Department or the Protective Inspection Division, provided that single station alarm devices are installed according to location requirements contained in this section. However, if such single station alarm devices are directly connected to the electrical system of the building, or if single-station alarm devices are installed by any person hired or reimbursed in any manner for the installation, an electrical permit shall be required. 
(e)  Administration; appeals. The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall have authority and responsibility for the enforcement and administration of this section. The Fire Chief or any person aggrieved by a decision of the Fire Chief may make application to the Construction Board of Appeals. The Board shall have the powers and duties described in Chapter 1442 of the Building and Housing Code, including the power to affirm, overrule or modify a decision of the Fire Chief and to make interpretations of this section. A fee for appeals shall be established by the Board. 
(Ord. 330. Passed 4-20-92. Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.13 - Electrical code. 
    That any reference to the International Electrical Code appearing in the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, is deleted and such references therein shall be substituted with the State of Michigan Electrical Code. 
(Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08. Ord. 909. Passed 4-4-11.) 
1610.14 - Fee schedule. 
    The City Commission of the City of Traverse City or its designee shall annually review and establish a fee schedule for the implementation and enforcement of this Ordinance. The fee schedule shall then be approved by the Commission of the City of Traverse City. The fee schedule to implement this Ordinance shall be published at the time of publication of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.97 - Severability. 
    That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is, for any reason, found to be held unconstitutional, unlawful or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City of Traverse City declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
1610.99 - Violation penalties. 
    Persons who violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, plus their costs allowed by law and court costs, or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. 809. Passed 8-4-08.) 
PART EIGHTEEN - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
Chapter 1820 - Hazardous Spills Expense Recovery[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Natural Resources and Enviromental Protection Act, MCL  324.101 et seq., MCL  324.21301 et seq.; Safe Drinking Water Act, M.C.L.A.  325.1001, et seq; MSA 14.427(1), et seq. 
Cross reference- Health nuisances,  660.03; Air pollution,  660.03(g) and  668.04; Water pollution,  1043.15 and  1062.11; Abandoned underground tanks,  1610.09. 

1820.01 - Intent. 
    Surface waters, groundwater, soils, vegetation, and atmosphere inside the City are susceptible to damage from the handling, storage, use, processing and disposal of hazardous material and the expense incurred by the taxpayer as a result of the City or its designee having to respond in an emergency to protect life, property and the environment when there has been a release of hazardous materials should be recovered from the person responsible for the emergency. 
1820.02 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
(1)  CFR shall mean the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(2)  Compressed gas shall mean any material regulated as a compressed gas by the United Stated Department of Transportation, by regulations found in 49 CFR ''173.300. 
(3)  Designee shall mean the Northwestern Regional Hazardous Materials Response Team or such other public or private agency authorized in writing by the City to respond to hazardous materials incidents within the City. 
(4)  Emergency action shall mean all of the activities conducted in order to prevent or mitigate injury to human health or to the environment inside the City from a release or threatened release of any material into or upon the environment. 
(5)  Explosive shall mean any material regulated as a class A or class B explosive by the United States Department of Transportation, by regulations found in 49 CFR '173.53 and 173.88. 
(6)  Flammable liquid shall mean any material regulated as a flammable liquid by the United Stated Department of Transportation, by regulations found In 49 CFR '173.115. 
(7)  Flammable solid shall mean any material regulated as a flammable solid by the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR '173.150. 
(8)  Hazardous material shall mean any of the following: 
a.  Any material listed in the list of toxic pollutants found in 40 CFR '401.15, as amended. 
b.  Any material designated as hazardous material by applicable State law. 
c.  Any compressed gas, explosive, flammable liquid, flammable solid, oxidizer, poison or radioactive material. 
(9)  Oxidizer shall mean any material regulated as an oxidizer by the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR '173.151. 
(10)  Person shall include any individual, corporation, association, partnership, firm, trustee, or legal representative. 
(11)  Poison shall mean any liquid or gas that is life threatening when mixed with air in small amounts, and shall also include all those materials regulated as poison class A by the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR '173.326. 
(12)  Radioactive material shall mean any material required by the United States Department of Transportation to have type A packaging or other special protection or closed transport vehicles, under regulations found in 49 CFR '173.425. 
(13)  Release shall mean any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injection, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into or upon the environment, which causes danger or harm to the public health or to the environment, including, but not limited to, the release of any material classified as hazardous material by any federal legislation or regulation, by any state legislation or regulation, or by any City ordinance. 
(14)  Threatened release shall mean any imminent or impending event potentially causing but not resulting in a release, but causing the City to undertake an emergency action. 
1820.03 - Notice and response. 
(a)  Any person who has damaged the surface waters, groundwater, soils or atmosphere by the handling or storage of hazardous materials, or who have violated any local, state or federal environmental laws with respect to hazardous materials, are required to immediately notify the City of Traverse City. 
(b)  The requirements of this Chapter shall not be construed to forbid or forgive any person from using all diligence necessary to control a hazardous material release prior or subsequent to the notification to the City, especially if such efforts may result in the containment of the release or the abatement of extreme hazard to the employees or the general public. Delays in reporting releases due to in-house notification of off-site owners or supervisors shall result in penalties. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to exempt or release any person from any other notification or reporting required by any state or federal agency. 
(c)  The City Fire Chief or the City's designee are authorized to direct an emergency action and the clean-up and abatement of any release, or threatened release within the City. 
1820.04 - Liability for costs. 
(a)  Any person causing or contributing to the causing of a release or threatened release shall be liable to the City for the recoverable costs. 
(b)  The following described persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for the payment of all costs incurred by the City as a result of such clean up or abatement activity: 
(1)  Any person whose negligent or willful act or omission proximately caused such release, discharge or deposit; 
(2)  The person who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous material or the material at the time of such release, discharge, or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause; and 
(3)  The person who owned or had custody or control of the container which held such hazardous material at the time of or immediately prior to such release, discharge or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause. 
1820.05 - Recovery of costs. 
(a)  The City or its designee shall keep an itemized record of recoverable costs resulting from a release or threatened release including an emergency action. 
(b)  The City or its designee shall submit a written itemized claim to the responsible person for the total costs incurred by the City or its designee related to the release or threatened release and any emergency action and a written notice that unless the amounts are paid in full within 30 days after the date of the mailing of the claim and notice, a civil action will be commenced seeking recovery for the stated amount plus any amounts occasioned by such suit. 
(c)  For the purposes of this chapter, costs of the City or its designee shall mean all direct and indirect costs and shall include costs of an emergency action and shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Actual labor cost of personnel, including workers compensation benefits and fringe benefits; 
(2)  Administrative overhead; 
(3)  Costs of equipment operation; 
(4)  Costs of materials; 
(5)  Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the emergency action. 
(6)  Medical expenses incurred as a result of response activities; 
(7)  Costs of any contract labor; 
(8)  Costs to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup or abatement by others; and 
(9)  Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the release or threatened release, including actions for recoverable costs pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  Costs recovered related to the emergency action incurred by the City's designee shall be transferred to the designee as soon as possible. 
1820.06 - Civil suit. 
    The City or designee may bring a civil action for payment of the recoverable costs against any and all persons liable under this chapter. All costs of such suit, including actual attorney fees, shall also be a recoverable cost within the same civil action. 
1820.07 - Conflict with state or federal law. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to conflict with state or federal laws requiring persons causing or responsible for release or threatened releases from engaging in remediation activities or paying the cost thereof, or both. 
1820.08 - Nonexclusive remedy. 
    The remedies provided by this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies available in equity or at law and such penalties as provided by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. 379. Passed 1-3-94.) 
1820.99 - Penalty. 
Editor's note- See  202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. 
TABLES - COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE 
Editor's note- Source material for the 1990 Codified Ordinances of Traverse City was ordinances or resolutions enacted by the City Commission or new matter ordained by the Adopting Ordinance. Sections and subsections of the 1990 Codified Ordinances without a history or with the words Adopting Ordinance at the end thereof are new matter ordained by the Adopting Ordinance. In the following table the disposition of all source material in the 1990 Traverse City Codified Ordinances is indicated. 
1976 
Code C.O. 
Section 1.07 202.08 2.01 220.01 2.02 230.01 2.03 230.02 2.04 230.03 2.05 230.04 2.06 230.05 2.07 232.01 2.08 230.06 2.10 266.01 2.121 1220.01 2.122 1220.02 2.123 1220.03 2.124 1220.04 2.125 1220.05 2.126 1220.06 2.127 1220.07 2.128 1220.08 2.141 274.01 2.142 274.02 2.15 252.01 3.01 1044.01 3.02 1044.02 3.03 1044.03 3.04 1044.04 3.05 1044.05 3.06 1044.06 3.07 1044.07 3.08 1044.08(a)-(f), (h) 3.09 1044.09 3.10 1044.10(a) 3.11 1044.10(b) 3.12 1044.11 3.13 1044.12 3.14 1044.13 3.15 1044.14 3.17 1044.16 5.01 232.02 5.02 232.03 5.03 232.04 5.04 232.05 5.05 232.06 5.06 232.07 5.07 232.08(a) 5.08 232.08(b) 5.11 232.10 5.12 232.11 5.13 232.12 6.01 668.01 6.031 1454.01 6.032 1454.02 6.033 1454.03 6.034 1454.04 6.042 836.02 6.044 836.04 6.05 668.05 6.06 668.04 6.10 660.02 6.111 660.01 6.113 660.04 6.12 666.06(c), (d) 7.01 610.01 7.021 610.02 7.022 610.03 7.03 610.05 7.04 610.06 7.05 610.07 7.07 610.08 7.08 610.09 7.091 848.01 7.092 848.02 7.093 848.03 7.094 848.04 8.01 1060.01 8.02 1060.02 8.03 1060.03 8.041 826.01 8.042 826.02 8.05 1060.05 8.06 1060.04 8.08 1060.07 8.09 1060.08 9.01 1020.01 9.02 1020.02 9.031 1470.01 9.032 1470.02 9.04 1020.03 9.05 1468.01 9.06 1020.04 9.07 668.03 9.08 1022.05 9.091 1020.06(a) 9.093 1020.06(c) 9.11 668.12 9.12 1022.01 9.13 1022.02 9.14 1022.03 9.15 1022.04 9.161 1024.01 9.162 1024.02 9.163 1024.03 9.164 1024.04 9.165 1024.05 9.166 1024.06 9.167 1024.07 9.168 1024.08 9.17 1026.01 9.172 1026.02 9.18 1020.05 10.02 1064.17 10.03 1066.01 10.04 1066.02 10.05 1066.03 10.06 1066.04(b), (c) 10.07 1066.05(a), (b) 10.08 1066.06 10.10 1066.08(a)-(c), (e), (f) 11.011 1062.01 11.012 1062.02 11.013 1062.03(a) 11.014 1062.03(b) 11.02 1062.04 11.03 1062.05 11.04 1062.06 11.05 1062.07 11.06 1062.08 11.07 1062.09 11.08 1062.11 13.01 1040.01 13.02 1040.02 13.03 1040.03 13.04 1040.04 13.06 1048.01-1048.08 1048.10-1048.20 14.011 1250.02 14.012 1250.01 14.02 1250.07, 1299.05 14.031 1256.01 14.032 1256.02 14.033 1256.03 14.034 1256.04 14.035 1256.05 14.036 1256.06(a) 14.037 1256.06(b) 14.038 1250.05 1299.01-1299.04 14.039 1252.04 14.041 1258.01(a)-(f), (h) 14.042 1258.02 14.051 1260.01 14.052 1260.02 14.061 1262.01 14.062 1262.02 14.071 1264.01 14.0712 1266.01 14.072 1264.02 1266.02 14.081 1268.01 14.082 1268.02 14.091 1270.01 14.092 1270.02 14.093 1270.03 14.094 1270.04 14.095 1270.05 14.101 1272.01 14.102 1272.02 14.111 1274.01 14.112 1274.02 14.121 1276.01 14.131 1278.01 14.132 1278.02 14.141 1280.01 14.142 1280.02 14.151 1282.01 14.152 1282.02 14.161 1288.01 14.162 1288.02 14.171 1290.01 14.172 1290.02 14.173 1290.03 14.174 1290.04 14.175 1290.05 14.176 1290.06 14.177 1290.08 14.178 1290.09 14.179 1290.10 14.20 1294.01 14.211 1294.02(a) 14.212 1294.02(b) 14.213 1294.02(c) 14.214 1294.02(d) 14.216 1294.02(f) 14.217 1294.02(g) 14.221 1294.03(a) 14.222 1294.03(b) 14.23.1 1298.01 14.23.2 1298.02 14.23.3 1298.03 14.23.4 1298.04 14.23.5 1298.05 14.23.6 1298.06 14.23.7 1298.07 14.23.8 1298.08 14.24.1 1298.09 14.24.2 1298.10 14.24.3 1298.11 14.24.4 1298.12 14.24.5 1298.13 14.25 1298.14 14.26 1298.15 14.271 1292.01 14.272 1292.02 14.273 1292.03 14.274 1292.04 14.275 1292.04 14.276 1292.05 14.277 1292.06 14.278 1292.07 14.281 1296.01 14.282 1296.02 14.283 1296.03 14.284 1296.04 14.285 1296.05 14.286 1296.06 14.287 1296.07 14.288 1296.08 14.29 1252.02(a)-(c) 14.31 1252.03 14.32 1252.01 14.33 1250.03 14.341 1250.04(a) 14.351 1252.99 14.352 1252.05 14.36 1250.06 15.011 1240.01 15.012 1240.02 15.02 1240.06 15.031 1244.01 15.032 1244.02 15.033 1244.03 15.034 1244.04 15.035 1244.05 15.041 1246.01 15.042 1246.02 15.043 1246.03 15.044 1246.04 15.045 1246.05 15.046 1246.06 15.051 1248.01 15.052 1248.02 15.053 1248.03 15.054 1248.04-1248.11 15.055 1248.12 15.056 1248.13 15.057 1248.14 15.06 1240.04 15.07 1240.03 15.08 1242.01 15.09 1242.02(a), (b) 15.10 1242.99 15.11 1240.05 15.13 1242.03 19.01 1476.01 19.102 1476.02 19.103 1476.03 19.104 1476.05 19.105 1476.06 19.106 1476.07 19.107 1476.08 19.108 1476.09 19.109 1476.10 19.110 1476.11 19.111 1476.12 19.112 1476.13 19.113 1476.14 19.114 1476.27 19.115 1476.28 19.116 1476.99 19.117 1476.15 19.201 1476.16 19.202 1476.16 19.203 1476.17 19.204 1476.18 19.30 1476.19 19.401 1476.20(a)-(f) 19.402 1476.20(a)-(f) 19.403 1476.20(a)-(f) 19.404 1476.20(a)-(f) 19.405 1476.20(a)-(f) 19.406 1476.20(a)-(f) 19.407 1476.20(a)-(f) 19.408 1476.21 19.409 1476.22 19.412 1476.24 19.50 1476.25(a), (b), (d) 19.601 1476.26 19.602 1476.26 19.70 1476.04 22.01 1610.01 22.02 1610.02 22.025 1610.99 22.03 1610.03 22.04 1610.04 22.05 1610.05 22.06 1610.06 22.07 1610.07 22.08 1610.08 22.09 1610.09(b) 22.10 1610.10 22.11 1610.11 22.12 1610.12 22.13 1610.13 23.01 802.01(a) 23.02 802.01(b) 23.03 802.01(c) 23.04 802.01(d) 23.05 802.01(e) 23.06 802.01(f) 23.07 802.01(g) 23.08 802.01(h) 23.09 802.01(i) 23.10 802.01(j) 23.12 870.02 23.122 870.01 23.124 870.03 23.131 806.01 23.141 814.01 23.142 814.02 23.151 866.02(a)-(c) 23.154 866.04 23.155 866.07 23.157 866.02(h) 23.158 866.02(f) 23.159 866.06 23.1591 866.02(g) 23.1592 866.08(b) 23.1593 866.09 23.1594 866.10 23.1595 866.11 23.1596 866.02(e) 23.1597 866.05 23.1598 866.02(d) 23.181 846.01 23.182 846.02 23.183 846.03 23.171 822.01 23.172 822.02 23.211 818.02 23.212 818.01 23.213 818.04 23.214 818.03 23.215 818.05 23.221 860.01 23.222 860.02 23.223 860.03 23.251 852.01 23.252 852.02 24.01 802.02(a) 24.02 802.02(b) 24.03 802.02(c) 24.04 802.02(d) 24.05 802.02(e) 24.06 802.02(f) 24.07 802.02(g) 24.08 802.02(h) 24.09 802.02(i) 24.10 802.02(j) 25.041 484.01 25.042 484.02 25.043 484.03 25.044 484.04 25.045 484.05 25.046 484.06 484.07 25.05 480.01 25.062 420.02 25.063 420.03 25.10 488.01 25.101 488.02 25.103 488.03 25.104 488.04 25.105 488.05 25.106 488.06 26.01 668.02 26.02 690.01 26.03 656.01 688.13 26.04 668.06 26.10 608.02 26.11 670.01 26.14 858.01 26.15 664.01 26.181 862.01 26.1810 862.06 26.1811 862.07 26.1814 862.02(d)-(f) 26.182 862.02(a), (b) 26.183 862.02(a), (b) 26.184 862.02(d)-(f) 26.185 862.02(d)-(f) 26.186 862.02(d)-(f) 26.187 862.03 26.188 862.04 26.189 862.05 26.21 668.07 26.22 668.08 26.231 652.01 26.232 652.02 26.233 652.03 26.234 652.04 26.235 652.05 26.236 652.06 26.236 652.99 26.237 652.08 652.09 652.99 26.24 652.07 26.25 668.10 26.26 668.09 26.27 1480.01  
Ord. 
No. Effective 
Date C.O. 
Section 5 10-4-76 488.05 7 12-6-76 1250.07, 1264.01 1299.05 12 2-21-77 1020.02 14 5-2-77 1252.04 15 5-2-77 1298.04 16 5-2-77 1256.01 1264.01 1264.02 1266.01 1266.02 1294.01 1294.02(a), (g) 1294.03(a) 22 6-20-77 880.01-880.08 24 6-20-77 1294.03(b) 25 7-11-77 1022.05 32 8-15-77 1064.01-1064.14(a) 1064.15 1064.16 1064.99 1066.01 1066.02 3 10-3-77 1060.09 1060.99 39 11-7-77 1020.02 40 11-21-77 484.01-484.07 50 4-3-78 668.11 59 7-5-78 862.01 862.02(a), (b), (d) to 862.07 62 7-17-78 876.01-876.05 876.99 63 8-7-78 1250.07, 1264.01 64 8-7-78 862.01, 862.02(a), (b), (d) to 862.07 65 8-7-78 862.01, 862.02(a), (b), (d) to 862.07 66 8-7-78 62.01, 862.02(a), (b), (d) to 862.07 67 8-7-78 862.01, 862.02(a), (b), (d)-(f), 862.03, 862.05-862.07 69 8-21-78 1476.01-1476.20(f), 1476.21, 1476.22, 1476.24, 1476.25(a), (b), (d) to 1476.28 71 9-5-78 1244.05 72 9-5-78 298.01-298.08 79 12-4-78 1294.02(a), 1294.03(a) 87 2-20-79 1610.14 89 3-19-79 1044.02, 1044.08(a)-(f), (h), 1044.12 92 4-16-79 1610.02 93 4-16-79 276.01-276.05 94 5-7-79 1250.04(a) 105 11-5-79 1048.01-1048.08 1048.10-1048.20 106 12-17-79 220.01 108 12-17-79 652.01-652.09 652.99 109 6-2-80 484.04 111 7-7-80 862.01, 862.02(d)-(f), 862.08 112 8-4-80 488.06 117 7-5-81 1044.16 120 4-6-81 1254.01-1254.05 121 4-6-81 206.01-206.04 220.02-220.05 122 5-18-81 1420.01, 1440.01-1440.04, 1440.06, 1442.01, 1446.01 123 6-15-81 230.03 124 6-15-81 1462.01 1462.03-1462.06(a) 125 7-6-81 1298.01-1298.15 127 10-5-81 1062.08 128 10-5-81 652.04, 652.10, 652.11 129 1-5-82 220.03 131 3-15-82 1250.07, 1276.01 133 4-15-82 840.01-840.07 134 5-17-82 1064.15 135 5-17-82 1066.12(b), 1064.18 136 5-17-82 1462.03, 1462.04 140 8-2-82 876.01-876.05 876.99 143 10-4-82 608.02 144 10-18-82 1462.03 146 11-15-82 1458.01-1458.09 147 12-6-82 298.05 148 1-3-83 1290.01-1290.06, 1290.08 1290.09 150 4-3-83 1250.05, 1292.01-1292.04, 1292.06, 1292.07, 1299.01-1299.04 151 5-2-83 1250.07, 1254.04, 1296.01, 1296.02, 1296.04-1296.08 153 5-16-83 862.04 155 6-6-83 1252.02(d) 158 10-3-83 298.05 159 12-19-83 614.01, 614.99 160 3-19-84 232.06 161 3-19-84 1462.06(a) 169 7-2-84 834.01-834.06 171 9-4-84 1048.01-1048.08 1048.10-1048.20 175 4-1-85 1042.01-1042.07(d)(10), (12) to 1042.11, 1042.13-1042.16, 1042.99 176 6-17-85 298.04 180 8-19-85 298.05 184 10-7-85 1610.09(b) 185 10-7-85 610.04 186 10-7-85 610.05 187 12-16-85 610.05 191 2-3-86 1290.04 192 2-3-86 1292.04 194 3-3-86 274.02 195 3-17-86 856.01-856.04 196 3-17-86 1254.06 199 8-5-86 1064.09 200 5-19-86 1028.01-1028.08 204 6-16-86 410.01, 410.02 410.03(U.T.C. 5.97-10.76), 410.04 206 8-4-86 1610.04 210 9-2-86 610.08 212 11-3-86 1292.07 213 11-17-86 1042.04 214 11-17-86 1042.04 217 4-6-87 1256.01 1284.01-1284.03 1286.01-1286.03 218 4-6-87 1458.01-1458.09 221 4-20-87 1476.17, 1476.18 224 5-18-87 488.06 225 5-18-87 1046.01 226 6-1-87 1250.07 227 6-1-87 1292.07 228 6-1-87 608.01 229 6-15-87 488.06 233 10-5-87 232.06 236 11-16-87 1462.06(b) 237 12-7-87 1298.09 238 1-18-88 1294.01 239 1-18-88 1294.01 240 1-18-88 1294.02(a) 241 1-18-88 1294.02(a), (f) 242 1-18-88 1294.03(a) 243 2-1-88 1250.07, 1299.05 244 2-1-88 1258.01(a)-(f), (h) 245 2-1-88 868.01-868.07 246 2-1-88 1250.05 1299.01-1299.04 250 5-2-88 1476.17 251 5-2-88 1476.06 252 6-20-88 1042.07(a)-(d)(10), (12)-(i) 254 7-5-88 1292.07 255 7-5-88 1250.07 257 8-1-88 232.09 258 10-3-88 232.10 259 10-3-88 1482.01-1482.19 261 10-3-88 1046.02 262 12-5-88 1044.02 263 12-19-88 1462.02 264 3-20-89 1250.07 265 4-17-89 1062.10 269 8-21-89 1294.02(e) 272 10-2-89 866.08(a) 273 10-12-89 866.01, 866.03 274 11-6-89 1484.01-1484.03 275 2-20-90 1042.04 277 3-19-90 1296.03 278 3-19-90 1292.05 Adopting Ord. 286 10-15-90 202.01-202.07, 202.09-202.12, 202.99, 266.02, 420.03(U.T.C. 1.012b-5.82) 420.01, 420.99, 480.02, 480.99, 484.99, 660.03, 660.05, 660.06(a), (b) 806.02, 810.01-810.06, 826.03 836.01, 836.03, 836.05, 836.06, 862.02(c) 1020.06(b), (d), 1042.07(d)(11), 1042.12,1044.08(g), 1044.15, 1048.09, 1060.06, 1064.14(b), 1066.04(a), 1066.05(c), (d), 1066.07, 1066.08(d), 1066.09-1066.12(a), 1242.02(c), 1254.04(b), 1258.01(g) 1440.05, 1444.01-1444.06, 1446.02, 1470.03, (Cont.) 1476.20(g) 1476.23, 1476.25(c), 1610.09(a) 279 5-7-90 1060.06 280 5-21-90 1042.01-1042.11(c), (e)-1042.16, 1042.99 283 6-18-90 1022.01 285 10-1-90 1042.11(d) 287 11-19-90 232.11 288 12-3-90 1462.06 290 2-4-91 1267.01, 1267.02 291 2-19-91 1064.17 292 2-19-91 1064.01 294 3-18-91 1470.01, 1470.02 295 4-1-91 1022.01 296 4-1-91 1044.15 297 4-15-91 1290.02 298 4-15-91 1254.06 301 5-20-91 1292.07 302 6-17-91 1292.07 305 7-1-91 1290.07 306 7-15-91 1284.02(k) 307 7-15-91 1280.01(a) 308 8-5-91 1250.07 309 8-5-91 1298.06 310 8-5-91 1294.02 311 8-5-91 1294.03 312 8-5-91 1294.01 313 8-19-91 1298.15 314 8-19-91 1272.01 315 8-19-91 1250.07 316 11-4-91 1250.07 317 11-4-91 1292.07 318 12-2-91 1292.07 319 12-2-91 240.01 320 12-16-91 410.03 321 12-16-91 866.01-866.11 322 12-16-91 1020.02 323 12-16-91 1068.01-1068.13 1068.99 324 1-6-92 1292.07 325 2-3-92 1254.06(f) 326 2-18-92 1446.01 327 2-18-92 1042.04(a)(1)B. 328 3-16-92 1298.09 330 4-20-92 1610.14 331 5-4-92 1470.03 332 7-6-92 277.01-277.05 333 7-6-92 1068.04(h) 334 7-20-92 1610.025, 1610.03 1610.06-1610.08 1610.10 Adopting Ordinance 1256.06 335 8-17-92 668.03 336 9-8-92 1042.01-1042.10 337 9-8-92 1043.01-1043.41 1043.99 338 9-21-92 410.02 339 11-16-92 232.06 340 1-4-93 1048.04, 1048.20 342 3-15-93 1068.04 343 4-5-93 1482.06(b) 344 4-5-93 1250.07 345 4-5-93 1272.01(i) 346 4-5-93 1292.07 347 4-5-93 1294.02(b)(1), (d)(3), (e)(3) 348 4-5-93 1254.02(b) 349 5-17-93 610.10 350 5-17-93 652.12 351 5-17-93 668.14 352 5-17-93 670.02 353 5-17-93 690.02 354 5-17-93 818.06 355 5-17-93 822.03 356 5-17-93 836.07 357 5-17-93 840.06 358 5-17-93 876.06 359 5-17-93 852.03 360 5-17-93 856.05 361 5-17-93 862.09 362 5-17-9 870.04 363 6-7-93 488.06 364 6-21-93 480.02 365 7-6-93 1022.01(b) 366 7-6-93 410.03(U.T.C. 8.10s to w) 367 7-6-93 273.01-273.07 368 8-16-93 1020.07 (Erroneously indicated as 1020.06) 369 8-16-93 488.06 370 8-16-93 (Bond ordinance - not in Code book) 371 9-7-93 652.03 372 9-7-93 652.99 373 10-4-93 1292.07(n) 374 10-4-93 1299.06 375 10-18-93 1298.04 376 11-1-93 1048.01 377 12-20-93 1062.07 378 1-3-94 1292.07(q) 379 1-3-94 1520 380 2-7-94 230.01 381 3-21-94 880.09 382 4-18-94 488.06 383 5-17-94 1289.01-1289.09 384 5-17-94 Pt. 12-App. I- 
Zoning Map 385 6-6-94 1045.01-1045.07 386 6-20-94 863.01-863.18 387 6-20-94 862.01-862.17 388 6-20-94 870 (repeal) 389 7-5-94 822 (repeal) 390 9-6-94 1482.08 391 9-6-94 1482.10 392 9-6-94 1482.11 393 9-6-94 1482.12 394 9-6-94 1482.13 395 9-6-94 1482.14 396 9-6-94 Pt. 12-App. I- 
Zoning Map 397 9-19-94 1044.15 398 10-3-94 1066.03 399 10-3-94 1062.12 400 11-21-94 202.99 401 11-21-94 410.03 402 11-21-94 668.02 403 11-21-94 668.04 404 11-21-94 668.05 405 11-21-94 668.06 406 11-21-94 668.08 407 12-5-94 273 (repeal) 408 12-19-94 668.19 409 12-19-94 668.11 410 12-19-94 1020.04 411 12-19-94 1020.05 412 12-19-94 1020.06 413 1-3-95 Pt. 12-App. I- 
Zoning Map 414 1-3-95 Pt. 12-App. I- 
Zoning Map 415 2-6-95 Ch. 806 416 5-1-95 232.08 417 5-15-95 610.04 418 5-15-95 610.06 419 5-15-95 610.08 420 5-15-95 610.09 421 5-15-95 876.07 422 5-15-95 876.99 423 6-19-95 668.05 424 6-19-95 Ch. 1066 425 6-19-95 410.03(5.82) 426 6-19-95 410.03(5.83) 427 8-7-95 Pt. 12-App. I- 
Zoning Map 428 8-7-95 1280.01 429 8-7-95 1292.07 430 9-18-95 1610.03, 1610.04, 1610.05, 1610.06, 1610.07, 1610.08, 1610.09, 1610.10, 1610.11 431 12-4-95 881.01-881.13 432 12-4-95 1043.05, 1043.07, 1043.08, 1043.20, 1043.23, 1042.25, 1043.26, 1043.99 433 1-2-96 1610.03 434 2-5-96 1020.06 435 3-18-96 1064.11 435a 4-8-96 None (ordinance 
establishing 
moratorium) 436 5-6-96 Pt. 12-App. I-- 
Zoning Map 437 5-20-96 Pt. 12-App. I- 
Zoning Map 438 5-28-96 Ch. 1277 439 6-17-96 420.04 440 7-1-96 410.03(6.29) 410.03(6.32) 441 7-1-96 610.01 442 7-1-96 1062.04 443 7-1-96 1062.01 444 7-1-96 1610.03 445 7-1-96 None (ordinance amending TIF Plan No. 2) 446 3-17-97 1610.05 447 5-19-97 652.01 448 6-2-97 608.03 449 6-16-97 420.05 450 7-7-97 1482.99 451 8-4-97 826.01 452 8-4-97 826.02 (repeal) 453 8-4-97 1277.03(h) 454 10-6-97 1292.07(h) 455 10-20-97 1062.07 456 10-27-97 None (TIF ordinance) 457 12-1-97 Chapter 1476 458 1-5-98 1292.07 459 1-5-98 Zoning Map 460 2-17-98 232.06 461 3-16-98 232.10 462 3-16-98 232.06 463 4-20-98 Chapter 867 464 4-20-98 1462.02, 1462.03, 1462.04, 1462.05, 1462.06 465 8-3-98 Ch. 1044 466 7-6-98 Pt. 12- App. I- 
Zoning Map 466-A 10-16-98 None (TIF ordinance amendment) 467 10-19-98 None (Cable franchise transfer consent) 468 11-26-98 Pt. 12-App. I- 
Zoning Map 469 12-7-98 Chapter 271 (280) 470 12-31-98 880.10 471 1-22-99 1062.07 472 4-5-99 None (Cable franchise transfer consent) 473 4-26-99 1064.09 474 6-7-99 1066.05 475 6-7-99 1066.07 476 7-6-99 Pt. 13, Tit. 2 477 7-6-99 484.04 478 7-6-99 484.05 479 7-6-99 488.06 480 8-16-99 220.02, 220.03 220.04 487 1-18-00 610.04 488 1-18-00 866.99 489 4-17-00 1338.03, 1368.03 490 4-17-00 1338.04, 1368.02 491 4-17-00 1338.06, 1368.01 492 4-17-00 1338.01 493 5-1-00 1444.01 494 5-1-00 1370.02 495 5-1-00 1440.02 496 5-1-00 1442.01 497 5-1-00 1462.03 498 5-1-00 1462.05 499 5-15-00 Zoning map 500 5-15-00 Zoning map 501 5-15-00 Zoning map 502 5-15-00 1328.04 503 5-15-00 1340.09 504 7-27-00 Zoning map 505 8-7-00 Ch. 652 506 8-7-00 202.99 507 8-21-00 Ch. 286 508 8-21-00 232.11 509 9-5-00 1462.07 510 9-18-00 1368.02 511 9-18-00 1346.05 512 9-18-00 1346.04 513 10-16-00 880.04 514 10-16-00 880.11 515 11-6-00 Zoning map 516 11-6-00 Zoning map 481 9-7-99 (None - cable franchise transfer) 482 10-4-99 (None - ordinance amending TIF Plan No. 97) 483 12-30-99 1476.04, 1476.05, 1476.06, 1476.13, 1476.11, 1476.12, 1476.16, 1476.17, 1476.28 484 12-30-99 1476.07 485 1-18-00 610.01 486 1-18-00 610.02 517 11-6-00 Zoning map 517 11-6-00 1062.02, 1062.03, 1062.04, 1062.05, 1062.06 518 11-6-00 1610.03 519 11-20-00 1028.04 520 2-5-01 280.02 521 2-5-01 1610.03 522 2-20-01 670.02 523 2-19-01 1068.11 524 2-20-01 1356.01, 1356.02, 1356.06, 1357.07 525 Zoning Map 526 3-19-01 1336.07 527 3-19-01 1364.08 528 3-19-01 1346.06 529 4-2-01 1374.06 530 4-16-01 220.02 531 5-21-01 1064.11 532 6-4-01 Zoning Map 533 6-4-01 1356.03 534 6-4-01 1368.03 535 6-4-01 232.06 536 6-4-01 1374.03 537 6-4-01 1374.03 538 7-2-01 232.08 539 7-16-01 1020.07 540 7-16-01 1374.03 541 8-6-01 1610.03 542 8-20-01 1330.07, 1332.07 1334.07 543 10-1-01 484.04 544 10-15-01 1347.09 545 10-15-01 1346.09 546 10-15-01 1342.09 547 10-15-01 1340.09 548 12-17-01 1346.06, 1350.06 549 1-21-02 1220.03 550 12-3-01 1358.01, 1358.02 551 12-3-01 1358.03, 1368.03 552 12-17-01 1368.01 553 12-3-01 Zoning Map 554 2-4-02 1332.07, 1334.07, 1338.07, 1340.07, 1342.07, 1344.07, 1346.07, 1354.07, 1356.07, 1358.07 555 2-4-02 1334.03, 1368.03 556 2-4-02 1364.08 557 2-4-02 1320.07 558 2-19-02 610.03 559 3-18-02 1340.09 560 4-01-02 668.05 561 4-01-02 1346.06 562 5-20-02 480.03 563 5-20-02 1610.03 564 6-3-02 881.04 565 6-3-02 1320.07 566 6-17-02 881.04 567 7-1-02 Zoning Map 568 7-1-02 1358.03, 1368.03 569 7-1-02 1374.03 570 7-1-02 1020.07 571 8-19-02 Zoning Map 572 8-19-02 Zoning Map 573 8-19-02 1462.05 574 8-19-02 1462.02 575 8-19-02 1374.03 576 10-07-02 1346.04, 1368.02 577 10-7-02 1346.05 578 10-7-02 1062.12 579 10-7-02 1064.06 580 10-21-02 410.01 581 10-21-02 652.04 582 10-21-02 652.02 583 10-21-02 652.05 584 10-20-02 Ch. 1050 585 11-04-02 862.01 586 11-04-02 1364.09 587 11-04-02 1610.03 588 1-06-03 1366.08 589 1-06-03 1350.01 590 1-06-03 1356.01 591 1-06-03 1358.01 592 1-06-03 1364.08 593 1-06-03 1370.02 594 1-06-03 1322.01 595 3-17-03 410.05 596 3-17-03 232.06 597 3-17-03 410.03, 410.04 598 3-17-03 488.06 599 4-21-03 1484.02, 1484.03 600 4-21-03 1610.03 601 5-5-03 1028.09 602 6-2-03 1358.01 603 6-16-03 Chapter 864 604 6-16-03 1476.06 605 7-7-03 Zoning map 606 7-7-03 690.01 607 7-21-03 1350.04 608 7-21-03 1358.04 609 8-4-03 1244.05 610 9-2-03 1346.02, 1347.02 1350.02 611 10-6-03 1336.01 612 10-20-03 863.01 613 10-20-03 1220.03 614 11-3-03 1350.01 615 1-5-04 880.11 616 1-5-04 880.11 617 1-5-04 880.09 618 1-19-04 866.05 619 2-2-04 1344.09 620 2-2-04 1364.08 621 2-2-04 1332.03, 1134.04 1368.03 622 2-9-04 1024.01 623 3-15-04 1338.01 624 3-15-04 1338.03 625 3-15-04 1338.04, 1368.02 626 3-15-04 1338.05 627 3-15-04 1338.09 628 3-15-04 1338.06, 1368.01 629 3-15-04 1364.09 630 3-15-04 1320.07 631 4-19-04 1346.06, 1368.01, 1346.09 632 4-19-04 Chapter 1476 633 4-19-04 1068.04 634 4-19-04 1068.03 635 4-19-04 1040.02 636 4-19-04 1040.04 637 4-05-04 1330.07, 1332.07, 1334.07, 1336.07 638 5-03-04 1470.04 639 5-03-04 668.12 640 5-03-04 1468.02 641 5-17-04 1476.08 642 5-17-04 1476.13 643 6-21-04 1064.02 644 6-21-04 1064.05 645 6-21-04 1064.12 646 6-21-04 1064.14 647 6-21-04 1064.15 648 6-21-04 1064.99 649 8-16-04 1332.01 650 8-16-04 1330.01 651 8-16-04 Chapter 1065 652 8-16-04 1368.01 653 8-16-04 1368.02 654 8-16-04 1368.03 655 11-01-04 1364.07 656 12-16-04 668.03 657 12-06-04 868.08 658 12-06-04 1020.07 659 12-20-04 488.05 660 01-03-05 Zoning Map 661 02-22-05 1064.17 662 02-22-05 1040.04 663 02-22-05 1064.13 664 03-21-05 410.03 665 03-21-05 1350.01 666 03-21-05 1352.01, 1352.07 667 03-21-05 1356.01 668 03-21-05 1358.01 669 03-21-05 1362.01, 1362.02 670 03-21-05 1364.02, 1364.04 1364.05 671 03-21-05 1366.02 672 03-21-05 1320.07 673 03-21-05 Zoning Map 674 04-04-05 1354.01 675 04-18-05 Ch. 1048 676 05-02-05 1336.02, 1364.01 1364.08 677 05-02-05 1346.01, 1346.02 678 05-02-05 Zoning Map 679 05-16-05 206.02 680 05-16-05 1240.06 681 05-16-05 1244.05 682 09-06-05 656.02, 656.99 683 09-06-05 668.05 684 10-03-05 1346.03 685 10-03-05 1346.04 686 10-03-05 1346.06 687 10-03-05 1346.09 688 10-03-05 1364.08 689 10-03-05 292.03 690 10-17-05 Zoning Map 691 11-08-05 614.01, 614.02 614.03 692 12-05-05 1346.06 693 12-19-05 1334.01, 1336.01 694 02-06-06 230.01 695 02-06-06 Zoning Map 696 03-20-06 1476.08 697 03-20-06 1476.04 698 03-20-06 1347.09 699 03-20-06 1347.06 700 04-03-06 1020.07, 1020.08 701 05-01-06 1364.05 702 06-05-06 656.02 703 06-19-06 Zoning Map 704 07-17-06 1358.06 705 07-17-06 1368.01 707 10-2-06 1362.07 708 10-2-06 1364.07 709 10-2-06 1338.02 710 10-2-06 1364.01 711 10-2-06 1364.09 712 10-2-06 Zoning Map 714 10-16-06 876.03 715 1-2-07 410.04, 488.02 716 1-2-07 1338.04 717 2-5-07 1324.07 718 2-5-07 1320.04 719 2-5-07 1324.01,1324.02, 1324.04 720 2-5-07 1362.02 721 2-5-07 1364.04 722 4-30-07 1224.01, 1224.02, 1224.03, 1224.04 723 3-19-07 1320.07 724 3-19-07 1328.06 725 3-19-07 1330.06 726 3-19-07 1332.06 727 3-19-07 1334.06 728 3-19-07 1336.06 729 3-19-07 1338.06 730 3-19-07 1340.06 731 3-19-07 1342.06 732 3-19-07 1344.06 733 3-19-07 1346.06 734 3-19-07 1347.06 735 3-19-07 1348.06 736 3-19-07 1350.06 737 3-19-07 1354.06 738 3-19-07 1356.06 739 3-19-07 1358.06 740 3-19-07 1364.08 741 3-19-07 1366.08 742 3-19-07 1368.01 743 5-2-07 1362.01 744 5-7-07 608.04 745 5-21-07 274.03 746 5-21-07 1334.01 747 5-21-07 1342.01 748 5-21-07 1347.01 749 5-21-07 1320.04 750 5-21-07 1334.03 751 5-21-07 484.04 752 6-4-07 410.04 753 6-4-07 1045.01, 1045.02, 1045.03, 1045.04, 1045.05, 1045.06, 1045.07 754 6-4-07 488.06 755 6-18-07 608.05, 608.99 756 7-2-07 482.01, 482.02, 482.03, 482.04, 482.05 757 7-2-07 1332.04 758 7-2-07 1332.08 759 7-2-07 1334.04 760 7-2-07 1334.08 761 7-2-07 1336.08 762 7-2-07 1338.08 763 7-2-07 1340.08 764 7-2-07 1342.08 765 7-2-07 1344.08 766 7-2-07 1374.03, 1374.04 767 8-6-07 206.01, 206.02, 206.03, 206.04 768 8-6-07 None (Ordinance amending TIF Plan No. 97) 769 8-20-07 862.07 770 8-20-07 864.04, 864.06 771 9-4-07 1352.02 772 10-15-07 230.01 773 11-5-07 1062.07 774 11-5-07 1374.02 775 11-5-07 1350.01 776 11-5-07 1354.01 777 12-3-07 1364.05 778 1-7-08 1344.01 779 1-7-08 1346.02 780 1-7-08 1364.01, 1364.08 781 2-4-08 1320.07 782 2-4-08 1338 Introduction, 1338.01, 1346.01, 1347.01 783 3-17-08 1320.07 784 3-17-08 1364.01 785 3-17-08 1364.08 786 3-17-08 1364.09 787 3-17-08 1320.07 788 3-17-08 1338.01, 1340.01 789 3-17-08 Chapter 870 790 3-17-08 668.14 791 3-17-08 1064.01, 1064.19 792 4-7-08 222.01 793 4-7-08 230.05 (repeal) 794 4-7-08 1374.04 795 6-2-08 Ch. 1070 796 6-2-08 Ch. 1048 797 6-2-08 1476.06, 1476.11 798 6-16-08 1476.02 799 6-16-08 232.08 800 6-16-08 Zoning map 801 6-16-08 None - Ordinance amending TIF Plan 802 6-16-08 Zoning Map 803 6-16-08 1347.01 804 6-16-08 1064.20 805 7-21-08 1064.09 806 7-21-08 863.07 807 7-21-08 410.04 808 8-4-08 1324.07 809 8-4-08 Chapter 1610 810 9-2-08 1322.01 811 9-2-08 1324.04 812 10-6-08 1322.01 813 10-20-08 None - Ordinance amending TIF Plan 814 11-3-08 Ch. 1360 815 11-17-08 1064.09 816 12-1-08 220.02, 220.04 817 1-4-09 866.02, 866.08 818 1-5-09 1346.04 819 1-5-09 Chapter 232 820 1-5-09 1320.07 821 1-5-09 1368.03 822 1-5-09 Chapter 1376 823 1-19-09 1020.09 824 2-2-09 1362.08 825 2-2-09 1346.01 826 2-2-09 1374.04 827 2-2-09 1320.07 828 3-27-09 1064.08 829 3-27-09 1368.03 830 5-14-09 1044.12 831 5-14-09 1364.02 832 5-14-09 1368.03 833 5-28-08 Appendix I 834 5-28-09 Appendix I 835 5-28-09 Appendix I 836 6-15-09 410.04 837 6-15-09 488.06 838 6-25-09 Appendix I 839 7-16-09 834.03 840 7-30-09 277.02, 277.04, 277.05 841 8-13-09 1354.01 842 8-13-09 1328.01, 1332.01, 1334.01, 1336.01, 1350.01, 1358.01 843 8-13-09 1320.07 844 8-13-09 1338.01, 1358.01 1340.01 845 9-18-09 610.01 846 9-18-09 1064.11 847 10-29-09 232.02 848 10-29-09 608.06 849 11-12-09 410.04 850 12-31-09 1220.02 851 12-31-09 1024.03, 1024.99 852 1-28-10 Ch. 814 853 1-28-10 Ch. 818 854 1-28-10 Ch. 836 855 1-28-10 Ch. 840 856 1-28-10 Ch. 848 857 1-28-10 Ch. 852 858 1-28-10 Ch. 858 859 1-28-10 Ch. 859 860 2-16-10 Ch. 1374 861 3-15-10 1220.03, 1220.04 862 3-15-10 220.04 863 3-15-10 Ch. 842 864 4-19-10 None - Establishing moratorium on issuance of permits or licenses for the sale or dispensation of medical marihuana until 8-19-10 865 4-19-10 1046.02 866 6-7-10 Ch. 1062 867 6-7-10 Ch. 1342 868 6-21-10 834.06 869 7-6-10 1476.04, 1476.05, 1476.06, 1476.08, Schedule of Regulations 870 7-6-10 1062.04 871 7-19-10 1364.01, 1364.08, 1364.09 872 8-16-10 1065.03 873 8-16-10 1320.07 874 8-16-10 1330.01 875 8-16-10 1332.01 876 8-16-10 1334.01 877 8-16-10 1336.01 878 8-16-10 1344.01 879 8-16-10 1354.01 880 8-16-10 1358.01 881 8-16-10 Ch. 844 882 10-04-10 Ch. 605 883 10-18-10 Ch. 1047 884 11-1-10 1334.03 885 11-1-10 1338.03 886 11-1-10 1340.03 887 11-1-10 1342.03 888 11-1-10 1344.03 889 11-1-10 1347.03 890 11-1-10 1368.03 891 11-15-10 488.06 892 12-06-10 1320.07 893 12-06-10 1330.02 894 12-06-10 1334.01 895 12-06-10 1332.01 896 12-06-10 1336.01 897 12-06-10 1364.01 898 12-20-10 834.06 899 12-20-10 664.01 900 1-28-11 Ch. 1060 901 1-28-11 Ch. 1060 902 2-17-11 1320.07 903 2-17-11 1344.01 904 2-17-11 1358.01 905 2-17-11 1320.05 907 3-04-11 1062.04 908 3-31-11 668.15 909 4-14-11 Chap. 1610 910 4-18-11 TIF 97 911 4-18-11 TIF 2 912 No Amendment, Editor's Mistake 913 5-12-11 1360.01 914 5-26-11 1043.07, 1043.08, 1043.18, 1043.24 915 5-26-11 Appendix I 916 6-6-11 1332.03 917 6-16-11 1368.03 918 6-30-11 844.01 919 7-15-11 863.02, 863.11 920 7-15-11 862.01, 862.10 921 8-25-11 279.01, 279.01, 279.03, 279.04 279.05 922 8-25-11 1320.05 923 10-3-11 1374.03 924 10-3-11 410.03 925 10-17-11 279.02 926 10-17-11 834.03 927 11-7-11 488.06 928 11-7-11 1220.04, 1220.06 1220.07, 1220.08 929 11-7-11 1354.01 930 12-19-11 488.06 931 2-16-12 279.02, 279.04 932 2-16-12 1364.08 933 2-21-12 Zoning Map Change No. 29 934 2-21-12 Zoning Map Change No.30 935 3-15-12 488.06 936 4-12-12 1347.01 937 4-12-12 202.10 938 4-12-12 1378 939 4-12-12 1364.01 940 5-17-12 1347.06 941 5-31-12 867.07, 867.12 942 5-31-12 806.02, 806.03, 806.04, 806.05, 806.06 943 7-1-12 Ch. 866 944 7-1-12 Ch. 866 945 6-14-12 610.05 946 6-14-12 1064.11 947 7-12-12 480.03 948 7-26-12 1610.02 949 7-26-12 Ch. 863 950 9-14-12 690.02, 690.03 951 9-14-12 None - Ordinance amending TIF Plan 2 952 10-11-12 Zoning Map Change No. 31 953 10-11-12 Preamble, 1378.01, 1378.02, 1378.03, 1378.04 954 10-11-12 Preamble, 1340.01, 1340.09 955 12-13-12 610.01 956 1-17-13 1332.02, 1368.03 957 1-17-13 1342.09 958 3-1-13 1062.04 959 4-18-13 Ch. 1377 960 4-18-13 1320.07 961 5-16-13 1022.05 962 5-16-13 834.01, 834.02, 834.07 963 5-16-13 Ch. 865 964 5-16-13 1480.01 965 5-16-13 1064.12, 1064.13, 1064.17 966 5-30-13 1020.07, 1020.08 967 6-13-13 1347.03 968 6-13-13 482.03 969 6-13-13 484.04 970 6-13-13 865.15 971 6-13-13 1364.01 972 6-13-13 1328.01, 1328.02 973 7-11-13 1044.16 974 7-11-13 1332.09 975 7-11-13 1334.09 976 7-11-13 1336.09 977 7-25-13 690.02 978 8-15-13 842.02 979 8-29-13 1062.06 980 9-13-13 Zoning Map Change No. 33 981 9-13-13 Zoning Map Change No. 34 982 10-17-13 1354.01 983 10-31-13 1046.01, 1046.03 984 11-14-13 1476.08 985 12-12-13 Zoning Map Change No. 35 986 4-18-13 Zoning Map Change No. 32 987 1-16-14 1374.04 988 1-31-14 865.08 989 2-28-14 1324.04 990 4-17-14 232.04 991 4-17-14 Zoning Map Change No. 36 992 6-12-14 1368.01 993 6-12-14 1338.06, 1338.09 994 6-12-14 1340.06 1340.09 995 6-12-14 1342.06 1342.09 996 6-12-14 1344.09 1346.09 1347.09 997 6-26-14 863.06 998 7-17-14 1320.07 999 7-17-14 1364.01 1000 7-17-14 1364.08 1001 7-17-14 1338.02 1002 7-17-14 1340.02 1003 7-17-14 1342.02 1004 7-17-14 1344.02 1005 7-17-14 1347.02 1006 7-17-14 1356.02 1007 7-17-14 1358.02 1008 7-31-14 834.06 1009 8-14-14 1020.07, 1020.08 1010 9-12-14 1320.07 1011 1-15-15 484.02-484.04 1012 2-27-15 1065.02 1065.03 1013 2-27-15 1020.07 1020.08 1014  2-27-15 Ch. 299 1015  3-26-15 864.02 864.03 864.04 864.05 864.07 864.08 1016  4-16-15 Ch. 13 Zoning Map Changes 1017  4-16-15 Ch. 13 Zoning Map Changes 1031  3-31-16 1476.05(1) 1032  3-11-16 1476.11(1)       Added Ch. 1476, App. E 1033  5-12-16 1348.01, 1348.04 1348.06, 1348.07       Added 1348.09-1348.11 1034  6-30-16 279.01-279.05 1035  7-15-16 230.01 1036  8-11-16 1020.02(b) 1037  8-11-16 299.09 1038 10-13-16 232.03 1039 12-29-16 232.04 1040 12-29-16       Added 1020.10 1041 12-29-16 866.01 1042 12-29-16 1347.01 1044  3-13-17 Ch. 13 Zoning Map Changes 1045  3- 3-17       Rpld 866.01, 866.02 1046  3- 3-17 1050.04(b) 1047  4-27-17 1020.10 1048  5-10-17 410.03 1050  6-15-17 Ch. 13 Zoning Map 
Changes 1051  6-15-17 Ch. 13 Zoning Map 
Changes 1052  6-15-17       Added 1375.01-1375.07 1053  6-15-17       Added 1332.07(6)       Added 1334.07(6) 1054  7-13-17 1346.04(c) 1346.09(9) 1366.03(a)(11) 1055  8-18-17 Ch. 13 Zoning Map 
Changes 1056  1- 1-18 488.06 1057  8-17-17 488.06 1058  8-17-17 1320.07 1059  8-17-17 1340.01 1060 11- 3-17 Ch. 13 Zoning Map Changes 1061 11-30-17 608.04 608.06 1062  1-16-18 608.04 1063  2-15-18       Rpld 1352.01-1352.09       Added 1352.01-1352.03 1064  2-15-18 1336.01 1065  2-15-18 1320.07 1332.01 1332.07 1374.03(d) 1066  2-15-18 1334.01 1334.07 1067  3- 2-18       Rpld 610.05 1068  3-29-18 1044.14 1069  3-29-18 1064.11 1070  4-12-18 1320.07 1372.01 1372.05 1071  5-17-18       Added 882.01-882.04 1072  5-17-18 Ch. 13 Zoning Map Changes 1073  5-31-18 299.06 299.08 1074  5-31-18 299.02 299.06 1075  6-14-18 867.02 1076  7-12-18 1332.01 1332.02 1334.01 1334.02 1336.01 1336.02 1338.01 1340.01 1342.01 1350.01 1356.01 1358.01 1364.09 1077  8-30-18 410.04 1078  9-14-18       Added 1420.02 1079  9-14-18 1458.03       Added 1458.10 1080  9-14-18 1042.08 1081  9-14-18 1320.07 1347.03 1347.04 1347.09 1374.03 1374.04 1082  9-14-18 1332.07 1334.07 1083 11-15-18 1347.06 1084 12-13-18 1320.07 1338.01 1342.01 1346.01 1347.01 1354.01 1358.01 1085 12-27-18       Added 851.01-851.04 1086 12-13-18       Added 845.01-845.22 1087  2- 1-19 1320.07 1332.01 1334.01       Rpld 868.01-868.08       Added 868.01-868.10 1088  2-14-19       Added 870.01-870.07 1089  3- 1-19 1320.01 1330.01 1332.01 1334.01 1336.01 1348.01 1354.01 1090  3- 1-19 845.01-845.22 1091  5-30-19 690.02 1092  5-30-19 608.06  
