Chapter 1 - Adoption, Contents and Interpretation
1-1
An ordinance to provide for the exercise of certain municipal powers of the City of Troy,
Michigan, and for the health, safety and welfare of persons and property in the City, and to
provide penalties for the violation of the provisions thereof.
The City of Troy ordains:
1. Copy Available. The City Clerk shall keep one copy of the City Code available for public
inspection during office hours.
(Rev. 04-17-1967)
1.2 Amendment Procedure. This Code shall be amended by ordinance. The Title of each
amendatory ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances and purposes of the
amendment, shall be substantially as follows:
(1) To amend any section or chapter:
AND ORDINANCE TO AMEND CHAPTER _____________ OF THE CODE OF
THE CITY OF TROY.
(2) To insert a new chapter:
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE CITY OF TROY BY ADDING
A NEW CHAPTER, WHICH NEW CHAPTER SHALL BE DESIGNATED AS
CHAPTER ____________ OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF TROY.
(3) To repeal a chapter:
AN ORDINANCE TO REPEAL CHAPTER ___________ OF THE CODE OF THE
CITY OF TROY.
(Rev. 06-28-1976)
1.3 Publication and Distribution of Amendments. Amendments to the Code shall be published
as required by the Charter of the City of Troy and copies of each amendment shall be
published in loose leaf form suitable for insertion in the loose leaf copies of the Code.
Such copies shall be distributed to the officers of the City having copies of the Code
assigned to them. Each officer assigned a copy of the Code shall be responsible for
maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received.
(Rev. 04-17-1967)
1.4 Contents of Code. This Code contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature
of the City of Troy and includes ordinances dealing with municipal administration, parks
and public grounds, streets and sidewalks, zoning and planning, food and health,
businesses and trades, building, electrical, heating and plumbing regulations, police
regulations and traffic regulations, and excludes ordinances granting franchises and
Chapter 1 - Adoption, Contents and Interpretation
1-2
special privileges, establishing sewer and other public improvement districts, providing for
the construction of particular sewers, streets or sidewalks, or for the improvement thereof,
and for the construction and improvement of other public works, authorizing the borrowing
of money or the issuance of bonds. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Troy adopted
March 25, 1957 (Ordinance No. 23), as amended to the date of adoption of this Code, is
set forth as Chapter 39 of this Code, except as section numbers and references to other
ordinances of the City are changed to conform to the Code numbering system. The
adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the
continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the City
in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. All ordinances of a general and permanent
nature in effect on the effective date of this Code are hereby repealed except as to such
provisions of any such ordinances as are also contained herein; provided, however, that
any sections or parts of any such ordinance which are not permanent and general in
nature as herein defined, and which are severable from the remainder of such ordinance
are saved from repeal. Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or
permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published, and
recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code,
nor be deemed a part thereof.
1.5 Short Title. This ordinance may be known and cited as the "Troy City Code".
1.6 Headings. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any
chapter or section heading.
1.7 Responsibility. Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof, or
by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include
the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do said act.
1.8 Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this Code and any
amendment thereto, shall, for the purposes of this Code, have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
(1) "Person" shall include any individual, co-partnership, corporation, association, club,
joint adventure, estate, trust, and any other group or combination acting as a unit,
and the individuals constituting such group or unit.
(2) "Public place" shall mean any place to or upon which the public resorts, or travels,
whether such place is owned or controlled by the City or any agency of the State of
Michigan, or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom, or
by invitation, express or implied.
(3) "Street", "highway" and "alley" shall mean the entire width subject to an easement
for public right of way, or owned in fee by the City, County or State, of every way or
place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The word "alley" shall
mean any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress
Chapter 1 - Adoption, Contents and Interpretation
1-3
from a property.
(4) "Sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curb lines or lateral lines
and the right of way lines which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
(5) "City" shall mean the City of Troy.
1.9 Title of Officer to Include Deputy or Subordinate. Whenever, by the provisions of this
Code, any officer of the City of Troy is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any
act or duty, the title of said officer shall mean and include such officer or his deputy or
authorized subordinate.
1.10 Tense. Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words
used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption
of this Code but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any act, event,
or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity,
requirement or prohibition.
1.11 Notice. Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous
structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which if performed by the
City, may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of this Code, shall be
served:
(1) By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his
residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and
discretion, or
(2) By mailing said notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his last
known address, or
(3) If the owner is unknown, by posting said notice in some conspicuous place on the
premises for five (5) days. No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate,
conceal, or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any City officer,
unless permission is given by said officer to remove said notice.
1.12 Publication of Rules and Regulations. All rules and regulations made by the
administrative officers which are subject to approval by the Council under the provisions
of this Code, after such approval is given, and all rules and regulations adopted by the
Council on its own initiative, shall be adopted by resolution. Copies of all such rules and
regulations shall be kept in the office of the Clerk for public inspection and distribution.
(Rev. 01-23-1978)
1.13 Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular
provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code or
any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine
of not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars and costs or prosecution or by
Chapter 1 - Adoption, Contents and Interpretation
1-4
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall
constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another
penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code
whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance.
(Rev. 08-23-1982)
1.14 Severability. It is the legislative intent of the Council in adopting this Code, that all
provisions and sections of this ordinance be liberally construed to protect and preserve
the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Troy and should any
provision or section of this ordinance be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall
not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it
being the intent that this ordinance shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any
provision or section thereof.
The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code
whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance.
(Rev. 01-23-1978)
1.15 Effective Date: This ordinance shall take effect April 1, 1964.
Chapter 2 - Address Numbering and Street Naming
2-1
1. Purpose - Address Numbering.
There is hereby established a system for numbering buildings and structures fronting on
all public and private streets in the City of Troy. All buildings and structures shall be
numbered in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. This Chapter shall establish
base lines and set criteria for numbering all buildings or structures in the City of Troy and
shall attempt to conform to the numbering system of our neighboring communities where
common streets form boundary lines.
(Rev. 07-06-1998)
2. Base Lines.
Fourteen Mile Road shall constitute the base line for numbering buildings or structures
along all streets running northerly and southerly except for Dequindre Road. Livernois
Road shall constitute the base line for numbering buildings or structures along streets
running easterly and westerly except that John R Road shall constitute the base line for
Fourteen Mile Road only and Rochester Road shall constitute the base line for South
Boulevard only.
(Rev. 07-06-1998)
3. Numbering.
The numbering of buildings and structures on each street shall begin with zero (0) at the
base line. (See exception under (B) for Dequindre Road).
(Rev. 02-27-1978)
(A) All numbers applicable to east-west streets shall be assigned on the basis of one
thousand (1000) numbers to each mile, extending east and west from the base
lines, except that portion of the City located south of Big Beaver and west of
Livernois where the numbering system shall follow addresses existing prior to the
adoption of this ordinance as closely as possible.
(B) All numbers applicable to north-south streets shall be assigned consecutively as
follows: Fourteen Mile to Maple - 1 to 1599, Maple to Big Beaver - 1600 to 2999,
each mile thereafter shall be numbered 1000 numbers per mile except that
Dequindre Road shall be numbered consecutively starting at 33001 at Fourteen
Mile Road utilizing 2000 numbers per mile.
(C) Addresses shall be assigned at a ratio of one number for every five and one-half (5
1/2) lineal feet, where one thousand (1000) numbers are assigned per mile and at
a ratio of one number for not more than four (4) lineal feet where more than one
thousand (1000) numbers are assigned per mile.
Chapter 2 - Address Numbering and Street Naming
2-2
(D) The Director of Building and Zoning shall be responsible for assignment of
addresses. All addresses shall follow this Chapter whenever possible. If addresses
of existing buildings would make conformance to this Chapter impossible, the
Director of Building and Zoning shall be responsible for the assignment of an
address to be in sequence with the existing addresses.
(Rev. 07-06-1998)
4. Even-Odd Numbers.
All buildings on the right hand side of each street running from the base street shall be
assigned an even number. All buildings on the left hand side of each street, running from
the base street, shall be assigned an odd number.
(Rev. 06-26-1972)
5. Streets Not Intersecting Base Street.
All buildings facing streets not extending through to the base line shall be assigned the
same relative address as if the said street had extended to the appropriate base line.
(Rev. 06-26-1972)
6. Deadline for Placement of Address.
(A) The proper address shall be displayed on all buildings prior to the building being
occupied.
(B) Change of address: The proper new address shall be displayed on all existing
buildings prior to the effective date of the address change as established by
resolution of the City Council. (Resolution #98-343 - Effective 9/9/1999).
(Rev. 03-20-1978)
7. Placement of Address.
(A) Each address shall be indicated by digits, placed in a horizontal line or a diagonal
line no more than forty-five (45) degrees from horizontal and placed so as to be
read properly from left to right or shall be placed vertically so as to be read from
top to bottom.
(Rev. 07-09-2001)
(B) The digits used for an address shall not be less than four (4) inches in height for
residential, six (6) inches in height for commercial, office, or industrial, and shall be
made of a durable and clearly visible material, which shall contrast with its
background. The digit font shall be easily distinguishable and readable from the
street under varying natural and artificial light conditions.
Chapter 2 - Address Numbering and Street Naming
2-3
(Rev. 07-06-1998)
(C) The digits shall be conspicuously placed so that the address can be seen plainly
from the Street. Generally, the digits shall be placed immediately above, on or at
the side of the main entrance of each building.
(D) Whenever any building is situated more than 75 feet from the street, either of the
following provisions, as determined by the owner of the building, shall apply:
1. The address shall be displayed upon a separate sign or post, placed by the
main driveway entrance closest to the property center line and at least one
foot off of the ground, so as to be easily discernible from the street.
2. Larger size digits, as approved by the Director of Building and Zoning, may
be placed on the building to comply with the provisions of Section 7(C).
(Rev. 07-06-1998)
(E) Multiple family structures containing three (3) or more dwelling units may be
required (1) to display the appropriate address on the individual residences and (2)
to display the addresses of all residences included in each building, or court on a
separate sign or post at least one foot off of the ground, so as to be easily
discernible from the street.
(F) The owners and/or occupants of all establishments contained within a multi-tenant
commercial, office, or industrial building complex which have front and rear
entrances shall cause the correct street numbers to be placed on or adjacent to
both front and rear doors. The numbers shall comply with all other sections of this
Chapter and be at least four (4) inches high. In addition to the street number, each
establishment shall be clearly identified both front and rear by display of the name
of the business or occupant. If no other visible identification is available, the name
shall be clearly printed on the door or beneath the address by letters at least three
(3) inches high and shall meet the requirements of Chapter 78 (Sign Ordinance).
(Rev. 07-09-2001)
8. Compliance.
If the proper address is not displayed on a new or existing building on or before the
appropriate date as outlined in Section 6 above, it shall be the duty of the Director of
Building and Zoning to install the proper address on said building, and to make a charge
of Twenty Dollars ($20.00) for each address so installed. If, after proper notice, said
charge remains unpaid, said charge shall become a lien against the premises on which
said building is located, and shall be added to the city property tax on said premises for
the ensuing year.
(Rev. 07-06-1998)
Chapter 2 - Address Numbering and Street Naming
2-4
9. House Number Records.
(A) For the purpose of facilitating correct numbering, a plat book of all public and
private streets within the City of Troy, showing the proper address of all houses,
buildings and platted lots, fronting upon all public or private streets, shall be kept
on file in the Building Department. These plats shall be open to inspection of all
persons during regular City Hall office hours.
(Rev. 06-26-1972)
(B) It shall be the duty of the Director of Building and Zoning to inform any party of the
address assigned to any building, lot or property as provided in this Chapter.
(Rev. 07-06-1998)
10. Purpose - Street Naming.
There is hereby established a uniform system of street naming in the City of Troy and all
public and private streets shall be named in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance.
(Rev. 06-26-1972)
11. Word Suffixes for Streets.
All public or private thoroughfares dedicated or improved for general travel, and used as
means of primary access to the front of residential, business or other property shall be
termed a "street, avenue, drive, place, parkway, road, or boulevard", with the following
defined exceptions:
(A) "Circle": A public or private thoroughfare which aligns in a full or partial circular
configuration and which intersects another thoroughfare at two locations.
(B) "Court": A public or private thoroughfare with only one present or future means of
entrance or exit.
(C) "Lane": A private thoroughfare generally used only by the abutting property
owners.
(Rev. 07-06-1998)
12. Name of New Streets.
(A) Street names of any new public or private street shall not duplicate or be so similar
either in spelling or phonetics to an existing street, so as to cause possible
confusion.
Chapter 2 - Address Numbering and Street Naming
2-5
(B) New street names shall be reviewed by the appropriate City Departments in a
manner prescribed by the City Manager.
(C) New public or private street names shall contain no more than thirteen (13) letters.
(Rev. 06-26-1972)
13. Changing Street Names.
A. Platted Public Street: The City Council, by resolution, may change, rename or
name an existing or newly established platted public street within the City of Troy
in accordance with M.S.A. 26.430, Section 256 and M.C.L.A. Chapter 560,
Michigan Subdivision Control Act.
B. Non-Platted and/or Private Street: The Street Name Committee may change,
rename, or name an existing or newly established non-platted or private street
within the City of Troy.
(Rev. 07-06-1998)
14. Posting of Street Names.
Street name signs shall be uniformly placed on the northeast corner of every intersection
and on such other additional corners as deemed necessary by the Superintendent of
Public Services to provide proper identification.
(Rev. 06-26-1972)
15. Enforcement.
The Director of Building and Zoning shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
Chapter.
(Rev. 07-06-1998)
16. Penalties for Violations
Except as otherwise provided in specific sections of this Chapter, a violation of any
section of Chapter 2 is a Municipal Civil Infraction subject to the provisions of Chapter
100 of the Code of the City of Troy. Each day that a violation continues is a separate
Municipal Civil Infraction violation. Sanctions for each violation of Chapter 2 shall
include a fine of not more than $500, costs, damages and injunctive orders as
authorized by Chapter 100.
.
(03-01-2006)
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-1
1. Division of Administrative Service. The administrative service of the City shall
be under the supervision and direction of the City Manager, except as
otherwise provided by the City Charter, and shall be divided into the following
offices and departments, each of which shall be the responsibility of and under
the control of a head as listed opposite such office or department:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS
Office or Department Official Head
Office of Clerk City Clerk
Office of Assessor City Assessor
Office of Treasurer City Treasurer
Department of Police Police Chief
Department of Fire Fire Chief
Department of Law City Attorney
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
1.1. The following City employees shall be responsible for certain functions as
provided in this Chapter but shall not be deemed administrative officers as the
term is defined in section 3.9 of the Charter.
Office or Department Official Head
Department of Finance Finance Director
Department of Public Works Director of Public Works
Department of Engineering City Engineer
Department of Building Director of Buildings and Inspections
(Rev. 02-17-2003)
CLERK
1.2. Office of Clerk. This office shall be headed by the City Clerk, who shall serve as
Clerk of the Council and perform such other duties for the Council as may be
required by it. He/she shall be responsible for the publication, filing, indexing
and safe keeping of all proceedings of the Council.
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
1.36. Election Records. He/she shall keep and maintain all election records and have
custody of all property used in connection with elections.
1.37. Other Duties. He/she shall publish all legal notices unless otherwise provided;
collect all license fees required by ordinance or statute except as otherwise
provided; be the custodian of the official seal; and notify the appointing
authority of any board or commission thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of
the term of office of any member thereof.
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-2
DEPARTMENT OF ACCOUNTING
1.40. Department of Finance. The Department of Finance shall be headed by the
Finance Director as accountant for the City. He/she shall examine and audit all
accounts against the City and promptly report to the City Council through the
City Manager in writing any default or delinquency he/she may discover in the
books, records or accounts of any City department. It shall be his duty to
examine, verify and approve all accounts against the City. He/she shall not
verify or approve for payment any voucher until he/she has verified the
correctness of the account for which the same is issued, neither shall he/she
approve for payment any account unless the money has been appropriated
therefor, nor shall he/she verify or sign any warrant except in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter.
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
1.41. Examination of Books. The Finance Director shall have access to all books,
records and documents kept by any officer, employee or department of the
City. Daily reports of all moneys collected and of the disposition thereof shall be
made to the Finance Director by the department or person receiving the same.
The books in all departments of the City shall be balanced each calendar
month and a report thereon made by the Finance Director to the City Manager.
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
1.42. Reports. The Finance Director shall present to the City Manager at the
beginning of each quarter during the fiscal year and whenever required by the
City Manager or the City Council at any other time, a detailed statement of the
financial condition of the City.
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
ASSESSOR
1.45. Office of Assessor. This office shall be headed by the City Assessor whose
duty it shall be to perform all work in connection with the assessing of property
and the preparation of all assessment and tax rolls and tax notices.
TREASURER
1.51. Office of Treasurer. This office shall be headed by the City Treasurer whose
duty it shall be to:
a) Have the custody of all moneys of the City, any bond pertaining to the
Clerk, and all evidences of indebtedness belonging to the City or held in
trust by the City.
b) Collect all moneys of the City, the collection of which is not provided for
elsewhere by Charter or ordinance. He/she shall receive from other
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-3
officers and employees of the City all money belonging to and
receivable by the City that may be collected by such officers and
employees, including fines, license fees, taxes, assessments and all
other charges. All money shall be turned over to the Treasurer after
collection or receipt, and he/she shall in all cases give a receipt therefor
and shall daily present an accounting of receipts to the Finance Director.
c) Keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only in such
places as the Council may determine and shall report the same in detail
to the Finance Director.
d) Disburse all City funds in accordance with the provisions of the City
Charter and this Code.
e) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by the Council
or by the Finance Director.
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
1.70. Department of Police. The Department of Police shall be headed by the Police
Chief, who shall be the commanding officer of the police force. He/she shall
direct the police work of the City and be responsible for the enforcement of law
and order.
1.71. Functions of Police Department. The police work of the City shall consist of the
following functions:
1) The operation of motor and foot patrol units for routine investigations
and the general maintenance of law and order.
2) The maintenance of the central complaint desk at Central Police
Headquarters, the maintaining and supervising of police records,
criminal and non-criminal identification, property identification, custody of
property and the operation of detention quarters.
3) The investigation of crimes, elimination of illegal liquor traffic and vice,
and the preparation of evidence for the prosecution of criminal cases
and offenses in violation of this Code. The Police Department shall
enforce all provisions of this Code for which any penalty is provided, as
well as all other laws applicable to and in force within the City.
4) The prevention and control of juvenile delinquency, the removal of crime
hazards and the co-ordination of community agencies interested in
crime prevention.
(Rev. 02-05-2001)
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-4
5) The control of traffic, traffic educational programs, school patrols, and
co-ordination of traffic violation prosecutions.
(Rev. 02-05-2001)
1.72. Department Rules. The Police Chief may prescribe rules for the government of
police officers of the City, subject to approval by the City Manager, which shall
be entered in a book of Police Department rules and orders and may be
amended or revoked by the Police Chief upon written notice to the City
Manager. Such rules may establish one or more divisions within the Police
Department, each of which divisions may be charged with performing one or
more of the functions of the Police Department enumerated in Section.
1.71. Any such divisions shall be supervised by an officer of the Police Department,
who shall be responsible for the particular functions of the Police Department
assigned to the particular division supervised by him. It shall be the duty of all
members of the Police Force to comply with such rules and orders while
effective.
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
1.73. Acting Chief. In case of the absence from the City of the Police Chief, or his
disability, or inability from any cause, to act as Police Chief, The City Manager
shall designate and appoint some other member of the Police Department to
act as Chief during such absence or disability.
1.74. Delivery to Police Chief. When any person within the City of Troy finds any lost
money or any lost personal property of any other nature having apparent value
of ten dollars ($10.00) or more and the owner of said money or personal
property is unknown to such finder, the finder shall, within seven (7) days,
deliver the said money or personal property to the Police Chief. The said finder
shall further, within thirty (30) days from the date of finding such money or
personal property, cause notice to be published in a newspaper circulating
within the City that such money or personal property has been found, which
notice shall briefly describe the property found, and notify the owner that
he/she may recover the same upon application to the Police Department
making satisfactory identification of himself and the lost property and paying for
the cost of the advertisement. If any finder shall fail to give notice of such
finding, as herein required, within the time limited, he/she shall forfeit all claims
to any property right in said found property which he/she might otherwise have
upon termination of the custody of the Police Department under the provisions
of this Chapter.
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
1.75. Property Record. Whenever any such money or other property shall be
received by the Police Chief, he/she shall cause a record of the same to be
entered in a book kept for that purpose. Such book shall be a part of the public
records of the City of Troy and shall be kept on file in the Police Department.
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-5
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
1.76. Notice to Owner. If the identity of the owner shall be learned while such
property is in the custody of the Police Department, the Department shall cause
to be served upon such owner a written notice informing him that his property
has been found and is in possession of the Police Department. Said notice
shall advise the owner that unless he/she shall reclaim the property within
twenty (20) days from the date of the service of such notice that he/she shall
have forfeited any claim to the return of such money or property. Any person
making a claim for the return of lost money or property shall establish his
ownership to the satisfaction of the Police Chief and such money or property
shall be returned to him upon payment of the cost of advertising by the finder or
expenses of storage incurred by the Department.
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
1.77. Return to Finder. After any lost money or lost personal property shall have
been in the custody of the Police Department for sixty (60) days and the owner
shall not have been found or has abandoned his claim to the property, and
there being no claim of ownership pending against such property, the same
may be returned by the Police Chief to the finder thereof, if said finder shall
have complied with the provisions of this Chapter regarding lost property, in all
respects. No employee of the City of Troy shall be eligible to acquire any
property right in any lost money or lost personal property by reason of having
found any such money or personal property.
(Rev. 05-01-1978)
1.78. Unclaimed Property. As to any property remaining in the custody of the Police
Department as to which there are no claims pending and no finder having any
rights therein, the Police Chief shall cause said property, except money, to be
sold at public auction, reserving the right to reject any or all bids, or to be sold
by a system recommended by the City Manager and approved by resolution of
City Council. If the unclaimed property is a bicycle, the Police Chief or his/ her
designee may donate it to a state licensed charitable organization, or to the
Oakland County Sheriff, in connection with any Sheriff operated recognized
charitable program as provided in 1959 PA 54, MCL 434.171 et. seq. as
amended. By written authorization of the City Manager, unclaimed property
may be retained by the City for City use. Notice of the time and place of such
sale shall be given by publishing notice thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation with the City and posted for ten (10) days in three (3) of the most
public places in the City. Such notice shall set forth a full description of said
property. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to deliver and convey such
property to the successful purchaser upon payment of the full purchase price
without any warranty or representation as to title and with the understanding
that in the event the rightful owner recovers such property in an action at law
against such purchaser, that the liability of the City of Troy shall be limited to
the amount paid by said purchaser for such property. The proceeds of all such
sales and any money which shall have been held for sixty (60) days against
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-6
which there is no claim pending either by any purported owner or by the finder
thereof, shall be paid by the Police Chief to the City Treasurer to the credit of
the General Fund. The City of Troy may purchase property at any such sale in
the same manner as any other bidder.
(Rev. 04-21-2008)
1.79. Property to Which Inapplicable. The provisions of this Chapter as to lost
property shall not apply to perishable articles which may be sold or destroyed
within twelve (12) hours, if unclaimed. This Chapter shall not apply to
abandoned vehicles, nor to firearms carried in violation of State Law, nor
alcoholic beverages seized by the Department, all of which shall be disposed of
in accord with the applicable Statutes. Other dangerous weapons shall be
destroyed.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
1.91. Department of Fire. The Department of Fire shall be headed by the Fire Chief,
who shall be charged with the prevention and extinguishment of fires, the
protection of life and property against fire, the removal of fire hazards, the
performance of other public services of an emergency nature assigned to it,
and the conducting of an educational fire prevention program.
1.92. Department Rules. The Fire Chief shall adopt rules and regulations for the
government of the Department, subject to the approval of the City Manager,
which shall be entered in a book of Fire Department Rules and which may be
changed and repealed by the Fire Chief upon notice to and approval by the
City Manager. Such rules and regulations shall designate the chain of
command for the Department so that in the absence or disability of the Chief,
the responsibility for the operation of the Department shall immediately and
automatically be vested in the next ranking officer or member of the
Department present.
1.93. Department Equipment. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the
maintenance and care of all property and equipment used by the Fire
Department.
1.94. Enforce Fire Laws. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to enforce all State laws
and provisions of this Code governing the following:
1) The prevention of fires.
2) The storage and use of explosives and flammables.
3) The maintenance of fire alarm systems, both automatic and private, and
all fire extinguishing equipment.
4) The maintenance and use of fire escapes.
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-7
5) The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards in
all buildings and structures.
6) The maintenance and adequacy of fire exits from factories, schools,
hotels, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theatres and all other places
in which numbers of persons work or congregate for any purpose.
7) Structures erected and uses conducted on premises located within the
fire limits.
1.95. Other Duties. The Fire Chief shall perform the following duties:
1) Investigate the origin, cause and circumstances of all fires.
2) Issue all orders necessary for the enforcement of State laws and
provisions of this Code.
3) Require and supervise from time to time fire drills from all schools and
educational institutions as required by law.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
1.101. Department of Health. The Oakland County Health Department shall be
responsible for all health related matters.
(Rev. 02-17-2003)
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
1.111. Department of Public Works. The Department of Public Works shall be headed
by the Director of Public Works who shall be experienced in municipal
engineering works and responsible to the Assistant City Manager for Services.
The Department of Public Works shall include the Division of Streets, and the
Division of Water Supply and Sewer Facilities. The Director of Public Works
shall have charge of all such divisions.
(Rev. 02-17-2003)
A. Division of Streets. The Division of Streets shall be under the direction of
the Director of Public Works and shall be headed by the Superintendent
of Streets. He/she shall be in charge of the maintenance of all improved
and unimproved streets and surfaces, the cleaning of improved streets,
the removal of snow and the construction and maintenance of
sidewalks.
(Rev. 02-17-2003)
B. Division of Water Supply and Sewer Facilities. The Division of Water
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-8
Supply and Sewer Facilities shall be under the direction of the Director
of Public Works and shall be headed by the Superintendent of Water
Supply and Sewer Facilities. He/she shall have charge of the
construction, operation and maintenance of the City sewage system and
shall be responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of
City water mains and connections and other facilities pertaining to the
water distribution system. He/she shall have charge of the pumping of
the water into and through the City water distribution system.
(Rev. 02-17-2003)
1.112. Department of Engineering. The Department of Engineering shall be headed
by the City Engineer who, shall be headed by a competent civil engineer and
responsible to the Assistant City Manager for Services. The Engineering
Department shall include the Traffic Division. The City Engineer shall be
responsible for all matters relating to construction of all the physical properties
of the City except as provided elsewhere in this Code. The City Engineer shall
also be responsible for planning in connection with such changing or
improvements to the physical properties of the City as are consistent with and
necessary to the future growth and development of the City. This department
shall perform such engineering services for the City and for such other
departments of the City as may be required.
(Rev. 02-17-2003)
DEPARTMENT OF LAW
1.131. Department of Law. This Department shall be headed by the City Attorney who
shall be the legal advisor to the Council, the City Manager and to other
departments and officers of the City through the City Manager. He/she shall
represent the City in all legal proceedings or matters in which the City is
interested. He/she shall attend the meetings of the City Council.
(Rev. 04-08-1985)
1.141(1) A City of Troy Police Service Aide assigned to Road Patrol Duty shall have
authority to issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket, a Municipal
Civil Infraction notice of violation, and/or a Municipal Civil Infraction citation, if
he/she has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a
violation of any of the following provisions of the Troy City Code:
Chapter 16: Garbage and Rubbish
Chapter 26: Parks - General Regulations
Chapter 29: Cemetery
Chapter 39: Zoning (provisions related to the parking of vehicles)
Chapter 47: House Trailers and Trailer Courts
Chapter 48: Litter
Chapter 75: Pet Shops
Chapter 88: Nuisances
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-9
Chapter 90: Animals
Chapter 98.07.01: Hunting
Chapter 98-07.02: Trapping
Chapter 106: Traffic (Provisions related to the parking of vehicles)
(Rev. 03-01-2006)
1.141(2) City of Troy Police Service Aide assigned to Lock-up shall have authority to
issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket if he/she has reasonable
cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of any of the
following provisions of the Troy City Code:
Chapter 98.06.01: Hinder, Obstruct or Resist Police
Chapter 98.06.02: Hinder Police by False Identification
Chapter 98.06.03: False Statement or Report to Police
(Rev. 02-05-2001)
1.141(5) A City of Troy Water and Sewer Division Supervisor shall have the authority
to issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket, a Municipal Civil
Infraction notice of violation, and/or a Municipal Civil Infraction citation, if
he/she has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a
violation of any of the following provisions of the Troy City Code:
Chapter 18: City Water Utility
Chapter 19: City Sewer Service
Chapter 20: Water and Sewer Rates
Chapter 23: Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
Chapter 33: Streets
(Rev. 11-25-2019; Effective 12-05-2019)
1.141(6) A City of Troy Building Department Inspector shall have authority to issue and
serve upon a person an appearance ticket, a Municipal Civil Infraction notice
of violation, and/or a Municipal Civil Infraction citation, if he/she has
reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of any
of the following provisions of the Troy City Code.
Chapter 2: House Numbering and Street Naming
Chapter 13: Historic Preservation
Chapter 16: Garbage and Rubbish
Chapter 18: City Water Utility
Chapter 19: City Sewer Service
Chapter 20: Water and Sewer Rates
Chapter 23: Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
Chapter 39: Zoning
Chapter 47: House Trailers and Trailer Courts
Chapter 48: Litter
Chapter 61: Temporary Merchant Business
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-10
Chapter 64: Gasoline Stations
Chapter 67: Dances and Dance Halls
Chapter 68: Amusements and Recreation Places
Chapter 69: Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
Chapter 70: Self Service Laundries and Dry Cleaners
Chapter 71: Auto Wash
Chapter 73: Drive-In Restaurant
Chapter 76: Adult Use Businesses Licenses (07-09-07)
Chapter 77: Smoking Lounges (08-06-07)
Chapter 79: General Building Regulations
Chapter 82: Property Maintenance Regulations
Chapter 82-A: Rental and Dwelling Inspection and Enforcement
Chapter 82-B: Dangerous Buildings
Chapter 83: Fences
Chapter 85: Signs
Chapter 88: Nuisances
Chapter 93: Fire Prevention (provisions related to building codes)
Chapter 97: Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
(Rev. 11-25-2019; Effective 12-05-2019)
1.141(7) A City of Troy Fire Department Staff Lieutenant, Assistant Fire Chief or Fire
Chief shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person an appearance
ticket, a Municipal Civil Infraction notice of violation, and/or a Municipal Civil
Infraction citation, if he/she has reasonable cause to believe that the person
has committed a violation of any of the following provisions of the Troy City
Code:
Chapter 2: House Numbering and Street Naming
Chapter 23: Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
Chapter 61A Film Production
(provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 67: Dances and Dance Halls
(provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 68: Amusements and Recreation Places
(provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 69: Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
(provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 70: Self Service Laundries and Dry Cleaners
(provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 79: General Building Regulations
(provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 82: Property Maintenance Regulations
(provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 82A: Rental and Dwelling Inspection and Enforcement
(provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 82B: Dangerous Buildings (provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 84: Garbage, Rubbish, and Refuse Transfer Station
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-11
(provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 88: Nuisances (provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 93: Fire Prevention
Chapter 97: Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
(provisions related to fire safety)
Chapter 103: Alarm Ordinance
Chapter 106: Traffic (provisions related to fire safety)
(Rev. 11-25-2019; Effective 12-05-2019)
1.141(8) A City of Troy Engineer, Surveyor, Inspector Supervisor or Engineering
Specialist (II and III) shall have authority to issue and serve upon a person an
Appearance ticket, a Municipal Civil Infraction notice of violation, and/or a
Municipal Civil Infraction citation, if he/she has reasonable cause to believe
that the person has committed a violation of any of the following provisions of
the Troy City Code:
Chapter 17: Rubbish Fill Operation
Chapter 23: Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
Chapter 34: Sidewalks
Chapter 42: Flood Plain Management
Chapter 79: General Building Regulations
Chapter 80: Soil Removal and Fill
Chapter 86: Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
(Rev. 11-25-2019; Effective 12-05-2019)
1.141(9) The City of Troy Director of Public Works, Superintendent of Parks, Streets,
and Drains Operations Manager or the Parks Division Field Supervisor shall
have authority to issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket, a
Municipal Civil Infraction notice of violation, and/or a Municipal Civil Infraction
citation, if he/she has reasonable cause to believe that the person has
committed a violation of any of the following provisions of the Troy City Code:
Chapter 23: Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
Chapter 28: Tree Regulations
Chapter 29: Cemetery
Chapter 39: Zoning
(provisions related to landscaping)
Chapter 41: Subdivision Control
(provisions related to landscaping)
Chapter 61A: Film Production
(provisions related to filming on public parks and public
lands)
(Rev. 11-25-2019; Effective 12-05-2019)
1.141(10) The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, a Housing and Zoning
Inspector, and the Inspector Supervisor shall have authority to issue and
Chapter 3 - Administrative Service
3-12
serve upon a person an appearance ticket, a Municipal Civil Infraction notice
of violation, and/or a Municipal Civil Infraction citation, if he/she has
reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of any
of the following provisions of the Troy City Code:
Chapter 16: Garbage and Rubbish
Chapter 23: Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
Chapter 34: Sidewalks and Driveway Approaches
Chapter 39: Zoning
Chapter 47: House Trailers and Trailer Courts
Chapter 61: Temporary Merchant Business
Chapter 6A: Film Production
Chapter 64: Gasoline Stations
Chapter 67: Dances and Dance Halls
Chapter 69: Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
Chapter 73: Drive-In Restaurant
Chapter 76: Adult Use Businesses Licenses
Chapter 79: General Building Regulations
Chapter 82: Property Maintenance Regulations
Chapter 82-A: Rental and Dwelling Inspection and Enforcement
Chapter 82-B: Dangerous Buildings
Chapter 83: Fences
Chapter 85: Signs
Chapter 88: Nuisances
Chapter 90: Animals
Chapter 93: Fire Prevention
Chapter 97: Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
(Rev. 11-25-2019; Effective 12-05-2019)
Chapter 4 - Administrative Policy and Procedure
4-1
1. City Manager. The City Manager shall see that all laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations adopted by the Council and the provisions of this Code, are properly
enforced. He shall attend all meetings of the Council. He is empowered to
delegate to the several department heads his supervisory and personnel powers,
within such regulations as may be promulgated by him. During the absence or
disability of the Manager, the Council may designate some qualified person to
temporarily perform the duties of the Manager.
(Rev. 05-15-1978)
1.132 Department Heads. All department heads, other than the Attorney, are responsible
to the Manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and
all activities assigned to them. As to department heads other than the City
Attorney, the Manager may set aside any action by them taken and may
supersede them in the functions of their respective offices.
1.133 Vacancies. In case of a vacancy in office or during the absence of any
administrative officer, the City Manager may designate an interim acting head or
perform personally the functions of the office, until such vacancy is filled in
accordance with the Charter.
1.134 All Departments. All departments of the City shall comply with the following:
1) All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest practices in their
particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the City Manager in
the case of departments responsible to him or in the case of other
departments, with the approval of the officer or body to whom the
department head is responsible, such new practices as appear to be of
benefit to the service and to the public.
2) Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the Manager
at the end of each fiscal quarter and an annual report shall also be filed with
the Manager within sixty (60) days after the end of the fiscal year. A
summary of all such reports shall be made by the Manager and submitted
to the Council. Each department head shall establish a system of records
and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper
control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports
to the Manager. The City Manager shall keep the Council fully advised at all
times as to the financial condition and needs of the City.
(Rev. 05-15-1978)
3) Each department shall be held responsible for the preservation of all public
records under his jurisdiction and shall provide a system of filing and
indexing the same.
Chapter 4 - Administrative Policy and Procedure
4-2
4) All members of the administrative staff and employees of the City of Troy
appointed to membership on an advisory committee, commission or board
shall serve as ex officio members only, and shall not vote on any matter
considered by that committee, commission or board unless otherwise
provided for by statute or City Charter.
(Rev. 07-21-1975)
5) The conditions and prohibitions contained in Subsection 4) above, shall not
apply to the following existing regulatory committees, to-wit:
a. Board of Electrical Examiners.
b. Building Code Board of Appeals.
c. Election Commission.
d. Retirement Board of Trustees.
e. Building Authority.
f. Historic District Commission
(Rev. 08-25-1975)
1.135 Administrative Manual. The City Manager is authorized to adopt such
administrative regulations in addition to, but not inconsistent with, the Charter and
this Code, as he shall deem necessary and proper to provide for the adequate
functioning of all departments. Such regulations shall comprise the Administrative
Manual.
1.136 Payment of Monies. All monies belonging to the City shall be paid out upon
presentation of a valid warrant of the Clerk, and countersigned by the Manager,
issued in accordance with the Charter, by checks drawn by the City Treasurer.
1.137 Approval of Legal Documents. The Mayor shall sign, the City Clerk shall attest to,
the City Manager shall approve as to substance, and the City Attorney shall
approve as to form, all contracts and agreements requiring the assent of the City,
unless otherwise provided for by law, the Charter, ordinance or the provisions of
this Code.
8. Bonds. Surety bonds, conditioned as required by section 6.11 of the Charter, shall
be filed by the following officers of the City in not less than the amounts indicated:
Treasurer, $10,000.00
Municipal Judge and Associate Municipal Judge, each, $5,000.00. All other
officers of City and employees (except the Mayor and Council) Blanket Bond,
$10,000.00 ($100,000.00 aggregate).
(Rev. 05-15-1978)
Chapter 4 - Administrative Policy and Procedure
4-3
9. Code of Conduct.
1) The following policy shall be applied for all employees and violations thereof
shall subject that employee to disciplinary action up to and including
discharge:
a) An employee shall not solicit or accept anything of value,
including a gift, loan, contribution, reward, or promise of future
employment based on an agreement that the vote, official
action or judgment of the employee would be influenced
thereby.
b) An employee shall not use his/her position of employment or
any confidential information received through the holding of
that employment to obtain financial gain, other than
compensation provided by law, for himself or herself, a
member of his or her immediate family, or a business with
which the individual is associated.
c) An employee shall not use City personnel, resources,
property or funds for personal gain of more than a de minimus
nature.
d) An employee shall not represent a personal opinion as that of
the City Council.
e) An employee shall not accept outside employment or render
services for any private or public interest when that
employment or service is incompatible with, in conflict with, or
would impair independence or judgment in the discharge of
that employee's official duties.
f) An employee shall not participate in the negotiation or
execution of contracts, making of loans, granting of subsidies,
fixing of rates, issuance of permits or certificates or other
regulation or supervision of a business enterprise in which
that employee or a member of his or her immediate family has
a financial interest of more than a de minimus nature.
g) An employee shall not make or participate in making a
decision, having knowledge that the decision will provide that
employee, a member of the employee's immediate family, or
a business with which the employee is associated, financial
benefits of more than a de minimus nature.
2) An employee shall avoid making a decision or taking action which will
provide a financial benefit for that employee, a member of his or her
Chapter 4 - Administrative Policy and Procedure
4-4
immediate family, or a business with which that employee is associated, by
reporting the situation to his or her supervisor who shall than forward the
information to the City Manager. The City Manager shall then take whatever
administrative action is necessary to continue the implementation of
municipal services without placing that employee in a conflict of interest
situation.
(Rev. 05-10-1976)
10. INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF
THE CITY OF TROY
Each elected and appointed official and employee of the City of Troy now or
hereafter serving as such, shall be indemnified by the City of Troy against any and
all claims and liabilities to which he has or shall become subject by reason of
serving or having served as such official or employee, or by reason of any action
alleged to have been taken, omitted, or neglected by him as such official or
employee which occurred in the course of his employment and within the scope of
his authority; and the City of Troy shall provide legal representation for or
reimburse each such person for all legal expenses reasonably incurred by him in
connection with any such claim or liability, provided, however, that no such person
shall be indemnified against, or be reimbursed for any expense incurred in
connection with any claim or liability arising out of his own willful misconduct or
gross negligence.
The amount paid to any official or employee by way of indemnification shall not
exceed his actual, reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in connection with
the matter involved, and such additional amount as may be fixed by the Council for
the City of Troy and any determination so made shall be prima facie evidence of
the reasonableness of the amount fixed or binding on the indemnified official or
employee.
The right of indemnification hereinabove provided for shall not be exclusive of any
rights to which any official or employee of the City of Troy may otherwise be
entitled by law.
(Rev. 11-14-1977)
Chapter 5 - Special Assessments
5-1
1. Power to Make Special Assessments. The City Council shall have the power to assess
and reassess the cost, or any portion thereof, of any public improvement to a special
district as provided in Chapter X of the City Charter, in accordance with the procedures
established by the Charter and this Chapter.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.1 Resolution, What to Contain. When the Council shall determine to make any public
improvement and defray the whole or any part of the costs and expenses thereof by
special assessment, they shall so declare by resolution, stating the improvement, and
what part or proportion of the expenses thereof shall be paid by special assessments,
and what part, if any, from the general funds of the City and shall designate the district or
land and premises upon which the special assessment shall be levied. The Council may,
in its discretion divide any improvement into parts or sections and provide for the separate
construction or such parts or sections, and may establish a special assessment district for
each part or section, and may issue bonds against such separate districts. The
aforementioned resolution may be adopted in brief form in the official minutes of the City
by reference to this Code.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.2 Cost Estimates: Resolution No. 1. Before ordering any public improvement, when part or
all of the expense is to be defrayed by special assessment, the Council shall cause plans
and cost estimates to be made by the adoption of Standard Resolution No. 1, which shall
be in the following form:
WHEREAS, the City Council deems it necessary and proposes to make the following
described public improvements:
AND, WHEREAS, it appears that part or all of the cost of said public improvement shall
be defrayed by special assessment:
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT:
1. The matter of said public improvement is referred to the City Manager, who shall
prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans showing the improvement and the location
thereof and as estimate of the cost thereof, and also maps and plans of the work.
2. Upon completion of the same, the same shall be presented to the City Council.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.154 Cost to Include What. The cost and expenses of any improvement which may be
defrayed by special assessment shall include the costs of surveys, plans, assessments,
cost of construction, and all other costs incurred in making improvement.
Chapter 5 - Special Assessments
5-2
1.155 Resolution No. 2. When any special assessment is to be made pro rata upon the lots and
premises in any special district according to benefits, the Council shall direct the same to
be made by the City Assessor by the adoption of Standard Resolution No. 2, which shall
be in the following form:
WHEREAS, the City Council has ordered the City Manager to prepare or cause to be
prepared plans showing the improvement and the location thereof and an estimate of the
cost thereof, and also maps and plans of the work of the following described public
improvement:
AND WHEREAS, the City Manager has prepared the same and has presented the same
to the City Council,
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT;
1. The plans and estimate of the cost of said public improvement in the amount of
___________dollars and the other materials pertaining to said public improvement
prepared by the City Manager are hereby adopted and approved.
2. The City Council hereby determines and orders that the public improvement
described in the preamble hereto shall be made.
3. The City Council determines that _________dollars of the cost of said public
improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment to be levied against each
and every lot and parcel of land in the Special Assessment District hereinafter set
forth.
4. The City Council hereby determines that the following described lots and parcels of
land constitute the Special Assessment District against which the special
assessment for said public improvement shall be levied.
5. The City Assessor is hereby ordered and directed to prepare a Special
Assessment Roll and shall assess against the lots and parcels of land in the
Special Assessment District, as herein established, that portion of the cost of said
public improvement to be paid from special assessments as herein determined.
The Assessor, in preparing said Special Assessment Roll, shall assess the amount
to be assessed against the Special Assessment District according to benefits. In
preparing said Special Assessment Roll the City Assessor shall follow the
procedures and requirements established by the provisions of Chapter 5 of the
Code of the City of Troy, as amended.
6. The City Assessor, when he shall have completed said Special Assessment Roll,
shall report the same with his certificate attached thereto to the City Council.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
Chapter 5 - Special Assessments
5-3
1.156 Preparation of Assessment Roll. Upon receiving such orders and direction, the City
Assessor shall make out an assessment roll, entering and describing therein all the lots,
premises and parcels of land to be assessed with the name of the persons, if known,
chargeable with the assessments thereon; and shall levy thereon and against such
property the amounts to be assessed in the manner directed by the Council and
provisions of this Chapter applicable to the assessment. In all cases where the ownership
of any description is unknown to the City Assessor, he shall in lieu of the name of the
owner insert the word "unknown and if by mistake, or otherwise, any person shall be
improperly designated as the owner of any lot or parcel of land or premises, or if the same
shall be assessed without the name of the owner or the name of any person other than
the owner, such assessment shall not for any cause be vitiated, but shall in all respects
be as valid upon and against such lot, parcel of land or premises as though assessed in
the name of the property owner, and when the assessment shall have been confirmed, it
shall be a lien on such lot, parcel of land or premises and collected as provided by
Charter and this Chapter.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.157 Certification of Assessment Roll. If the assessment is required to be according to
frontage, the City Assessor shall assess to each lot or parcel of land such relative portion
of the whole amount to be levied as the length or front of such premises abutting upon the
improvement bears to the whole frontage of all lots to be assessed, unless on account of
the shape or size of any lot an assessment for a different number of feet would be
more equitable. If the assessment is directed to be according to benefits, then he shall
assess upon each lot such relative proportion of the whole sum to be levied as shall be
proportionate to the estimated benefit resulting to such lot from the improvement. When
he shall report the same to the Council, such report shall be signed by the City Assessor
and may be in the form of a certificate endorsed on the assessment roll as follows:
State of Michigan)
ss
City of Troy)
To the Council of the City of Troy:
I hereby certify and report that the foregoing is a special assessment made by me
pursuant to a resolution of the Council of said City adopted (give date) for the purpose of
paying that part of the cost which the Council decided should be borne and paid by
special assessment for the (insert here object of the assessment); that in making such
assessment I have as near as may be, according to my best judgment, conformed in all
things to the directions contained in the resolution of the Council hereinbefore referred to,
and the Charter of the City relating to such assessment.
Dated and Signed
City Assessor
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
Chapter 5 - Special Assessments
5-4
1.158 Public Hearing: Resolution No. 3. Before ordering any public improvement when any part
of the expense is to be defrayed by special assessment and before confirming the
assessment roll, the Council shall set a date for the review of the necessity for such
proposed improvement and assessment roll and shall cause a notice to be given to each
owner of an interest in the property to be assessed, whose name appears upon the last
local tax assessment records, by first-class mail addressed to such owner at the address
shown on the tax records at least ten (10) days before the date of such hearing and shall
cause a notice to be published once (1) not less than ten (10) days prior to the date set
for such review in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
Any person objecting to the proposed improvement and the assessment against lands
owned by him may file objections thereto in writing with the Clerk. The notice of public
hearing shall be issued after the City Council adopts Standard Resolution No. 3, which
shall be in the following form:
WHEREAS, the City Council has ordered the City Assessor to prepare a Special
Assessment Roll for the purpose of defraying the Special Assessment District's share of
the cost of the following described public improvement:
AND, WHEREAS, the City Assessor has prepared said Special Assessment Roll and has
reported the same to the City Council with his certificate attached thereto,
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT:
1. Said Special Assessment Roll shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
2. The City Council and the City Assessor shall meet at the City Hall on
_______________, 19____ at ______ o'clock P.M. for the purpose of hearing any
person objecting to the necessity for improvement and the assessment against
lands owned by such person.
3. The City Clerk is hereby ordered to cause notice of the hearing of necessity and to
review the Special Assessment Roll to be published in the newspaper of record in
the City at least once, not less than ten (10) full days prior to the date set for the
hearing of necessity and for reviewing said Special Assessment Roll and shall
cause a notice to be given to each owner of an interest in property to be assessed
whose name appears upon the last local tax assessment records by first-class mail
to such owner at the address shown on the tax records at least ten (10) days
before the date of such hearing.
4. The notice of the hearing of necessity and to review the Special Assessment Roll
shall be in substantially the following form:
MEETING TO REVIEW THE NECESSITY FOR ___________ AND SPECIAL
ASSESSMENT ROLL NO._________ AND TO HEAR OBJECTIONS TO THE
NECESSITY OF THE PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT AND SAID SPECIAL
ASSESSMENTS ASSESSED AGAINST SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT NO.
__________ IN THE CITY OF TROY, MICHIGAN:
Chapter 5 - Special Assessments
5-5
PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that the Council will meet at the City Hall on the _____
day of __________, 19__, at _______o'clock P.M. for the purpose of reviewing the
necessity for ____________and said Special Assessment Roll No. _________
and of hearing any and all objections to the necessity of the public improvement
and said Special Assessments made in the matter of construction of the following
described improvements:
The Assessment Roll is on file in the office of the City Clerk for public examination.
The Special Assessments therein contained have been assessed according to law
against the parcels of land constituting Special Assessment District No.
_________, which District is described as follows:
The above assessment and all proceedings upon which they are based shall not
be contestable, unless suit to contest the validity thereof is instituted within thirty
(30) days after the date of confirmation of said Special Assessment Roll No.
_________.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.158.1Resolution No. 3 (a). In the case of a deficiency roll Standard Resolution No. 3 (a) shall
be adopted and shall be in the following form:
WHEREAS, the City Council has ordered the City Assessor to prepare a Special
Assessment Roll for the purpose of defraying the Special Assessment District's share of
the cost of the following described public improvement:
Construction of ________________in the following district and streets to-wit:
AND WHEREAS, the City Assessor has prepared said Special Assessment Roll and has
reported the same to the City Council with his certificate attached thereto;
AND WHEREAS, all other required special assessment procedures have been carried
out;
AND WHEREAS, improvements have been completed in said District No. ___________.
AND WHEREAS, the cost of improvements constructed in said District No. ________has
exceeded the original cost estimate of the work by _________ leaving a deficiency in
special assessment construction fund set up for this district;
AND WHEREAS, the City Assessor has prepared a Deficiency Special Assessment Roll
to cover the additional costs in said District No. ________ and the City Assessor has
reported the same to the City Council with his certificate attached thereto;
Chapter 5 - Special Assessments
5-6
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT:
1. Said Deficiency Special Assessment Roll shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk.
2. The City Council and the City Assessor shall meet at the City Hall on ________ at
______ o'clock P.M. for the purpose of hearing any person objecting to the
deficiency assessment against lands owned by such person.
3. The City Clerk is hereby ordered to cause notice of the hearing to review the
Deficiency Assessment Roll to be published in the newspaper of record in the City
at least once, not less than ten (10) full days prior to the date set for reviewing said
Special Assessment Roll and shall cause a notice to be given to each owner of an
interest in property to be assessed whose name appears upon the last local tax
assessment records by first-class mail to such owner at the address shown on the
tax records at least ten (10) days before the date of such hearing.
4. The notice of the hearing to review the Deficiency Special Assessment Roll shall
be in substantially the following Form.
MEETING TO REVIEW DEFICIENCY SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL NO.
_________ AND TO HEAR OBJECTIONS TO THE SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
ASSESSED AGAINST SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT NO. _____ IN THE
CITY OF TROY, MICHIGAN.
PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that the City Council will meet in the City Hall, on
_________ at _____ o-clock P.M. for the purpose of reviewing said Deficiency
Special Assessment Roll No. ________, and in hearing any and all objections to
the special assessments as assessed in said Roll No. ______, made in the matter
of constructing the following described improvement:
District No. Street From To
The assessment Roll is on file in the office of the City Clerk for public examination.
The special assessments herein contained have been assessed according to law
against all the parcels of land constituting the Special Assessment District No.
_________, which District is described as follows:
The above assessment and all proceedings upon which they are based shall not
be contestable, unless suit to contest the validity thereof is instituted within thirty
(30) days after the date of confirmation of said Special Assessment Roll No.
__________
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.159 Review of Special Assessments. At the time and place appointed for the purpose
aforesaid, the Council and City Assessor shall meet and there or at some adjourned
meeting review the assessments and hear any objections to any assessment which may
Chapter 5 - Special Assessments
5-7
be made by any person deeming himself aggrieved thereby; and the Council shall correct
the same if necessary, and confirm it as reported or as corrected; or they may refer the
assessment back to the City Assessor for revision or annul it and direct a new
assessment, in which case the same proceeding shall be had as in respect to the
previous assessment. When a special assessment shall be confirmed, the City Clerk shall
make an endorsement upon the roll showing the date of confirmation.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.160 Confirmation: Resolution No. 4. When any Special Assessment Roll shall be confirmed
by the Council it shall be final and conclusive. The City Council shall confirm a roll by the
adoption of Standard Resolution No. 4 which shall be in the following form:
WHEREAS, the City Council has caused Special Assessment Roll No. _______ to be
prepared for the purpose of defraying the Special Assessment District's portion of the
following described public improvement in the City of Troy:
AND WHEREAS, the City Council and City Assessor have met after due legal notice and
have reviewed said Special Assessment Roll and have heard all persons interested in
said Special Assessment Roll appearing at said hearing;
AND WHEREAS, the City Council is satisfied with said Special Assessment Roll as
prepared by the City Assessor;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT:
1. Said Special Assessment Roll No. ______ in the amount of _____ Dollars is
hereby confirmed as prepared by the City Assessor.
2. Said Special Assessment Roll shall be divided into ___ annual installments, the
first installment to be due and payable on _____ of each and every year thereafter.
3. Excepting special assessments for street lighting provided by privately owned
facilities, the installments of said Special Assessment Roll shall bear interest at the
rate of six percent (6%) per annum; provided, however, in the event bonds are
issued in anticipation of collection of the said special assessments, interest on said
Special Assessment Rolls shall be at a rate of interest which is not greater than
one percent (1%) in excess of the rate of interest borne by said bonds; said
interest to be payable on the due date of each installment of said Special
Assessment Roll and said interest to commence on the due date of the _____
installment.
(Rev. 11-25-1985)
1.160.1 Resolution No. 4 (A). In the case of a Deficiency Roll, Standard Resolution No. 4 (A)
shall be adopted and shall be in the following form:
Chapter 5 - Special Assessments
5-8
WHEREAS, the City Council has caused Deficiency Special Assessment Roll No._____
to be prepared for the purpose of defraying the Special Assessment District's portion of
the following described public improvement in the City of Troy;
AND WHEREAS, the City Council and City Assessor have met after due and legal notice
and have reviewed said Deficiency Special Assessment Roll and have heard all persons
interested in said Deficiency Special Assessment Roll appearing at said hearing;
AND WHEREAS, the City Council is satisfied with said Deficiency Special Assessment
Roll as prepared by the City Assessor;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT:
1. Said Deficiency Special Assessment Roll No. ____ in the amount of _______is
hereby confirmed as prepared by the City Assessor.
2. Said Special Assessment Roll shall be divided into ____ annual installments, the
first installment to be due and payable on __________ and the subsequent
installments shall be due and payable on _____ of each and every year thereafter.
3. The installments of said Special Assessment Roll shall bear interest at the rate of
six per cent (6%) per annum, said interest to be payable on the due date of each
installment of said Special Assessment Roll and said interest to commence on the
due date of the first installment.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.161 Incontestable After Thirty Days. Such special assessments and all proceedings upon
which such special assessments are based shall be incontestable, unless suit to test the
validity thereof is instituted within thirty (30) days after the date of confirmation of such
special assessment roll.
1.162 Payment by Installments. At the same meeting at which the Special Assessment Roll is
confirmed by the Council, the Council shall by resolution determine the number of annual
installments, if any, into which all assessments levied in such roll shall be divided for
collection, not exceeding twenty (20) in number, at such time of year as the Council shall
determine, with annual interest at the rate of six per cent (6%) per annum, provided no
interest shall be charged until thirty (30) days after confirmation; provided that no
individual principal payment, except the last installment, may be for less than Twenty
Dollars ($20.00). The balance or any additional portion of the assessment may be paid to
the City Treasurer at any time after confirmation with accrued interest thereon.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.163 Lands Divided After Assessment. Should any lots or lands be divided after a special
assessment thereon has been confirmed and divided into installments, and before the
collection of all installments, the Council may require the City Assessor to apportion the
uncollected amounts upon the several parts of lots and lands so divided. The report of
Chapter 5 - Special Assessments
5-9
such apportionment, when confirmed, shall be conclusive upon all the parties and all
assessments thereafter made upon such lots or lands shall be according to such division.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.164 Report to City Assessor. Whenever any special assessment shall be confirmed and be
payable, the Council may direct the Clerk to report to the City Assessor a description of
such lots and premises as are contained in said roll with the amount of the assessment
levied upon each and the name of the owner or occupant against whom the assessment
was made, and direct said City Assessor to levy the several sums so assessed
respectively. The City Assessor shall levy the sums therein mentioned upon the
respective lots and premises to which they are specially assessed and against the
persons chargeable therewith as a tax in the general tax roll next thereafter to be made in
a column for special assessments, and thereupon the amount so levied in said tax roll
shall be enforced and collected with the other taxes in the tax roll, and in the same
manner; and shall continue to be a lien upon the premises assessed until paid, and when
collected shall be paid into the City Treasury.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.165 Collection From Assessment Roll. Whenever any special assessment roll shall be
confirmed, the Council, instead of requiring the assessments therein to be reported to the
City Assessor as provided in Section 1.164, may direct the said assessments to be
collected directly from the special assessment roll, together with any interest which may
become due thereon; and thereupon the Clerk shall attach his warrant to said special
assessment roll, commanding the Treasurer to collect the amount of money assessed
against each lot, premises or parcel of land described in said roll, together with any
interest which may become due thereon, at such time and in such manner as prescribed
by the law and by resolution of the Council. Said warrant shall further require the City
Treasurer on the first day of April following the date when such assessments or any
installments thereof have become due to submit to the Council a sworn statement setting
forth a description of the lots, premises and parcels of land, including accrued interest
computed to April 1st of such year.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.166 Collection by Treasurer. Upon receiving said special assessment roll and warrant, the
Treasurer shall proceed to collect the amount assessed therein.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.167 Report of Delinquent Assessments. The Treasurer shall report delinquent assessments or
installments thereof as required in the warrant of the Clerk. The Council shall then certify
the same to the City Assessor, who shall reassess the same on the next annual city tax
roll in a column headed "Special Assessments", with interest to April 1 of such year, and
an additional penalty of four (4%) percent of such amount, and such total amount, when
so reassessed upon said tax roll shall be collected in all respects as provided for the
collection of city taxes. Unpaid special assessments reassessed upon the city tax roll
Chapter 5 - Special Assessments
5-10
shall be returned to the County Treasurer for collection at the same time and in the same
manner as city taxes.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
1.168 Delay Due to Contest. Should any of the proceedings authorized to be taken under the
provisions of this Chapter be delayed by reason of any suit or action to contest the validity
thereof, then such proceedings shall be taken as soon as such delay has ended.
21. Intent to Issue Bond. When the Council intends to issue bonds they shall adopt the
Standard Resolution: Notice of Intent, which shall be in the following form:
WHEREAS, the Council of the City of Troy, County of Oakland, Michigan, intends to
authorize the issuance and sale of special assessment bonds in the amount of
________dollars in anticipation of special assessment to be levied for the purpose of
defraying the Special Assessment District's share of the following described public
improvements:
AND WHEREAS, Section 5(g) of Act 279, Public Acts of Michigan, 1909, as amended,
requires that Notice of Intent to Issue Bonds be published at least thirty (30) days prior to
the adoption of any resolution authorizing the issuance and sale of bonds;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that the City Clerk of the City of Troy is hereby
directed to cause Notice of Intent to Issue Bonds to be published in the newspaper of
record, a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Troy, within ten (10) days from
the date of adoption of this resolution, said notice to be in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF INTENT TO ISSUE BONDS
BY THE CITY OF TROY, COUNTY OF
OAKLAND, MICHIGAN
TAKE NOTICE that the Council of the City of Troy, County of Oakland, Michigan, intends
to adopt a resolution authorizing the issuance and sale of the following described bonds:
Special Assessment Bonds - $ _________.
Said Bonds are to be issued for the purpose of defraying the Special Assessment
District's portion of the following described public improvements:
Said Special Assessment Bonds shall be payable from special assessments and shall
also be general obligations of the City of Troy.
This notice is given pursuant to Section 5(g) Act 279, Public Acts of Michigan, 1909, as
amended.
(Rev. 08-07-1978)
Chapter 5-A - Public Records
5A-1
1. Definitions.
1.1 The words and phrases, "Person", "Public Body", and "Public Record", when used in
this Chapter shall have the respective meanings therefore provided in Section 2 of
Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976.
1.2 "Act" as used in this Chapter means Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976.
2. Public Records Exempt from Disclosure.
2.1 The following public records are exempt from disclosure as public records under the
Act:
a) Information of a personal nature where the public disclosure of the information
would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of an individual's privacy,
except as otherwise regulated by other code provisions of the City of Troy.
b) Investigating records compiled for law enforcement purposes, but only to the
extent that disclosure as a public record would do any of the following:
(i) Interfere with law enforcement proceedings.
(ii) Deprive a person of the right to a fair trial or impartial administrative
adjudication.
(iii) Constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
(iv) Disclose the identity of a confidential source, or if the record is compiled
by a criminal law enforcement agency in the course of a criminal
investigation, disclose confidential information furnished only by a
confidential source.
(v) Disclose law enforcement investigative techniques or procedures.
(vi) Endanger the life or physical safety of law enforcement personnel.
c) A public record which if disclosed would prejudice a public body's ability to
maintain the physical security of custodial or penal institutions occupied by
persons arrested or convicted of a crime or admitted because of a mental
disability, unless the public interest in disclosure under this Act outweighs the
public interest in non-disclosure.
d) Records or information specifically described and exempted from disclosure
by statute.
e) A public record or information described in this section which is furnished by
the public body originally compiling, preparing, or receiving the record or
Chapter 5-A - Public Records
5A-2
information to a public officer or public body in connection with the
performance of the duties of that public officer or public body, if the
considerations originally giving rise to the exempt nature of the public record
remain applicable.
f) Trade secrets or commercial or financial information voluntarily provided to
an agency for use in developing governmental policy if:
(i) The information is submitted upon a promise of confidentiality by the
public body.
(ii) The promise of confidentiality is authorized by the chief administrative
officer of the public body or by an elected official at the time the
promise is made.
(iii) The description of the information is recorded by the public body within
a reasonable time after it has been submitted, maintained in a central
place within the public body, and made available to a person upon
request. This subdivision shall not apply to information submitted as
required by law or as a condition of receiving a governmental contract,
license, or other benefit.
g) Information or records subject to the attorney-client privilege.
h) Information or records subject to the physician-patient, psychologist-patient,
minister, priest or Christian Science practitioner, or other privilege recognized
by statute or court rule.
i) A bid or proposal by a person to enter into a contract or agreement, until the
time for the public opening of bids or proposals, or if a public opening is not to
be conducted, until the time for the receipt of bids or proposals has expired.
j) Appraisals of real property to be acquired by the public body until (i) an
agreement is entered into; or (ii) 3 years has elapsed since the making of the
appraisal, unless litigation relative to the acquisition has not yet terminated.
k) Test questions and answers, scoring keys, and other examination instruments
or data used to administer a license, public employment, or academic
examination, unless the public interest in disclosure under this Act outweighs
the public interest in non-disclosure.
l) Medical, counseling, or psychological facts or evaluations concerning an
individual if the individual's identity would be revealed by a disclosure of those
facts or evaluation.
m) Communications and notes within a public body or between public bodies of
an advisory nature to the extent that they cover other than purely factual
Chapter 5-A - Public Records
5A-3
materials and are preliminary to a final agency determination of policy or
action. This exemption shall not apply unless the public body shows that in the
particular instance the public interest in encouraging frank communications
between officials and employees of public bodies clearly outweighs the public
interest in disclosure. This exemption does not constitute an exemption under
state law for purposes of section 8(h) of Act no. 267 of the Public Acts of
1976, being section 15.268 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. As used in this
subdivision, "determination of policy or action" includes a determination
relating to collective bargaining, unless the public record is otherwise required
to be made available under Act No. 336 of the Public Acts of 1947, as
amended, being sections 423.201 to 423.216 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
n) Records of law enforcement communication codes, or plans for deployment of
law enforcement personnel, which if disclosed would prejudice a public body's
ability to protect the public safety unless the public interest in disclosure under
this act outweighs the public interest in non-disclosure in the particular
instance.
o) Unless the public interest in disclosure outweighs the public interest in nondisclosure
in the particular instance, public records of a police or sheriff's
agency or department, the release of which would do any of the following:
(i) Identify or provide a means of identifying an informer.
(ii) Identify or provide a means of identifying a law enforcement undercover
officer or agent or a plain clothes officer as a law enforcement officer or
agent.
(iii) Disclose the personal address or telephone number of law enforcement
officers or agents or any special skills that they may have.
(iv) Disclose the name, address, or telephone numbers of family members,
relatives, children, or parents of law enforcement officers or agents.
(v) Disclose operational instructions for law enforcement officers or agents.
(vi) Reveal the contents of staff manuals provided for law enforcement
officers or agents.
(vii) Endanger the life or safety of law enforcement officers or agents or
their families, relatives, children, parents, or those who furnish
information to law enforcement departments or agencies.
(viii) Identify or provide a means of identifying a person as a law
enforcement officer, agent, or informer.
Chapter 5-A - Public Records
5A-4
(ix) Disclose personnel records of law enforcement agencies.
(x) Identify or provide a means of identifying residences which law
enforcement agencies are requested to check in the absence of their
owners or tenants.
2.2 This section does not authorize the withholding of information otherwise required by
law to be made available to the public, or to a party in a contested case under Act
No. 306 of the Public Acts of 1969, as amended.
2.3 Whenever the exemption of public records from disclosure under Section 2 shall be
contingent upon a determination of an effect resulting from disclosure or nondisclosure
including, without limitation, the determination that the public interest in
disclosure under the Act outweighs the public interest in non-disclosure, the
determination shall be made by the City Manager, unless the Act requires otherwise.
A determination of non-disclosure by the City Manager is appealable to the City
Council.
3. Examination of Public Records.
3.1 Nonexempt public records may be examined as provided by this Act.
3.2 The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to Council approval, to make
reasonable rules necessary to protect the City's public records and to prevent
excessive and unreasonable interference with the discharge of City functions by
persons examining public records.
4. Copies of Public Records.
4.1 Copies of nonexempt public records shall be made available upon request as
required by the Act.
4.2 The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to the approval of the Council, to
establish procedures and guidelines as required by Section 4(3) of the Act in
establishing fee and charges for providing copies of public records. Upon approval by
the Council, the procedures and guidelines shall be published one time in the Official
Newspaper.
4.3 The City Manager is hereby empowered, subject to the approval of the Council, to
establish the subscription price for council proceedings and for any other public
records which are created, issued, or disseminated on a regular basis.
4.4 Until the procedures and guidelines required by Section 3.2 have been approved,
copies of nonexempt public records shall be furnished at a charge not to exceed the
City's actual out of pocket cost based on the hourly wage of the lowest paid, full-time
permanent employee in the city department furnishing the copy, and shall exclude
any cost for search, examination, review or the deletion or separation of exempt from
Chapter 5-A - Public Records
5A-5
nonexempt information. No charge for the first $20.00 of the fee shall be made to any
individual entitled to this exemption because of receipt of public assistance or
indigency as provided in Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976.
Chapter 7 - Purchases, Contracts and Sales
7-1
1. Purchasing Agent. The Manager shall act as Purchasing Agent of the City in accordance
with Section 12.1 of the Charter. The Manager may designate another officer or employee
of the City as Purchasing Agent to assist in the performance of such duties. Any such
designation shall be in writing filed with the Clerk. In the event of such designation, every
purchase order in excess of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars shall be approved by the
Manager, or some other designee, before being issued. The Manager shall adopt any
necessary rules respecting requisitions and purchase orders.
(Rev. 05-04-1992)
2. Purchases or Contracts of $10,000.00 or less. The purchase of, or contracting for,
supplies, materials, equipment and public improvements, the cost of which, in each
instance, is $10,000.00 or less, may be made by the Purchasing Agent in the open
market.
Such purchases shall be based on comparative price quotations, except when the
Manager shall determine that no advantage to the City would result from such a
procedure, or when the purchase is for the employment of professional services. When
comparative price quotations are submitted, such a purchase shall be made from the
supplier whom the Purchasing Agent believes is competent, who quotes the lowest price.
The Purchasing Agent may solicit price quotations from prospective suppliers in person, by
telephone, or by written communication. Records shall be kept for six (6) months of all
such open market purchases and the comparative price quotations submitted thereon.
Records shall be kept for two (2) years of all purchases made that were not based on
comparative price quotations, along with a statement by the Manager giving the reason
why that procedure was not used. Such records and statements shall be available for
public inspection.
(Rev. 05-04-1998)
3. Purchases or Contracts over $10,000.00. Any expenditure or contract obligating the City
for an amount in excess of $10,000.00 shall be approved by the City Council and shall be
governed by the provisions of this section.
1) Any such expenditure shall be made the subject of a written contract when directed
by the City Council. A purchase order shall be a sufficient written contract in cases
where the expenditure is in the usual and ordinary course of the City's affairs.
2) The Purchasing Agent shall solicit competitive bids from a reasonable number of
known qualified prospective bidders by ensuring that notices are distributed and bid
documents are accessible to bidders. A bid notice shall be posted in the City Hall.
Bids shall also be solicited by newspaper advertisements when directed by the City
Council.
(Rev. 07-12-2004)
3) Unless prescribed by the Council, the Manager shall prescribe the amount of any
security to be deposited with any bid, which deposit shall be in the form of cash,
certified or cashier's check or, if authorized by the City Manager, a bond written by a
Chapter 7 - Purchases, Contracts and Sales
7-2
surety company authorized to do business in the State of Michigan. Unless fixed by
the Council, the Manager shall fix the amount of the performance bond, and in the
case of construction contracts, the amount of the labor and materials bond, to be
required of the successful bidder.
4) Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place designated in the notice
requesting bids, in the presence of the Purchasing Agent, the City Clerk and at
least one other City official. The bids shall thereupon be carefully examined and
tabulated and reported to the Council with the recommendation of the Purchasing
Agent (as approved by the Manager if the Manager is not acting as Purchasing
Agent) within sixty (60) days after bid opening. After award, all bids may be
inspected by the competing bidders.
5) When such bids are submitted to the Council, if the Council shall find any of the
bids to be satisfactory, it shall award the contract to the lowest competent bidder
meeting specifications, unless the Council shall determine that the public interest
will be better served by accepting a higher bid. Such award shall be by resolution.
The Council shall have the right to reject any or all bids, to waive irregularities in
bidding, and to accept bids which do not conform in every respect to the bidding
requirements.
6) At the time a contractor executes a contract, the contractor shall file with the City a
bond to the City executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the
State of Michigan, conditioned to pay all laborers, mechanics, sub-contractors and
material suppliers, as well as all just debts, dues and demands incurred in the
performance of the work, and shall file a performance bond when one is required.
Said contractor shall also file evidence of public liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to the City Manager, and agree to save the City harmless from loss or
damage caused to any person or property by reason of the contractor's negligence.
7) All bids and security deposits may be retained until the contract is awarded and
signed. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into the proposed contract
within five (5) days after is has been awarded, or to file any bond required within the
same time, the deposit accompanying the bid shall be forfeited to the City, and the
Council may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next lowest competent
bidder meeting specifications, or to another competent bidder meeting
specifications if the Council shall determine that the public interest will be better
served by accepting such other bid, or said contract may be re-advertised.
(Rev. 05-04-1998)
4. Purchases or Contracts over $1,000.00. Any contract or agreement obligating the City for
an amount of One Thousand Dollars or more, made on a form or with terms other than the
standard city purchase order form, shall, before execution, be submitted to the City
Attorney, and his opinion obtained with respect to its form and legality. A copy of all
contracts or agreements requiring such opinion shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk
together with a copy of the opinion. Before any contract, agreement or purchase order
obligating the City to pay an amount of One Thousand Dollars or more is executed, the
accounting officer of the City shall first certify than an appropriation has been made for the
Chapter 7 - Purchases, Contracts and Sales
7-3
payment thereof, or, if the obligation be for a purpose being financed by the issuance of
bonds or by special assessments or for some other purpose not chargeable to a budget
appropriation, that sufficient funds will be available for the payment thereof. In the case of
a contract or agreement obligating the City for periodic payments in future fiscal years for
the furnishing of a continuing service or the leasing of property, such certification need not
cover those payments which will be due in future fiscal years, but this exception shall not
apply to a contract for purchase or construction being financed by an installment contract
under authority of Section 11.2 of the Charter. Certification by the accounting officer of the
City shall be endorsed one each contract, agreement or purchase order requiring same or
shall be filed as an attachment thereto.
5. Exceptions to Competitive Bidding. Competitive bidding shall not be required in the
following cases:
1) Pursuant to Section 2 of this Chapter.
2) When the Council shall determine by unanimous resolution of those present that
the public interest will be best served by purchase from or joint purchase with,
another unit of government.
3) When the City elects to undertake the work itself as provided by the Charter.
4) When the Council determines that an emergency exists.
5) When the Council determines that the public interest will be best served without
obtaining bids.
6) In the employment of professional services.
This section shall not be interpreted to exempt a contractor for the performance of work or
services from compliance with Section 3(6) of this Chapter.
6. Recreation Service Agreements. Contracts for services or instruction of a recreational
nature, to be provided to members of the public, the entire cost of which is to be
reimbursed to the City by the members of the public who receive the services or
instruction, shall be exempt from the requirements of Section 2 and Section 3 of this
Chapter.
Such contracts shall be phrased so that no payment is made to the contractor by the City
until after the City has received payment from the said members of the public.
7. Inspection of Materials. The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all
materials, supplies and equipment shall rest with the ordering department.
8. Sale of Property. Whenever any City property, real or personal, is no longer needed for
corporate or public purposes, the same may be offered for sale in accordance with this
section, except as to property the sale of which is restricted by law or the provisions of the
Charter. Personal property not exceeding $1,000.00 in value, may be sold for cash by the
Purchasing Agent upon approval of the City Manager after receiving quotations or
Chapter 7 - Purchases, Contracts and Sales
7-4
competitive bids therefor for the best price obtainable. Property with a value in excess of
$1,000.00 may be sold after advertising and receiving competitive bids, as provided in
Section 3 of this Chapter and after approval of the sale has been given by the Council.
9. Declared Emergency. Upon the activation of the Citys officially approved Emergency
Operations Plan, the City Manager or the Designated Resource Officer is permitted to
make emergency purchases without sealed bids, prior to Council approval and in excess
of $10,000. For each purchase under the Emergency Operations Plan, the City Manager
or Designated Resource Officer shall comply with any Federal or State emergency
purchasing mandates and make every effort to secure commercially reasonable prices
and retain receipts and any other required documentation to facilitate requests for
reimbursement from State or Federal sources. In those instances, and for those
purchases exceeding the limitations provided in the Charter, the City Manager or his/her
designee shall present the facts and circumstances concerning the purchase, and request
that City Council affirm the purchase at the next regularly scheduled meeting following the
delivery of the emergency purchase or initial rendering of emergency service.
For all other sales or purchases exceeding $10,000, advance City Council approval is
required. However, City Council has the option of passing a blanket type resolution
granting the required advance approval for emergency purchases that do not require the
activation of the Emergency Operations Plan, but are necessary because of an urgent and
unforeseen situation that threatens life, property, or the general public health, safety and
welfare, and immediate delivery or rendering of services is required. If such a blanket
resolution is adopted, the resolution shall require that in any such case, the City Manager
or his/her designee shall present the facts and circumstances concerning the emergency
purchase, and request that City Council affirm the purchase at the next regularly
scheduled meeting following the delivery of the emergency purchase or initial rendering of
emergency service. Any such resolution should be reviewed and revisited any time there is
a new member to City Council.
(11-14-2016)
10. Change Orders to Construction Contracts. Construction shall be defined as the process of
building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any public structure or building, or
other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. Construction does not
include the routine operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing structures
or real property.
A change Order to original construction contracts may be authorized solely by the City
Manager if:
1) The change, as reviewed and approved by the City Manager, is within the current
scope of work for the project.
2) The change is documented with itemized and verifiable cost, and/or pricing data.
This provision may be waived, solely by the City Manager, if the cost and/or pricing
data cannot be verified and the contractor certifies that to the best of his knowledge
and belief, the cost or pricing data submitted is accurate, complete, and current as
of a mutually specified date.
Chapter 7 - Purchases, Contracts and Sales
7-5
3) The profit and overhead for the General Contractor and Subcontractor is limited to
10% combined; with the General Contractor limited to adding 5% profit and
overhead for any subcontractors.
4) The change is within the contingency limits established by City of Troy Council
Resolution at the time of original project award.
(11-01-1999)
Chapter 8 - Disaster Control
8-1
1. It is the intent and purpose of this ordinance to ensure complete and efficient utilization of
all municipal resources during periods of disaster in order to protect the public peace,
health, safety and welfare of persons and property within the city limits, in accordance with
the Home Rule Act, being 1909 P.A. 279 as amended, and, for those disasters which are
beyond the control of the City's disaster relief services, to provide liaison between the City,
the County Coordinator and other municipalities within Oakland County, in accordance
with the Emergency Preparedness Act, being 1976 P.A. 390.
2. This ordinance will not relieve any elected official or municipal department of the normal
responsibilities or authority given by general law or ordinance, nor will it affect the work of
the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief of disasters.
3. Definitions. In the interpretation of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply:
1) "Disaster" means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or man-made
cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, snow, ice, windstorm, wave action, oil
spill, water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage,
utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation
accident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, hostile
military or paramilitary action, riots or other civil disorders. "Disaster" includes
aggravating elements of and conditions resulting directly from the causes above
listed.
2) "Disaster Relief Services" shall be broadly construed to mean all efforts committed
to the prevention of, preparation for, and relief from the effects of disasters.
3) "Disaster Relief Forces" shall mean all persons deemed necessary to provide
disaster relief services, including auxiliary fire and police personnel, rescue teams,
volunteers, volunteer organizations, and employees of every municipal department
or agency.
4) "County Coordinator" shall mean the person appointed in accordance with Section
9 of 1976 P.A. 390 to coordinate the utilization of emergency preparedness
resources within Oakland County.
5) "Curfew" as used in this ordinance means a prohibition against any person walking,
running, loitering, standing or motoring upon an alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within this City excepting persons officially designated
as not subject to such curfew.
4. Disaster Relief Plan.
1) As soon as practicable a comprehensive disaster relief plan shall be adopted by
Resolution of the City Council upon the recommendations of the City Manager, who
is hereby authorized and directed to prepare a disaster relief plan which utilizes to
the fullest extent the employees, equipment and facilities of all municipal
Chapter 8 - Disaster Control
8-2
departments, boards, agencies and commissions suitable for or adaptable to
disaster relief activities. When a disaster relief plan has been approved, it shall be
the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions and
duties assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current
state of readiness at all times.
2) The City Manager, with the approval of the Mayor and City Council, shall appoint a
Municipal Coordinator who shall have the power and duty to coordinate the disaster
relief activities of the municipal departments, boards, agencies, and commissions in
order to protect the public peace, health, safety, and welfare during states of
disaster and, for those disasters which are beyond the control of the City's disaster
relief services, to provide liaison between the City, the County Coordinator and
other municipalities in Oakland County.
5. State of Disaster.
1) In the event of actual or threatened disaster, a majority of the City Council members
shall declare a state of disaster by Resolution in accordance with the provisions of
the City Charter.
2) In the event of actual or threatened disaster where a majority of the members of the
City Council are absent or unable to convene in order to declare a state of disaster,
the Mayor, or in his absence or inability to serve, the Mayor Pro Tem, as
conservator of the peace, shall declare in writing the existence of a state of
disaster.
3) The existence of a state of disaster shall not be declared under this ordinance on
the basis of concerted activities by persons using lawful means to resolve a bona
fide labor dispute.
6. Powers and Duties of the Mayor.
1) When a state of disaster is declared under this ordinance, the Mayor, or in his
absence or inability to serve, the Mayor Pro-Tem, as conservator of the peace,
shall:
a) Immediately proclaim in writing the existence of a state of disaster and notify
the office of the governor and each member of the City Council.
b) As soon as may be practicable, convene the City Council to perform its
legislative functions as the situation may demand. The Council shall have
the power to terminate the state of disaster.
c) If the disaster is beyond the control of municipal resources, request the
governor to declare a state of disaster in accordance with Section 12 of 1976
P.A. 390, and request the County Coordinator to seek state assistance in
accordance with Section 14 of 1976 P.A. 390.
Chapter 8 - Disaster Control
8-3
d) Promulgate such emergency regulations as may be deemed necessary to
protect life and property and conserve critical resources, and such
regulations may be invoked when necessary for tests of the disaster relief
plan. All such regulations shall be subject to approval of the Council as soon
as practicable subsequent to promulgation.
(Rev 4-17-1989)
2) The Mayor, or in his absence or inability to serve, the Mayor Pro Tem, shall have
power to order disaster relief forces to the aid of the State or political subdivisions
thereof subject to City Council review as soon as practicable.
7. Powers and Duties of the City Manager.
1) The City Manager, as the Chief Administrative Officer of the City, shall be
responsible for the organization, administration and operation of the City's disaster
relief services, disaster relief forces, and the disaster relief plan. The powers and
duties of the City Manager shall include the following:
a) The City Manager may take all action necessary to conduct tests of the
disaster relief plan.
b) The City Manager is hereby authorized to appoint, employ, remove, train,
equip and provide, with or without compensation, disaster relief forces,
including rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other
disaster workers which he deems necessary to the implementation of the
disaster relief plan.
c) When a state of disaster has been declared, the City Manager shall
assemble and utilize disaster relief forces and prescribe the manner and
conditions of their use.
d) The City Manager shall designate a line of succession among his
department heads to carry out the powers and duties of this sub-section in
the event of his absence or inability to serve.
2) The City Manager is hereby authorized to exercise the powers granted to the Mayor
in Section 8.6 either in the absence or inability of the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem to
service or where delay in the exercise of such powers would be contrary to the
public interest, provided only that a majority of the members of the City Council are
absent or unable to convene in order to declare a state of disaster in accordance
with the provisions of the City Charter.
3) The Assistant City Manager shall carry out the powers and duties of the City
Manager in the absence of the City Manager.
Chapter 8 - Disaster Control
8-4
8. When a state of disaster has been declared under this ordinance, the Mayor or his lawful
designee may then order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the
City or to the City as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of
the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. No
person who is not a resident of the City, as evidenced by a current address on his driver
license or other valid identification, shall be arrested or prosecuted for violation of a curfew
without first being given a reasonable opportunity to continue through or otherwise leave
the area which is under curfew. Any person who is given a reasonable opportunity to leave
such area and does not do so is subject to arrest and prosecution.
9. When a state of disaster has been declared by resolution of the City Council, the Mayor or
his lawful designee may make any of the following orders in the interest of public safety
and welfare:
1) The discontinuance of the sale of beer and other alcoholic beverages.
2) The discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid
flammable or other combustible products in any container other than a gasoline
tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
3) The discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any
firearms, ammunition, explosives, or other dangerous weapons of any character
whatsoever.
4) The closing of the following public establishments:
a) All public places or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor or beer is permitted.
b) Retail and wholesale liquor establishments.
c) Gasoline service stations.
d) Any establishment selling firearms, ammunition, explosives or other
dangerous weapons of any character whatsoever.
e) Theaters and other places of public assembly.
10. A curfew or order authorized by Sections 8.8 or 8.9 of this ordinance shall become
effective upon being posted in three (3) public places in the City or affected area thereof
and transmitted to newspapers of general circulation in the area. The curfew and orders
may be amended or rescinded in like manner by the Mayor or his lawful designee during
the pendency of the state of disaster, but shall cease to be in effect upon the resolution by
the City Council that the state of disaster no longer exists, or when superseded by action
of the Governor of the State of Michigan.
11. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay the disaster relief
services or forces in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this
Chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the
authority contained in this Chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear,
Chapter 8 - Disaster Control
8-5
carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of
the disaster relief forces of the City of Troy unless authority so to do has been granted to
such person by the proper officials.
12. A violation of this ordinance or any order issued thereunder is a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more
than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 9  Troy Public Library
9-1
1. Establishment. The Public Library shall be established as a separate department of the
City to be administered under the direction of the City Manager.
(Rev. 10-03-2011)
3. Powers and Duties. The City, may accept donations, contributions, and gifts, for either
general or specific purposes, which become the property of the City with full rights of
disposal. All monetary donations, contributions, and gifts shall be deposited with the City
Treasurer in compliance with Section 8.8 of the Charter of the City of Troy.
(Rev. 10-03-2011)
4. Staff. The City Manager shall appoint a librarian and necessary staff. All employees
constituting the library staff shall conform and be subject to all rules and regulations
governing other employees of the City.
(Rev. 05-29-1967)
5. Library Building. The City Council shall provide suitable quarters for housing the library
and shall provide janitor service and maintenance under the direction of the City
Manager. Whenever the construction of a library building or buildings is contemplated it
shall be the duty of the City Manager to have detailed plans and specifications prepared
for same. The contract or contracts for such construction shall be let by the City Council
as provided by Section 12.2 of the City Charter.
(Rev. 10-03-2011)
6. Records. At the end of the fiscal year and at any other times when requested by the
Manager or City Council, the Librarian shall prepare a report stating the number of books
and periodicals on hand; the number added by purchase or gift during the year; the
number recorded lost, missing or worn out; the number of books loaned out, and such
other statistics, information and suggestions as he may deem to be of general interest.
(Rev. 10-03-2011)
8. Receipts and Disbursements. All funds received by the library shall be deposited with the
City Treasurer, and the Treasurer may establish a petty cash fund for the handling of
emergency disbursements and maintenance of fines and fees. All supplies and materials
shall be obtained through the Purchasing Department in compliance with administrative
rules applying to all other City departments, or in accordance with a legal contract
executed by the City for the purpose of providing such supplies and materials.
(Rev. 05-29-1967)
9. Use of Facilities. The Public Library shall be maintained for the use and benefit of the
inhabitants and freeholders of the City of Troy. All inhabitants and freeholders of
Chapter 9  Troy Public Library
9-2
the City shall have free use of said library, subject to the rules and regulations
governing the operation of the library, and subject further to the right of the City
Manager, upon recommendation of the Librarian, to exclude from the use of the
library any and all persons who shall willfully violate said rules. Non-residents may
be granted permission to use the library under such conditions and upon payment
of such fees as may be prescribed by the City Council.
(Rev. 08-28-1978)
10. Contracts. The City Council is hereby empowered to contract with another library
or libraries or a library system in order to provide library services to the City of Troy
under such terms and conditions as the City Council shall prescribe.
(Rev. 08-28-1978)
Chapter 9  Troy Public Library
9-3
11. Whoever willfully or negligently detains or fails to return to the Troy Public Library any
book, magazine, pamphlet, map, manuscript, picture, microfilm, phonograph records,
clipping, or other property belonging to such library, or pay the reasonable value thereof,
within thirty (30) days from the date of notice addressed to such person at the last
address furnished the public library, and which notice may be given at any time after the
date on which such person, under the rules of the library, should have returned the
loaned property, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this ordinance and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) for each loan transaction, or upon failure to pay such fine may be
sentenced to the County jail for not more than ten (10) days.
(Rev. 10-29-1986)
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-1
1. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
A) Accumulated contributions means the sum of all amounts deducted from
the compensation of a member and credited to his individual account in the
member's deposit fund, together with regular interest thereon.
B) Beneficiary means any person, except a retirant, who is in receipt of, or who
has entitlement to, a pension or other benefit, payable from the funds of the
retirement system.
C) Board of trustees or board means the board of trustees provided for in this
chapter.
D) Compensation means the salary or wages paid an employee for personal
services rendered by him to the city. The term shall not include allowances
for clothing, equipment, travel and similar items, nor shall it include the
payment of sick or vacation leave that is made because of termination or
retirement.
E) Council means the legislative body of the City of Troy.
F) Credited service means the total of a member's service, to the extent such
service is credited to him by the board of trustees.
(Rev. 07-26-1993)
G) Employee means any person in the employ of the city.
H) Final average compensation means the average of the annual
compensation paid a member during the three (3) highest calendar years of
his service contained within the last ten (10) calendar years, immediately
preceding termination of his last employment with the City.
(Rev. 11-06-2000)
I) Member means any employee who is included in the membership of the
retirement system.
J) Pension means an annual amount payable by the retirement system
throughout the future life of a person or for a temporary period as provided
in this chapter. All pensions shall be paid in equal monthly installments.
K) Pension reserve means the present value of all payments to be made on
account of any pension, computed on the basis of such mortality and other
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-2
tables of experience, and regular interest, as the board of trustees shall
from time to time adopt.
L) Regular interest means such rate of interest per annum, compounded
annually, as the board of trustees shall from time to time adopt.
M) Retirant means any member who retires with a pension payable from funds
of the retirement system.
N) Retirement means a member's withdrawal from the employ of the city with a
pension payable from the funds of the retirement system.
O) Retirement system or system means the city employees retirement system
created and established by this chapter.
P) Service means personal service rendered to the city by an employee of the
city.
(Rev. 02-11-1991)
2. Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees is vested with the power and authority to
administer, manage and operate the retirement system, and to construe and make
effective the provisions of this Chapter. The Board shall consist of eight trustees as
follows:
(Rev. 03-01-2004)
A) The City Manager, by virtue of his position.
B) The Assistant City Manager/Finance & Administration, by virtue of his
position.
(Rev. 11-06-2000)
C) A member of Council selected by the Council.
(Rev. 02-28-1994)
D) A citizen, who is an elector of the City, and who is not a member, retirant or
beneficiary of the retirement system, and who is not a member of the
Council, to be appointed by the Council.
(Rev. 09-11-1978)
E) Three members of the retirement system to be elected by the members of
the system in accordance with such rules and regulations as the Board shall
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-3
from time to time adopt to govern such elections.
F) A retiree member in the Defined Benefit plan, who shall be appointed by the
City Council, and shall serve as a non-voting member.
G) Of the five employee members, two must be in the Defined Benefit plan. A
minimum of two of the five member trustees, as set forth in paragraphs A, B
or E, must be a member of the Defined Benefit plan.
(Rev. 03-01-2004)
3. Terms of Office. The regular term of office for the appointed citizen, the 3 member
trustees, and the Council trustee, shall be 3 years.
(Rev. 02-28-1994)
Vacancy of Board.
3.4 If a member trustee leaves the employ of the City he shall be considered to have
resigned from the Board and the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of
the term.
(Rev. 02-11-1991)
Board Quorum, Vote, Meetings, Proceedings.
3.5 Four trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the Board of Trustees.
Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on each question before the Board and
at least four concurring votes shall be required for a decision by the Board. The
Board shall hold meetings regularly, at least one in each quarter year, and shall
designate the time and place thereof. The Board shall adopt its own rules of
procedure.
(Rev. 02-11-1991)
Board Chairman, Retirement System Officers, Employees.
3.6 The Board of Trustees is vested with the power and authority to administer,
manage and operate the retirement system, and to construe and make effective
the provisions of this Chapter. The Board shall consist of eight trustees as follows:
A) The Board of Trustees shall designate from its own number a Chairman
and a Vice-Chairman.
B) The City Treasurer shall be the Treasurer of the Retirement System.
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-4
C) The City Manager or his/her designee shall be the Administrative Officer
and serve as secretary of the Retirement System and he/she shall be the
custodian of its money and investments.
(Rev. 07-25-2011)
D) The City Attorney shall be the Legal Advisor to the Board of Trustees.
E) The Board of Trustees shall designate an actuary who shall be the
Technical Advisor to the Board and who shall perform such other duties as
are required of him under this Chapter.
F) The Board of Trustees may employ such other services as are approved by
the City Manager and authorized by the Council.
(Rev. 06-07-1999)
Records, Annual Reports.
3.7 The Administrative Officer shall keep, or cause to be kept, such data as shall be
necessary for an actuarial valuation of the Retirement System.
(Rev. 09-23-1974)
Experience Tables, Regular Interest, Adoption Of.
3.8 The Board of Trustees shall from time to time adopt such mortality and other
Tables of Experience, and a rate of regular interest, as are required in the proper
operation of the Retirement System; provided that no such rate of regular interest
shall exceed seven percent per annum, compounded annually.
(Rev. 02-04-1980)
4. Membership. The membership of the Retirement System shall include only those
persons who are classified as full time on the records of the Human Resources
Department of the City, and shall specifically exclude but not be limited to the
following: (1) any employee who is employed by the City in a position normally
requiring less than 1,000 hours of work per annum, (2) any person whose services
are compensated on a contractual or fee basis, (3) volunteer firefighters as such,
(4) elected officials of the City, and (5) employees classified as part time, seasonal
or temporary, on the records of the Human Resources Department of the City
regardless of the number of hours actually worked by the employee in any
calendar year.
In any case of doubt as to the membership status of any employee, the Board
shall decide the question.
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-5
(Rev. 01-22-2001)
Termination of Membership.
4.2 Should any member cease to be employed in a position covered by the Retirement
System he shall thereupon cease to be a member and his credited service at that
time shall be forfeited, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter. If he is reemployed
by the City in a position covered by the system he shall again become a
member. Should his re-employment occur within a period of 5 years from the date
he last ceased to be a member, his credited service last forfeited by him shall be
restored to his credit, provided he immediately returns to the Members Deposit
Fund the amount, if any, he withdrew therefrom, together with regular interest
thereon from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. Upon a member's
retirement, he shall cease to be a member of the system.
(Rev. 02-11-1991)
Service Credit.
4.3 The Board shall fix and determine by appropriate rules and regulations the amount
of service to be credited any member; provided, that in no case shall less than 10
days of service rendered by him in any calendar month be credited as a month of
service, nor shall less than 10 months of service rendered by him in any calendar
year be credited as a year of service, nor shall more than 1 year of service be
credited any member for all service rendered by him in any calendar year.
(Rev. 08-07-1967)
4.4 Military Service Credit. If an employee of the City, who while employed by the City,
enters the Armed Forces of the United States during any period of compulsory
military service, such armed service shall be credited him as City service; provided,
that (1) he re-enters the employ of the City, in a position covered by this retirement
system, within 6 months from and after termination of such armed service actually
required of him, and (2) he pays into the Members Deposit Fund the amount, if
any, he may have withdrawn therefrom, together with regular interest from the date
of withdrawal to the date of repayment, and (3) in no case shall any member be
credited with more than 5 years of service for all such armed service rendered by
him. In any case of doubt as to the period to be so credited any member, the
Board of Trustees shall have final power to determine such period.
(Rev. 02-11-1991)
4.5 Additional Service Credits. Any person (having been first employed by the City
prior to January 22, 2001) who is in the active employ of the City as of the date
of enactment of this provision, and who currently is or has previously been
excluded from membership in the Retirement System pursuant to the provisions
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-6
of Section 4(1) (solely due to being employed by the City in a part time position
normally requiring less than 1,000 hours of work per annum), shall be subject to
the following additional provisions:
A) Any such employee who as of the date of enactment of this provision has
completed five (5) or more consecutive years of service in such part time
position, shall immediately be eligible to become a member of the
Retirement System and receive credit for such service; provided that
during each such year he or she performed services in at least 10 months
and completed at least 1,000 hours of work, and that such consecutive
period of service is continuing as of the date of enactment of this
provision.
B) Any such employee who after the date of enactment of this provision (and
prior to January 21, 2006), completes a minimum of five (5) consecutive
years of service in such part time position, shall be eligible to become a
member of the Retirement System and receive credit for such service,
effective as of their completion of such period of service; provided that
during each such year he or she performed services in at least 10 months
and completed at least 1,000 hours of work.
C) Any such employee who currently is or otherwise becomes a member of
the Retirement System pursuant to Section 4 (due to a change in job
classification), and who previously was excluded from membership as a
part time employee, shall be eligible to receive credit for years of service
completed in such part time position, effective as of the later of the
enactment of this provision or their otherwise becoming a member;
provided that only the consecutive period of service (during each year of
which he or she performed services in at least 10 months and completed
at least 1,000 hours of work) that commenced prior to January 22, 2001,
and that was continuing at the date they became a member shall be so
credited.
D) An employee referred to in (A) or (B) above, shall continue to be a
member and receive credit for service only for such period as he or she
continues to perform services in at least 10 months complete at least
1,000 hours of work in any year. An employee referred to in (C) above,
shall continue to be a member and receive credit for service only for such
period that he or she continues to be employed in a position that
otherwise qualifies them for membership pursuant to the provisions of
Section 4. All such employees shall be subject to the break-in-service
provisions of Section 4.2, and the vesting requirements of Sections 6 and
57. In no event shall any year of service be counted more than once
pursuant to these provisions.
E) If the first period for which an employee receives service credit hereunder
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-7
occurs prior to January 1, 1998, such credited service shall be applied
towards determining the amount of pension under Section 6.1 to which
the employee may become entitled upon retirement; provided that the
value of such pension may be transferred to the Defined Contribution Plan
in accordance with such procedures as the Board may determine. If the
first period for which an employee receives service credit hereunder
occurs on or after such date, the Board shall determine (and the City shall
contribute) those amounts that would otherwise have been required to be
contributed on such employees behalf under Section 55 with respect to
such years.
F) Notwithstanding any provision in this Chapter to the contrary, for purposes
of calculating the amount of benefit (under Section 6.1) or contribution
(under Section 55) to which a member is entitled with respect to each year
of credited service referred to in (A), (B), (C) and (D) above, the benefit or
contribution otherwise due pursuant to this Chapter shall be prorated for
each such year based on the actual number of hours worked during such
year, as determined from the following schedule:
Hours Worked Years of Service
Credit
1,000 to 1,499 50%
1,500 to 1,999 75%
2,000 and over 100%
G) In order to become a member and/or receive service credits in
accordance with this provision, an eligible employee must elect (within six
(6) months of the date of enactment of this provision) to purchase such
service credits, by agreeing in writing to contribute to the Retirement
System those amounts that would otherwise have been required to be
contributed by the employee under Section 9.1 or Section 55 with respect
to such years, along with such interest as the actuary and/or Board shall
determine is appropriate. Such amounts shall be deducted from payroll in
accordance with such procedures as the Board may determine, provided
that all amounts due shall be contributed into the Retirement System no
later than the time the employee terminates his employment with the City.
Failure to contribute such amounts in a timely manner will result in
forfeiture of such service credits.
(Rev. 01-14-2002)
4.6 Prior Governmental Retirement Service. A member of the Employees Retirement
System may be eligible for prior governmental retirement service credit if all of
the following requirements are satisfied:
A) The member must be still actively employed by the City of Troy.
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-8
B) The member must have a minimum of 60 months of credited service
acquired as a member of the Troy Employees Retirement System.
C) The member must have attained the age requirements for the Troy
Employees Retirement System.
D) The member must have previously acquired credited service as a member
of another official governmental retirement system. If all of the above
requirements are satisfied, then a member who has not yet met the
service requirements for the Troy Employees Retirement System shall be
entitled to use his or her credited service from another official
governmental retirement system for eligibility purposes only.
(Rev. 10-07-2002)
5. Voluntary Retirement. Any member, who has attained age 55 years and has 10 or
more years of credited service in force, may retire upon his written application filed
with the Board of Trustees setting forth at what time, not less than 30 days nor
more than 90 days subsequent to the execution and filing thereof, he desires to be
retired.
5.1 Normal Retirement. Normal Retirement age is 65 years. If a member who is
separated from City employment on or after his attainment of age 65 years has 10
or more years of credited service in force, he shall be retired.
(Rev. 11-07-1988)
6. Deferred Retirement. In the event a member who has 10 or more years of credited
service leaves the employ of the City before he is eligible to retire, he shall be
entitled to a pension computed according to the provisions of this chapter in force
at the time of said member's separation from City employment; provided, that he
does not withdraw his accumulated contributions from the Members Deposit Fund.
His said pension shall begin the first day of the calendar month next following the
month in which he files his application for same with the Board of trustees on or
after his attainment of age 60 years.
(Rev. 04-20-1992)
6.1(A) Straight Life Pension. Upon a member's retirement, as provided in this Chapter, if
he has less than 27 years service, he shall receive a straight life pension equal to a
percent of an amount computed by multiplying the number of years, and fraction of
a year, of his credited service by 2.25 percent of his final average compensation
listed below. Such percent shall be equal to 70 percent increased by 1/2 of 1
percent for each full month by which the member's age at the time of retirement
exceeds 55 years. Provided, in no event shall such percent exceed 100 percent,
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-9
and, provided that in case of disability retirement or death pension the percent
shall be 100 percent. For Troy Command Officers Association (TCOA) and Troy
Police Officers Association (TPOA) members, the percent of Final Average
Compensation (FAC) will be 2.8% for the first 25 years and 1% per year thereafter,
with a cap of 75% of final average compensation.
(Rev. 08-20-2007)
6.1(B) Age and Service Retirement. Upon a member's retirement, as provided in this
Chapter, he shall receive a straight life pension equal to an amount computed by
multiplying the number of years, and fraction of a year, of his credited service by
2.25%. For TCOA and TPOA members, the percent of Final Average
Compensation (FAC) will be 2.8% for the first 25 years and 1% per year thereafter
with a cap of 75% of final average compensation.
(Rev. 08-20-2007)
6.1(C) A member who has 27 or more years service may retire on or after his attainment
of age 50. TPOA and TCOA, and Troy Fire Staff Officers Association (TFSOA)
members retiring after July 1, 1998 may retire as an age and service retirement
after the attainment of 25 years of service. Classified and Exempt and Michigan
Association of Police (MAP) members may retire as an age and service retirement
after the attainment of age 55 and 25 years of service.
(Rev 08-20-2007)
6.1(D) Supplemental Retirement. All members excluding TPOA and TCOA shall receive
an additional pension from age 50 to age 62 to equal the amount it would have
been if the percentages in the formulas in subsections A or B above were .25%
greater.
(Rev. 08-20-2007)
6.2 Terminal Payments. If a retirant dies before he has received in straight life pension
payments an aggregate amount equal to his accumulated contributions standing to
his credit in the members deposit fund at the time of his retirement, the difference
between his accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of straight life
pension payments received by him shall be paid to such person as he shall have
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If there
be no such designated person surviving the retirant, the difference, if any, shall be
paid to his estate.
(Rev. 02-11-1991)
Pension Options.
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-10
6.3 Prior to the receipt of his first retirement payment, but not thereafter, a member
may elect to receive his pension as a straight life pension payable throughout his
life; or, he may elect to receive the actuarial equivalent, at that time, of his straight
life pension in a reduced pension payable throughout his life, and nominate a
beneficiary, in accordance with the provisions of Option A thru D as set forth
below:
Option A. Joint and Survivor Pension: Upon the death of a retirant who elected
Option A, his reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life and paid to
such person, having an insurable interest in his life, as he shall have nominated by
written designation duly executed and filed with the Board of Trustees.
Option B. Modified Joint and Survivor Pension: Upon the death of a retirant, who
elected Option B, one-half of his reduced pension shall be continued throughout
the life of and paid to such person, having an insurable interest in his life, as he
shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the Board
of Trustees.
Option C. Joint and Survivor Pension (pop-up A): Upon the death of a retirant who
elected Option C, his reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life and
paid to such person, having an insurable interest in his life, as he shall have
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the Board of
Trustees. If the selected beneficiary predeceases the retirant, the pension shall
revert to a straight-life pension payable throughout the remainder of his life.
Option D. Modified Joint and Survivor Pension (pop-up B): Upon the death of a
retirant who elected Option D, one-half of his reduced pension shall be continued
throughout the life of and paid to such person, having an insurable interest in his
life, as he shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with
the Board of Trustees. If the selected beneficiary predeceases the retirant, the
pension shall revert to a straight-life pension payable throughout the remainder of
his life.
(Rev. 11-02-1987)
7.1A Upon the application of an Exempt, Classified, or Michigan Association of Police
(MAP) member, or his department head, who is below age 60 or who does not
otherwise qualify for retirement, who (1) is in the employ of the City, (2) has 10 or
more years of credited service [for American Federation of State, County, and
Municipal Employees (AFSCME) employees hired after 2/12/96, or Michigan
Association of Police (MAP) members who have 5 or more years of credited
services as of 8/7/1995)], (3) becomes totally and permanently incapacitated for
full time work, by reason of a personal injury or disease, and is in receipt of
disability benefits from Social Security, or has received a favorable determination
letter with a current effective date for the commencement of disability benefits
under Social Security, may be retired by the Board of Trustees; provided, that after
a medical examination of the member made by or under the direction of a Medical
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-11
Committee consisting of 2 physicians, 1 of whom shall be named by the Board,
and 1 by the member, the said Medical Committee reports to the Board, in
writing,(1) that the member is mentally or physically totally incapacitated for full
time work, (2) that his incapacity will probably be permanent, and (3) that the
member should be retired. In the event that the 2 physicians constituting the
Medical Committee do not agree in their findings, then the Board may, in its
discretion, appoint a third physician to examine the member and based upon the
report, in writing, of the third physician, the Board may retire the member.
The 10 years credited service requirement contained in this section shall be
waived in the case of a member whom the Board finds (1) to be totally and
permanently incapacitated for full time work as a natural and proximate result of a
personal injury or disease arising out of and in the course of his actual
performance of duty in the employ of the City and (2) to be in receipt of workmen's
compensation on account of his disability arising out of and in the course of his
City employment.
(Rev. 03-01-2004)
7.1B Upon the application of an American Federation of State, County, and Municipal
Employees (AFSCME), Troy Police Officers Association (TPOA), or Troy
Command Officers Association (TCOA) member, or his department head, who is
below age 60 or who does not otherwise qualify for retirement, who (1) is in the
employ of the City, (2) has 5 or more years of credited service, and (3) becomes
totally and permanently incapacitated for duty in the employ of the City, by reason
of a personal injury or disease, may be retired by the Board of Trustees; provided,
that after a medical examination of the member made by or under the direction of
a Medical Committee consisting of 2 physicians, 1 of whom shall be named by the
Board, and 1 by the member, the said Medical Committee reports to the Board, in
writing, (1) that the member is mentally or physically totally incapacitated for duty in
the employ of the City, (2) that his incapacity will probably be permanent, and (3)
that the member should be retired. In the event that the 2 physicians constituting
the Medical Committee do not agrees in their findings, then the Board may, in its
discretion, appoint a third physician to examine the member and based upon the
report, in writing, of the third physician, the Board may retire the member. The 5
years credited service requirement contained in this section shall be waived in the
case of a member whom the Board finds (1) to be totally and permanently
incapacitated for duty in the employ of the City as a natural and proximate result of
a personal injury or disease arising out of and in the course of his actual
performance of duty in the employ of the City and (2) to be in receipt of workmen's
compensation on account of his disability arising out of and in the course of his
City employment.
(Rev. 03-01-2004)
7.2 Disability Pension
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-12
A) Upon retirement of a member on account of disability, as provided in this
Chapter, he shall receive a pension computed in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter; provided, that his straight life disability pension
shall not be less than the amount it would be if he had 10 years of credited
service.
B) Troy Police Officers Association (TPOA) Duty Disability. Upon the
retirement of a member of the Troy Police Officers Association (TPOA) on
account of disability, as provided in this Chapter, he shall receive a pension
of not less than two-thirds of his final average compensation during the
period he is in receipt of workmen's compensation on account of his
disability arising out of and in the course of his City employment.
(Rev. 03-01-2004)
Re-examination of Disability Retirant
7.4 At least once each year during the first 5 years following a member's retirement on
account of disability, and at least once in every 3 year period thereafter, the Board
of Trustees may, and upon the retirant's application shall, require any disability
retirant who has not attained age 55 years undergo a medical examination to be
made by or under the direction of a physician designated by the Board. If the said
retirant refuses to submit to such medical examination in any such period, his
disability pension may be suspended by the Board until his withdrawal of such
refusal. Should such refusal continue for 1 year all his rights in and to a disability
pension may be revoked by the Board. If upon such medical examination of said
retirant, the said physician reports to the Board that the said retirant is physically
able and capable of resuming employment with the City he shall be returned to
City employment and his disability pension shall terminate; provided, that the
report of the said physician is concurred in by the Board. In returning the said
retirant to City employment reasonable latitude shall be allowed the City in placing
him in a position commensurate with his type of work and compensation at the
time of his retirement.
(Rev. 05-10-1965)
7.5 A disability retirant who is returned to City employment shall again become a
member of the retirement system. His credited service at the time of his retirement
shall be restored to full force and effect. He shall be given service credit for the
period he was in receipt of workmen's compensation on account of his disability
arising out of and in the course of his City employment; otherwise he shall not be
given service credit for such period.
(Rev. 08-07-1967)
7.6 If a disability retirant, who has not attained age 55 years become engaged in
gainful occupation, business, or employment paying him more than the difference
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-13
between his annual rate of compensation at the time of his retirement and his
disability pension, his pension shall be reduced to an amount which together with
the amount so earned by him shall equal but not exceed his annual rate of
compensation. Should the retirant's earnings change, the reduction of his pension
shall be adjusted accordingly.
(Rev. 02-11-1991)
8. Duty Death Pension. If a member dies as the result of personal injury or disease
arising solely and exclusively out of and in the course of his employment with the
City, and such death, or injury or disease resulting in such death, be found by the
Board of Trustees to have been the result of his actual performance of duty in the
employ of the City, the benefits provided in this section shall be paid, subject to the
condition that workmen's compensation becomes payable on account of the death
of the member.
A) His widow shall receive a pension computed as if the member had (1)
retired the day preceding the date of his death, notwithstanding that he
might not have been otherwise eligible to retire, (2) elected Option A and (3)
nominated his widow as beneficiary; provided, that the pension shall not be
less than 25 percent of the member's final average compensation. For Troy
Command Officers Association (TCOA) and Troy Police Officers
Association (TPOA), and Troy Command Officers Association (TCOA), and
Troy Fire Staff Officers Association (TFSOA) members retiring after July 1,
1998, the percent will be 50 instead of 25.
(Rev. 03-01-2004)
B) If there be no widow, or if the widow's pension shall cease, for any reason,
the member's dependent children shall share equally in a pension equal to
25 percent of the member's final average compensation. Each child's
pension shall terminate when the child has died, married, or attained age 18
years.
C) As used in this section, the term "Widow" means any person to whom the
member was married at the time his employment with the City is terminated.
8.1 Non-Duty Death Pension. If any member who has 10 or more years of credited
service and dies while in the employ of the City, his or her spouse shall receive a
pension computed in the same manner in all respects as if the member had (1)
retired the day preceding the date of death, notwithstanding that the member might
not have been otherwise eligible to retire, (2) elected Option A, and (3) nominated
the member's spouse as beneficiary.
(Rev. 01-23-1995)
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-14
9. Members Deposit Fund. The Members Deposit Fund shall be the fund in which
shall be accumulated, at regular interest, the contributions of members, and from
which shall be made refunds and transfers of accumulated contributions, as
provided in this Chapter.
(Rev. 08-07-1967)
9.1 Members Contributions. A members contribution to the retirement system shall be
based on the following percent of compensation: MAP 1.50; TPOA; 4.00, TCOA
4.00; Classified and Exempt 1.50; American Federation of State, County, and
Municipal Employees (AFSCME) 1.50; and TFSOA 3.00.
(Rev. 08-20-2007)
9.2 Payroll deductions. The contributions provided for in this Chapter shall be
deducted from the compensations of each member on each and every payroll, for
each and every payroll period, from the date of his entrance in the retirement
system to the date his City employment terminates. Each member shall be
deemed to consent and agree to the deductions made and provided for herein.
Payment of his compensation less said deduction shall be a full and complete
discharge and acquittance of all claims and demands whatsoever for the service
rendered by him during the period covered by such payment, except as to benefits
provided by this Chapter. When deducted, each of said contributions shall be
credited to the member's individual account in the Members Deposit Fund.
(Rev. 04-20-1992)
9.5 Contributions Transferred. Upon a member's retirement, his accumulated
contributions standing to his credit in the Members Deposit Fund shall be
transferred to the Retirement Reserve Fund. Except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter, at the expiration of a period of years from and after the date a member
ceases to be an employee of the City, any balance standing to his credit in the
Members Deposit Fund, unclaimed by the member or his legal representative,
shall be transferred to the Income Fund.
(Rev. 02-11-1991)
Refund of Member's Contributions.
9.6 Should any member cease to be employed by the City and not be entitled to a
pension payable from funds of the Retirement System, he shall be paid the
balance standing to his credit in the Members Deposit Fund, provided he files his
written request for same.
(Rev. 04-20-1992)
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-15
9.7 Upon the death of a member, if no pension becomes payable on account of his
City employment, the balance standing to his credit in the Members Deposit Fund
at the time of his death shall be paid to such person or persons as he shall have
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the Board of
Trustees. If no designated person or persons survives the member, his
accumulated contributions shall be paid to his estate.
(Rev. 02-11-1991)
Pension Reserve Fund
10.1 The Pension Reserve Fund is hereby created. It shall be the fund in which shall be
accumulated the contributions made by the City to the retirement system and from
which shall be made transfers of pensions reserves, as provided in this section.
(Rev. 11-23-1964)
10.2 Upon the basis of such mortality and other tables of experience, and regular
interest, as the Board of Trustees shall from time to time adopt, the actuary shall
annually compute the pension reserves or service rendered and to be rendered by
members, and the pension reserves for pensions being paid retirants and
beneficiaries. The pension reserve liabilities so determined shall be financed by
annual City contributions to be appropriated by the Council; said contributions:
A) for member's current service shall be a percent of their annual
compensations which will produce an amount which if paid annually by the
City during their future service will be sufficient, at the time of their
retirement, to provide the pension reserves, not financed by members'
future contributions, for the portions of the pensions to be paid them based
upon their future service; and
B) for members' accrued service shall be a percent of their annual
compensations which will produce an amount which if paid annually by the
City over a period of years, to be determined by the Council, will amortize,
at regular interest, the unfunded pension reserves for the accrued service
portions of the pensions to which they may be entitled upon retirement; and
C) for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries shall be a percent of the
annual compensations of members which will produce an amount which if
paid annually by the City over a period of years, to be determined by the
Council, will amortize, at regular interest, the unfunded pension reserves for
pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries.
(Rev. 11-2-1987)
10.3 In the event the amount appropriated in the budget in any fiscal year is insufficient
to pay in full the amounts due in said year to all retirants and beneficiaries of the
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-16
retirement system, the amount of such insufficiency shall thereupon be provided
by the City.
(Rev. 11-23-1964)
10.4 Upon the retirement of a member the difference between the pension reserve for
the pension payable on his account and his accumulated contributions shall be
transferred from the Pension Reserve Fund to the Retirement Reserve Fund.
10.5 Retirement Reserve Fund. The Retirement Reserve Fund shall be the fund from
which shall be paid all pensions as provided in this Chapter. In the event a
disability retirant returns to City employment, his pension reserve at that time shall
be transferred from the Retirement Reserve Fund to the Members Deposit Fund
and the Pension Reserve Fund in the same proportion as the pension reserve was
originally transferred.
(Rev. 08-07-1967)
10.6 Income Fund. The Income Fund shall be the fund to which shall be credited all
interest, dividends, and other income from investments of the retirement system;
all transfers from the Members Deposit Fund by reason of lack of claimant; and all
other moneys received by the retirement system, the disposition of which is not
specifically otherwise provided for in this Chapter. The Board of Trustees may
accept gifts and bequests. There shall be transferred from the Income Fund all
amounts required to credit regular interest to the Members Deposit Fund,
Retirement Reserve Fund, and Pension Reserve Fund. Whenever the Board
determines that the balance in the Income Fund is more than sufficient to cover
the current charges to the Fund, the Board may, by resolution provide for
contingency reserves.
(Rev. 11-02-1987)
11. Investment. The Board of Trustees shall be the trustees of the funds of the
retirement system and shall have full power to invest and reinvest such funds as
permitted by State Law.
Restricted Use of Funds.
11.3 All moneys and investments of the Retirement System shall be held for the
exclusive purpose of meeting the disbursements for pensions and other payments
authorized by this Chapter and shall be used for no other purpose whatsoever.
(Rev. 11-06-2000)
Assets Not Segregated.
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-17
11.4 The Members Deposit Fund, Pension Reserve Fund, Retirement Reserve Fund,
Income Fund, and any other Funds created by the Board of Trustees shall be
interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the Retirement System and not to
the actual segregation of the assets of the System in the said Funds.
(Rev. 11-23-1964)
Allowance of Regular Interest.
11.5 The Board of Trustees shall, at the end of each fiscal year, allow and credit regular
interest to the members' individual accounts in the Members Deposit Fund
computed upon their individual balances at the beginning of such fiscal year; and
to the mean balances for the year in the Pension Reserve Fund and the
Retirement Reserve Fund. The amounts of interest so credited shall be charged to
the Income Fund. In the event the balance in the Income Fund is not sufficient to
cover the amounts of interest charged to it, the amount of such insufficiency shall
be transferred from the Pension Reserve Fund to the Income Fund.
No Trustee Shall Gain From Investments.
11.6 Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no trustee and no employee of the
City shall have any interest direct or indirect in the gains or profit arising from any
investments made by the Board of Trustees. No person directly or indirectly , for
himself or as an agent or partner of others, shall borrow any moneys or
investments of the Retirement System, or in any manner use the same except to
make current and necessary payments as are authorized by the Board. No such
person shall become an endorser or surety or become in any manner an obligor
for moneys loaned by or borrowed from the Board. Nothing contained herein shall
be construed to impair the rights of any member, retirant, or beneficiary of the
Retirement System to benefits provided by the system.
(Rev. 08-07-1967)
Method of Making Payments.
11.7 All payments from moneys of the Retirement System shall be made by the City
Treasurer; all payments shall have been previously authorized by a specific or
continuing resolution adopted by the Board.
(Rev. 09-23-1974)
Correction of Errors.
12.1 Should any change or error in the records of the City or the Retirement System
result in any person receiving from the System more or less than he would have
been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the Board of Trustees shall
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-18
correct such error as far as is practicable shall adjust the payment of the benefit in
such manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which such person was
correctly entitled shall be paid.
(Rev. 11-23-1964)
Subrogation.
12.2 In the event a person becomes entitled to a pension or other benefit payable by
the Retirement System as the result of an accident or injury caused by the act of a
third party, the City shall be subrogated to the rights of the said person against
such third party to the extent of the benefits to which the City pays or becomes
liable to pay.
Assignments Prohibited.
12.3 The right of a person to a pension, to the return of accumulated contributions, the
pension itself, any pension option, and any other right accrued or accruing to any
member, retirant or beneficiary, under the provisions of this Chapter, and all
moneys belonging to the Retirement System, shall not be subject to execution,
garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law, or any
other process of law whatsoever and shall be unassignable, except as is
specifically provided in this Chapter; provided, that if a member is covered by a
group insurance or repayment plan participated in by the City, and should be
permitted to, and elect to, continue such coverage as a retirant, he may authorize
the Board of Trustees to have deducted from his pension the payments required of
him to continue coverage under such group insurance or prepayment plan and he
may authorize the withholding of State and Federal taxes as provided by law;
provided further, that the City shall have the right of setoff for any claim arising
from embezzlement by or fraud of a member, retirant, or beneficiary.
(Rev. 10-01-1979)
Fraud Penalty.
51 Whoever with intent to deceive shall make any statement or report required under
this Chapter which is untrue, or shall falsify or permit to be falsified any record or
records of the Retirement System shall be subject to punishment as provided in
Chapter 1.
(Rev. 02-11-1991)
52. Pension Suspended. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, in the event a
retirant or beneficiary is employed or re-employed by the City in a position which
requires membership, payment of his pension shall be suspended during the
period of his employment or re-employment. Upon termination of such
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-19
employment or re-employment in a position which requires membership, his
pension shall be re-computed, and he shall receive the new re-computed pension
or his prior pension shall be resumed, whichever is the greater amount.
(Rev. 01-07-1985)
53. DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN (DCP)
The Employees Retirement System Board of Trustees are vested with the power
and authority to administer, manage and operate the Defined Contribution Plan,
and to construe and make effective the provisions of this Chapter
(Rev. 11-06-2000)
54. The following groups of Employees are eligible to participate in the Plan:
Classified & Exempt, AFSCME, MAP, TCOA, TFSOA, and TPOA.
(Rev. 08-20-2007)
55. Contribution Provisions.  The City shall contribute as follows:
The City shall contribute on behalf of each Participant (a)% of earnings for the
Plan Year. Each Participant is required to contribute (b)% of earnings for the
Plan Year as a condition of participation in the Plan. A Participant shall not have
the right to discontinue or vary the rate of such contributions after becoming a
Plan Participant.
(a)  Employer (b)  Employee
Classified & Exempt:
(Hired before 01/01/2004) 12% 4%
(Hired after 01/01/2004) 11% 4%
(Hired after 01/01/2005) 10% 4%
(Rev. 08-20-2007)
American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees
(AFSCME):
(Hired prior to 02/16/1998) 12% 4%
(Hired after 02/16/1998) 11% 5%
(Hired after 11/17/2003) 10% 5%
(Rev. 02-02-2004)
Michigan Association of Police (MAP):
(Hired prior to 12/21/1998) 12% 4%
(Hired after 12/21/1998) 11% 5%
(Hired after 02/07/2005) 10% 5%
(Rev. 08-20-2007)
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-20
Troy Fire Staff Officers Association (TFSOA):
(Hired prior to 07/01/1997) 13% 3%
(Hired after 07/01/1997) 11% 5%
(Hired after 07/01/2006) 10% 5%
(Rev. 08-20-2007)
Troy Police Officers Association (TPOA):
(Hired after0 2/15/2000) 11% 5%
(Hired after 10/17/2005) 10% 6%
(Rev. 08-20-2007)
Troy Command Officers Association (TCOA):
(Hired after 10/17/2005) 12% 4%
(Rev. 03-01-2004)
56. Voluntary Contributions.
Each Participant may make voluntary (unmatched), after-tax contributions,
subject to the limitations of Section 4.05 and Articles V and VI of the Plan.
(06-07-1999)
57. Vesting Provisions.
The City hereby specifies the following vesting schedule:
Each Participant who transfers from the Defined Benefit Plan shall be 100%
percent vested.
For all other Participants the following vesting schedule will apply:
Years of Completed
Service
Percent Vested
Three 50%
Four 75%
Five 100%
(06-07-1999)
58. Loan Provisions.
Loans are not permitted under the Plan.
(06-07-1999)
59. Disability Pension.
Chapter 10 - Employees Retirement System
10-21
Participants in the DCP shall also participate in a disability plan equivalent to the
defined benefit disability plan as set forth in the retirement ordinance. The Citys
liability for the disability benefit shall be offset by (1) an amount which may be
payable pursuant to the workers compensation act, if applicable, and (2) by the
lifetime annuity value of the employees 401 (a) defined contribution retirement
account, determined as of the effective date of the employees disability-related
separation from service.
Defined contributions shall include all contributions and income accumulated in
the plan account whether derived by the contributions made by the employee or
employer, including any amounts transferred into the plan. While the employee is
receiving disability benefits or is receiving workers compensation the City shall
contribute the employer rate as contained in the ordinance of the disabled
employees taxable wage for deposit in the DCP for the employees benefit.
(06-07-1999)
60. Non-Duty Death Provision.
Participants in the DCP shall also be covered in the event of death including nonduty
death with a benefit equivalent to the defined benefit plan as set forth in the
retirement ordinance. The Citys liability for a death benefit shall be off-set by (1)
an amount which may be payable pursuant to the workers compensation act, if
applicable, and (2) by the lifetime annuity value of the employees 401 (a)
defined contribution retirement account, determined as of the effective date of
the employees death.
(06-07-1999)
61. Voluntary Separation Incentive Program for Retirement.
In order to address significant budget short falls for the 2009 fiscal year, on
November 10, 2008, the Troy City Council approved a limited Voluntary
Separation Incentive Program for those employees eligible to retire as of
December 31, 2008 and who retire between January 1, 2009 and February 28,
2009. For those employees who satisfactorily complete all requirements for the
Voluntary Separation Incentive Program (City Council Resolution 2008-11-331),
the definition of credited service, as found in Section 1 (F) is modified to allow for
one week of additional credited service for each full year of the employees
service as of December 31, 2008, as well as a one time lump sum payment in
the amount of one week of 2008 base salary for each full year of the employees
service as of December 31, 2008. This lump sum payment is not included in the
employees Final Average Compensation, as defined in Section 1 (H).
(01-26-2009)
Chapter 11 - Personnel Board
11-1
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1.1 It is hereby declared personnel policy of the City that:
a) Employment in the City government shall be based on merit and qualifications, free of
personal and political considerations without regard to religion, race, color, national origin,
age, sex, marital status, height, weight, arrest record or disability.
b) City government shall promote efficiency and economy of operations.
c) Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and compensated on
a similar basis.
d) Appointments, promotions and other actions requiring the application of the merit principle
shall be based on systematic tests and evaluations.
e) The rights and interests of employees covered by this Chapter shall be fairly administered
in a manner consistent with the best interests of the public and the City.
f) Any individual whose employment is subject to the provisions of this Chapter may be
disciplined or discharged for misconduct or unsatisfactory work performance.
g) The Employment of any individual subject to this chapter is conditional upon the necessity
for the performance of work within the employee's classification and the availability of
funds.
1.2 The Personnel Board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Council. The members of
the Board shall be persons in sympathy with the application of merit principles to public
employment. No member of the Board shall be employed by or be an official of the City; nor shall
be a member of any local, state or national committee of a political party or an official or member
of a committee in any partisan political club or organization, nor shall hold or be a candidate for
any governmental elective office. The members of the Board shall serve for a term of three years.
Vacancies occurring during a term shall be filled for the balance of the term. Members of the
Board shall serve without compensation, but funds will be provided for reasonable and necessary
expenses. The Board shall elect its own chairman. The Council may remove any member of the
Board with five affirmative votes upon stating in writing the reasons for removal and allowing the
member an opportunity to be heard. Three members shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of
the Personnel Board.
1.3 In addition to the duties set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the Board shall:
a) Advise the City Manager on matters of personnel policy and problems of personnel
administration, including the personnel rules; job classification plan and pay plan as they
apply to Classified employees.
b) Represent the public interest in the improvement of personnel administration for Classified
employees in the City service.
Chapter 11 - Personnel Board
11-2
2. SCOPE OF CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM.
2.1 All offices and positions of the City are divided into the classified service and the exempt service.
2.2 The Classified service shall include the following classifications:
Accountant Legal Assistant
Legal Secretary
Administrative Aide Librarian I
Administrative Asst. to the City Manager
Appraiser Library Aide
Managers Office Secretary
Assistant Naturalist Museum Archivist
Building Inspector
Building Maint. Specialist
Office Coordinator
PC Specialist/Help Desk
Civilian Communications Supv. Plan Analyst
Community Affairs Officer
Cross Connection Inspector
Education Coordinator
Engineering Assistant
Engineering Technician Planning Technician
Project Manager (Engineering)
Field Supervisor
GIS Data Analyst Right-of-Way Representative
Inspector
Inspector Supervisor Secretary II
Insurance & Safety Coordinator
Inventory Control Assistant Survey Supervisor
Landscape Analyst
(Rev. 06-19-2006)
2.3 The Exempt service shall include the following:
a) Elected officials, members of boards and commissions
b) Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without pay.
c) Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional service.
d) Such positions involving seasonal or part-time employment, as may be specifically placed
in the exempt service by the personnel rules.
e) Positions in the City service that are represented by an exclusive bargaining
representative pursuant to the Public Employment Relations Act, MCLA 423.201 et seq.
f) Positions of City Manager and City Attorney which serve at the pleasure of City Council
pursuant to City Charter.
Chapter 11 - Personnel Board
11-3
g) All other employees in the City service that are not placed in the Classified service by this
Chapter and are not represented by an exclusive bargaining representative pursuant to
the Public Employment Relations Act, MCLA 423.201 et seq.
3. ADMINISTRATION.
3.1 The City Manager shall be responsible for the execution of the personnel program and all advice
and rulings of the Board in pursuance of this chapter.
3.2 The City Clerk shall serve as secretary to the Board.
3.3 The City Manager, with approval of City Council if required by City Charter, may contract with any
qualified person or agency for the performance of such technical services as may be desired in
establishment and operation of the personnel programs.
4. RULES.
4.1 The City Manager or designee shall draft such rules as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. These rules shall be submitted to the Board for review and approval.
Personnel rules approved or initiated by the Board shall be submitted for adoption by resolution of
the Council. The rules as adopted shall have the force and effect of law. All rules and
amendments thereto shall be made in accordance with the above procedure.
5. CLASSIFICATION.
5.1. The City Manager or designee shall make an analysis of the duties and responsibilities of all
positions in the classified service and he shall recommend to the Board a job classification plan.
Each position in the Classified service shall be assigned to a job class on the basis of the kind and
level of its duties and responsibilities, to the end that all positions in the same class shall be
sufficiently alike to permit use of a single description title, the same qualification requirements, the
same test of competence and same pay scale. A job class may contain one or more positions.
The classification plan, as reviewed and approved or initiated by the Board, shall be submitted for
adoption by resolution of the City Council.
5.2. The classification plan may be revised from time to time as required.
6. COMPENSATION.
6.1 The City Manager or designee shall prepare a Classified pay plan based upon accepted principles
of pay administration. The rate or range for each class shall be such as to reflect fairly the
differences in duties and responsibilities and shall be related to compensation for comparable
positions in other places of employment.
6.2 The City Manager shall submit the pay plan and rules for its administration to the Board for
approval. The Board may recommend that the City Council adopt the plan and the rules, with or
without amendment.
6.3 The pay plan may be amended from time to time as required, through adjustment of rates, by
reassignment of job classes to different pay ranges, or by the addition or deletion of job classes
by the City Manager.
Chapter 11 - Personnel Board
11-4
7. APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTIONS.
7.1 Original appointments to vacancies in the Classified service shall be based on merit as
determined by competitive examinations which may include prior training and experience.
7.2 Competitive examinations shall be in such form as will fairly test the job-related requirements for
the position being sought. Examinations may include written, oral, performance tests or any
combination of these.
7.3 Pending the approval of an eligible list based upon competitive examination, vacancies may be
filled by the City Manager by means of a temporary appointment. Temporary appointment will only
be as long as is necessary to establish an approved eligible list.
7.4 Priority of Eligible lists for purposes of filling a vacancy shall be: re-employment eligible lists,
promotional eligible lists and original appointment eligible lists.
7.5 Re-employment lists shall contain the names of regular full-time employees laid off in good
standing for lack of funds or work and the position from which they have been laid off. An
employee on a re-employment eligible list shall only be able to fill a vacancy in a classification
formerly held by the employee or a similar classification at a lower level that the employee is
qualified to perform.
7.6 Employees who have not completed the initial review period and are (1) laid off for lack of work or
lack of funds, or (2) who resign and whose resignations are withdrawn within one year, upon
application and with the approval of the Department Head and the City Manager, shall have their
names restored to the eligible list from which appointment was originally made.
(Rev. 06-19-2006)
7.7 Candidates who qualify for original appointment or promotion eligible lists shall be placed on the
appropriate eligible list for the classification in the rank order of the composite scores they
obtained on the competitive examination, including prior training and experience.
7.8 When an appointment is to be made to a vacancy, the City Manager shall appoint from the three
persons ranked highest on the appropriate list (or lists, when applicable), who have indicated
willingness, to accept appointment. When more than one vacancy is to be filled the number of
names submitted shall not exceed the number of vacancies plus two.
7.9 An advancement in rank, grade, or to a salary range beyond the limits defined in the rules for the
administration of the pay plan for the incumbent's current position shall constitute a promotion.
7.10 In preparation of a promotional eligible list, consideration shall be given to the qualifications of a
candidate, including training and experience, and the individual's record of performance.
7.11 Vacancies in positions above the entrance level shall be filled by promotion rather than original
appointment except when in the judgment of the City Manager it is not in the best interests of the
City to do so.
7.12 Policies and procedures for administering eligible lists shall be provided in the personnel rules
covering the duration, cancellation, replacement and consolidation of such lists, and the removal
or suspension of the names of eligibles therefrom.
Chapter 11 - Personnel Board
11-5
8. RECORDS.
8.1 The City Clerk shall maintain adequate records of the proceedings of the Board.
8.2 The Human Resources Department shall maintain the examination record of every candidate for
one (1) year, and shall maintain the employment record of every employee for a period of five (5)
years after separation of employment with the City.
(Rev. 06-19-2006)
9. INVESTIGATIONS, HEARINGS.
9.1 During the course of any investigation or hearing the Board or the City Manager may direct any
employee of the City to attend and give witness. Any employee refusing to do so may be subject
to disciplinary action.
9.2 The Board shall have power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the
production thereby of records, books and papers pertinent to the investigations and hearings.
10. GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
10.1 Employees in the Classified service shall be selected on merit and qualifications without regard to
political considerations, shall not be required to contribute to any political purpose and shall not
engage in improper political activity. The rules shall define the scope of improper political activity.
10.2 There shall be no discrimination against any qualified person seeking employment or employed in
the classified service because of any considerations of political or religious affiliation or belief,
race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status, height, weight, arrest record or disability.
11. TERMINATION APPEAL.
11.1 Any member of the Classified service, who is being considered for discharge shall be provided
prior written notice of the reasons for the possible disciplinary action and an opportunity to
respond to or discuss the contemplated action with the decision-maker prior to a final decision
being made. If the employee is discharged, the employee shall be entitled to appeal the discharge
to the Personnel Board as set forth below.
11.2 A discharged employee is entitled to appeal the discharge to the Personnel Board by filing a
written notice of appeal no later than ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice of discharge.
Said notice shall be filed with the City Clerk who is Secretary of the Board. Upon receipt of a
notice of appeal, the Secretary of the Personnel Board shall schedule a hearing before the
Personnel Board within thirty (30) calendar days. At the hearing, the discharged employee shall
be entitled to present evidence and testimony on his or her behalf and to question the witnesses
called in support of the discharge. The employee and the City may retain a representative for the
hearing. A record of the hearing may be kept at the request of the employee or the City.
11.3 The Personnel Board shall then review the evidence presented at the hearing and, within thirty
(30) days after the close of the hearing, render a written determination. The authority of the
Personnel Board shall be limited to determining whether the discharge was arbitrary or capricious.
The determination of the Personnel Board shall be final and binding on both the employee on both
the employee and the City and shall constitute the sole and exclusive remedy for the employee.
Chapter 11 - Personnel Board
11-6
11.4 At any hearing held subject to this appeal procedure, no member of the Personnel Board shall
serve if he or she has been involved in the process leading to the discharge of the employee. In
addition, the employee shall be entitled to challenge any member of the Personnel Board for bias
or prejudice by providing the Personnel Board written notice of such claim prior to or at the
hearing scheduled as set forth above.
Chapter 12 - Historical Commission
12-1
Chapter 12 Historical Commission of the Code of the City of Troy is deleted by the Council of the City of
Troy, Oakland County Michigan, at a Regular Meeting of the City Council held at City Hall, 500 W. Big
Beaver, Troy, MI on the 3rd day of October, 2011 and is effective October 13, 2011.
(10-03-2011)
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-1
1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to 1) safeguard the heritage of the City of Troy by preserving
historic resources in the City which reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, political
and architectural history; (2) stabilize and improve property values; 3) foster civic beauty; 4)
strengthen the local economy; 5) promote the use of historic resources for the education,
pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the City.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
2. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
A. ALTERATION: Work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its
basic size or shape.
B. CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA): Written approval of a permit
application to apply for a building permit if required, for work that is determined to be
appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource.
C. COMMISSION: The historic district commission which is responsible for implementing
Public Act 169 of 1970 as amended and the citys historic preservation ordinance for
the City of Troy.
D. COMMITTEE: A historic district study committee appointed by the city council.
E. DEMOLITION: razing a resource, whether entirely or in part, which may include, but is
not limited to demolition by neglect.
F. DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT: Neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource
that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural
integrity of the resource.
G. FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: A system designed to detect and annunciate the presence of
fire or byproducts of fire. Fire alarm system includes smoke alarms.
(12/22/2005)
H. HISTORIC DISTRICT: In accordance with Act 169, Public Acts of 1970, the term
"Historic District" shall mean an area or group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, created by the City for the purposes of this Chapter. This shall
include any historical or cultural site or structure (including significant trees or other
plant life located thereon) of particular historic or cultural significance to the City of Troy,
the State of Michigan, or the U.S.A., where cultural, political, spiritual, economic or
social history of the community, state or nation is reflected or exemplified with historic
personages or with important events in local, state, or national history, or which embody
the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural specimen, inherently valuable for a
representation of a period, or style or method of construction, or a notable work of
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-2
construction, or a notable work of a master designer or architect whose individual
genius influenced his age.
I. HISTORIC LANDMARK: Any structure, site, object, feature, or open space that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this city,
state, or of the United States. A landmark is a historic district as defined in this section
which contains only one (1) resource.
J. HISTORIC RESOURCE: A structure, site, object, feature, or open space that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this city,
state, or of the United States.
K. NOTICE TO PROCEED: Authorization to perform work that does not qualify for a COA
but may legally be accomplished following criteria set forth in this ordinance.
L. OPEN SPACE: Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or manmade
landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between other
resources.
M. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE: Keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition
through ongoing minor intervention to the exterior of a resource. Ordinary maintenance
does not change the exterior appearance of the resource except through the elimination
of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not
constitute work for purposes of this act.
N. PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area or group of areas, not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a
committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to
whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an established historic
district.
O. REPAIR: To restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by
any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes
an alteration for purposes of this act.
P. RESOURCE: A building, structure, site, object, feature or open space located within a
historic district, or described as a historic landmark.
Q. SMOKE ALARM: A single-station or multiple-station alarm responsive to smoke and
not connected to a system. As used in this ordinance single-station alarm means an
assembly incorporating a detector, the control equipment, and the alarm sounding
device into a single unit, operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at
the point of installation. Multiple-station alarm means two or more single-station
alarms that are capable of interconnection such that actuation of one alarm causes all
integrated separate audible alarms to operate.
(12/22/2005)
R. WORK: Construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or demolition.
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-3
(Renumbered 12/22/2005)
3. REGULATION OF RESOURCES AND ESTABLISHED HISTORIC DISTRICTS
A. There shall be no construction, alteration, repair, moving or demolition of the exterior
features of a Historic Resource unless a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to
proceed is issued in accordance with this chapter. The following Historic Districts are
hereby established.
Troy Union Cemetery, 1199 E. Square Lake (Tax ID: 88-20-02-301-009) T2N,
R11E, SEC 2, PART OF SW  OF SW  BEG AT PT DIST S 89-44-00 E 750
FT FROM SW COR SEC 2, TH S 89-44-00 E 573.57 FT, TH N 00-24-30 W
446.10 FT, TH N 88-46-00 W 365.25 FT, TH S 40-53-00 W 133.60 FT, TH S 89-
27-30 W 29.8 FT, TH S 14-06-00 W 360.89 FT TO BEG 4.66 A
6890 Norton (Tax ID: 88-20-03-226-033) T2N, R11E, SEC 3 PART OF NE 
BEG AT PT DIST S 01-15-30 E 809.30 FT & S 88-59-30 W 276.15 FT FROM N
1/8 COR, TH S 88-59-30 W 250 FT, TH N 01-35-15 W 136.63 FT, TH N 88-59-
30 E 250 FT, TH S 01-35-15 E 136.63 FT TO BEG 0.78 A
770 W. Square Lake (Tax ID: 88-20-04-354-011) T2N, R11E, SEC 4 PART OF
SW  BEG AT PT DIST N 00-17-56 E 259.88 FT & S 89-45-00 E 160 FT & S
79-23-48 E 273.17 FT & S 69-02-36 E 300 FT & S 79-29-59 E 232.30 FT & S 89-
57-22 E 136.66 FT FROM SW SEC COR, T N 00-12-04 E 226.40 FT, TH N 73-
29-54 E 14.90 FT TH ALG CURVE TO RIGHT, RAD 60 FT, CHORD BEARS N
86-20-14 E 26.67 FT, DIST OF 26.89 FT, TH ALG CURVE TO LEFT, RAD 60
FT, CHORD BEARS N 74-27-32 E 50.18 FT, DIST OF 51.77 FT, TH S 40-15-30
E 40.45 FT, TH S 89-57-22 E 9.96 FT, TH S 00-06-01 W 215 FT, TH N 89-59-22
W 125.75 FT, TO BEG 0.67 A5-3-90 FR 008
330 W. Square Lake (Tax ID: 88-20-04-451-029) T2N, R11E, SEC 4 E 169.92
FT of W 856.08 FT OF S 300 FT OF SE , EXC S 60 FT TAKEN FOR RD
0.941A 2-6-93 FR 025
6091 Livernois (Tax ID: 88-20-04-478-013) T2N, R11E, SEC 4 TROY ACRES S
70 FT OF LOT 1
6071 Livernois (Tax ID: 88-20-04-478-017) T2N, R11E, SEC 3, 4, 9, & 10
SUPERVISORS PLAT NO. 7 LOT 1 EXC E 27 FT TAKEN FOR RD 6-11-96
CORR
6059 Livernois (Tax ID: 88-20-04-478-018) T2N, R11E, SEC 3, 4, 9 & 10,
SUPERVISORS PLAT NO. 7 LOT 2
90 West Square Lake (Tax ID: 88-20-04-478-022) T2N, R11E, SEC 4, TROY
ACRES NO. 1 SLY 150 FT OF LOT 20 EXC BEG AT SW LOT COR, TH N 89-
30-00 E 93 FT, TH N 41 FT, TH S 88-15-21 W 93.04 FT, TH S 38.98 FT TO BEG
6-13-96 CORR
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-4
Former Stone School, 3995 South Boulevard (Tax ID: 88-20-06-101-001) T2N,
R11E, SEC 6 W 165 FT OF N 264 FT OF NW FRC  EXC PART TAKEN FOR
HWY DESC AS BEG AT NW SEC COR, TH ELY 91 FT ALG SEC LINE, TH
SWLY TO PT IN W SEC LINE DIST OF 91 FT SLY FROM BEG, TH NLY 91 FT
ALG SEC LINE TO BEG 0.90 A
Beach Road Cemetery (Tax ID: 88-20-07-451-001) T2N, R11E, SEC 7 N 147
FT OF 167 FT OF SW  OF SE  0.57A
46 East Square Lake Road (Tax ID: 88-20-10-101-002) T2N, R11E, SEC 3, 4, 9
& 10 SUPERVISORS PLAAT NO. 7, PART OF LOT 26 BEG AT NW COR, T S
89-43-00 E 1.32 FT ALG N LOT LINE, TH S TO PT ON S LOT LINE 6 FT E OF
SW LOT COR, TH S 89-15-00 W 6 FT ALG S LOT LINE, TH NLY 116.30 FT TO
BEG, ALSO ALL OF LOT 27
54 East Square Lake Road (Tax ID: 88-20-10-101-003) T2N, R11E, SEC 3, 4, 9
& 10 SUPERVISORS PLAT NO. 7 LOT 26 EXC BEG AT NW LOT COR, TH S
89-43-00 E 1.32 FT ALG N LOT LINE, TH S TO PT ON S LOT LINE 6 FT E OF
SW LOT COR, TH S 89-15-00 W 6 FT ALG S LOT LINE, TH NLY 116.30 FT
ALG W LOT LINE TO BEG
90 East Square Lake Road and 110 East Square Lake Road (Tax ID 88-20-10-
101-004) T2N, R11E, SEC 3, 4, 9, & 10 SUPERVISORS PLAT NO. 7 LOT 25
126 East Square Lake Road (Tax ID: 88-20-10-101-005) T2N, R11E, SEC 3, 4,
9, & 10 SUPERVISORS PLAT NO. 7 LOT 24
138 East Square Lake Road (Tax ID: 88-20-10-101-006) T2N, R11E, SEC 3, 4,
9, & 10 SUPERVISORS PLAT NO. 7 LOT 23
160 East Square Lake Road (Tax ID: 88-20-10-101-043) T2N, R11E, SEC 10
PART OF NW  BEG AT PT DIST N 00-14-00 W 33 FT FROM NE COR OF
LOT 23 OF SUPERVISORS PLAT NO 7, TH S 89-43-00 E 145 FT, TH S 00-14-
00 E 300 FT, TH N 89-43-00 W 145 FT, TH N 00-14-00 W 300 FT TO BEG 1 A
101 East Square Lake Road (Tax ID: 88-20-03-301-077) T2N, R11E, SEC 3,
SUPERVISORS PLAT NO. 7 E 30 FT OF LOT 20 EXC S 41 FT TAKEN FOR
RD, ALSO LOT 21 EXC S 41 FT TAKEN FOR RD, ALSO N 73.43 FT OF LOT 22
Sylvan Glen Clubhouse, 5725 Rochester Road (Tax ID: 88-20-10-200-001)
T2N, R11E, SEC 10 NE /4 160 A
5871 Hilmore (Tax ID: 88-20-11-103-014) T2N, R11E, SEC 11 PART OF NW 
BEG AT PT DIST S 01-33-00 E 833 FT FROM NE COR OF W  OF NW , TH
S 88-55-00 W 330 FT, TH S 01-33-00 E 200 FT, TH N 88-55-00 E 330 FT, TH N
01-33-00 W 200 FT TO BEG 1.55 A
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-5
Hill House, 4320 John R (Tax ID: 88-20-13-303-014) T2N, R11E, SEC 13 PART
OF SW  BEG AT PT DIST N 00-49-43 E 1544.71 FT FROM SW SEC COR, TH
S 89-10-17 E 220 FT, TH N 00-49-43 E 200 FT, TH N 89-10-17 W 220 FT, TH S
00-49-43 W 200 FT TO BEG EXC W 50 FT TAKEN FOR RD 0.77 A
Emerson Church  Unitarian Universalist, 4320 Livernois (Tax ID: 88-20-15-
351-002) T2N, R11E, SEC 15 & 16 MC CORMICK & LAWRENCE LITTLE
FARMS SUB LOTS 46 & 47 EXC W 27 FT TAKEN FOR RD, ALSO ALL OF LOT
48, ALSO W 85.58 FT OF LOT 49
Troy Museum & Historic Village - Caswell House, Poppleton School, Old
City Hall, Old Troy Church and Parsonage, Log Cabin and Wagon Shop 60
W. Wattles (Tax ID: 88-20-16-478-033) T2N, R11E, SEC 16 LAKEWOOD SUB
LOT 89 TO 92 INCL, ALSO LOTS 131 TO 134 INCL EXC S 27 FT TAKEN FOR
RD, ALSO N 30.75 FT OF LOT 138, ALSO LOTS 139 TO 142 INCL, EXC E 27
FT TAKEN FOR LIVERNOIS RD, and 100 W WATTLES (Tax ID 88-20-16-478-
027) T2N, R11E, SEC 16 LAKEWOOD SUB LOT 130 EXC S 20 FT TAKEN FOR
WATTLES RD., and 109 LANGE (Tax ID: 88-20-16-478-026) T2N, R11E, SEC
16 LAKEWOOD SUB LOT 93.
(Corrected: 12/07/2009)
Crooks Road Cemetery (Tax ID: 88-20-20-226-022) T2N, R11E, SEC 20 PART
OF NE  BEG AT PT DIST N 00-43-30 E 1101.84 FT FROM E  COR, TH N
88-08-30 W 310.03 FT, TH ALG CURVE TO RIGHT, RAD 100 FT, CHORD
BEARS N 43-08-30 W 141.42 FT, DIST OF 157.08 FT, TH N 01-51-30 E 180 FT,
TH ALONG CURVE TO LEFT, RAD 180 FT, CHORD BEARS N 43-08-30 W
254.56 FT, DIST OF 282.74 FT, TH N 01-51-30 E 179.31 FT, TH S 87-06-30 E
577.09 FT, TH S 00-43-30 E 629.54 FT TO BEG 6.71 A
3864 Livernois (Part of Tax ID: 88-20-22-101-005) Part of the NW  of Sec. 22,
T.2N R11E, City of Troy, Oakland County, Michigan beginning at the point which
is N 002025 E 1771.60 ft. Along the West line of Sec. 22 from the West 
corner of Sec. 22, T2N R11E; thence, continuing along the West line of Sec. 22
N 002025 E 330.00 ft.; thence S 892555 E 225.00 ft.; thence S 002025 W
330.00 ft.; thence N 892555 W 225 ft. to the point of beginning. Containing
74,247 square feet  1.705 acres, and subject to an easement over the North 30
ft. for ingress and egress and public utilities.
(Rev. 12/22/05)
36551 Dequindre (Tax ID: 88-20-25-230-032) T2N, R11E, SEC 25 PART OF
NW  BEG AT PT DIST S 00-00-08 E 1028.22 FT & S 89-23-59 W 60 FT FROM
NE SEC COR, TH S 00-00-08 E 300 FT, TH S 89-23-59 W 245 FT, TH N 00-00-
08 W 300 FT, TH N 89-23-59 E 245 FT TO BEG 1.69 A
1934 Livernois (Tax ID: 88-20-27-351-016) T2N, R11E, SEC 27 ADDISON
HEIGHTS SUB N 81 FT OF W 108 FT OF LOT 53
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-6
Perrin Cemetery (Coolidge) (Tax ID: 88-20-32-152-002) T2N, R11E, SEC 32
PART OF W  BEG AT W  COR, TH N 00-03-00 E 165 FT, TH E 140 FT, TH
S 00-03-00 W 165 FT, TH S 88-44-30 E 25 FT, TH S 01-06-30 W 67.5 FT, TH N
88-31-00 W 165 FT, TH N 00-03-00 E 66 FT TO BEG 0.78
(Revised 10/08/2018; Effective 10-25-2018)
B. Except as provided in subsection C, all of the Historic Districts established as of July
21, 2003 shall be exempt from the requirements and provisions of Section 14 of this
Chapter entitled Establishment, Modification or Elimination of a Historic District. Such
exempt Historic Districts shall not be within the purview of any Historic District Study
Committee and shall remain under the sole jurisdiction of the Historic District
Commission, except to the extent otherwise provided in Section 5 of this Chapter for
the Historic Districts included in the Troy Museum and Historic Village.
C. A person or entity that owns a resource within a Historic District established as of July
21, 2003, may submit a request to the Commission to modify or eliminate such Historic
District. In such cases, the Historic District may only be eliminated or modified in
accordance with Section 14.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
4. HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
A. Creation of Commission: In order to execute the purposes of this section, there is
hereby created a Commission to be called the Historic District Commission.
B. Membership of Commission: The Historic District Commission shall consist of seven
(7) members whose residence is located in the City of Troy. The majority of the
members will have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic
preservation. The Commission shall include at least two (2) people chosen from a list
submitted by a duly organized history group or groups, and, if available, one (1)
architect duly registered in the State of Michigan. They shall be appointed by the City
Council for terms of office of three (3) years. All members shall hold office until their
successors are appointed. Members of the Commission may be reappointed after their
terms expire. A vacancy occurring in the membership of the Commission for any cause
shall be filled by a person appointed by the City Council for the unexpired term. The
members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Rev. 12/22/2005)
5. DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION
The Commission shall have all powers and duties authorized by Public Act 169 of 1970, as
amended, MCL 399.201, et seq. including but not limited to the following:
A. The Commission shall have authority to conduct an ongoing survey to identify
historically and architecturally significant, properties, structures and areas that
exemplify the cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural history of the nation,
state or city. The Commission may use the Michigan Historical Site Survey form as a
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-7
guide, and accept the work of interested volunteers. Such Site Surveys should be kept
as a part of the permanent records of the Commission, at a place designated by the
Commission.
B. It shall be the duty of this Commission to review all applications for permits required by
City ordinance concerning construction, alteration, repair, moving or demolition of the
exterior features of a historic resource. Plans for any work in the historic resources
comprising the Troy Museum and Historic Village may be submitted based on a threeyear
plan based on Department of Interior Preservation briefs but without detailed
specifications. For purposes of this Chapter, the historic resources of the Troy Museum
and Historic Village shall include, but are not limited to, those Historic Districts
established in Section 3 of this Chapter and listed as Old City Hall, Caswell House,
Poppleton School, Old Troy Church, and Parsonage. It is the intent of this section that
the Commission shall be lenient in its judgment of plans for a new construction or for
alteration or demolition of historic resources of little historic value, except where such
construction, alteration or demolition would seriously impair the historic value and
character of the resource and the surrounding resources and area. A permit shall not
be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the Commission has acted on the
application by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed.
In reviewing the plans, the Commission shall follow the United States Secretary of the
Interiors standards for rehabilitating historic buildings as set forth in 36 CFR part 67.
Design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of
historic districts administered by the Commission may be followed if they are equivalent
in guidance to the Secretary of Interiors standards and guidelines and are established
or approved by the Michigan Department of History, Arts, and Libraries. The
Commission shall also consider the following:
1. The historical or architectural value and significance of the resource and its
relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area;
2. The relationship of the exterior architectural features of the resource to the rest
of the resource and to the surrounding area;
3. The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement, texture and materials
proposed to be used;
4. Any other factor, including aesthetic, which it deems to be pertinent.
The Commission shall review and act upon exterior features of a historic resource and
shall not consider interior arrangement, unless interior work will cause visible change to
the exterior of the resource. The Commission shall not disapprove an application due to
considerations not set forth above.
C. In those situations where the Commission finds the proposed work adversely affects
the exterior of a resource the Commission considers valuable to the city, state or nation,
and the Commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will
adversely affect the public purpose of the city, state or nation, the Commission shall
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-8
attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for
preservation of the resource.
D. Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a notice to
proceed by the Commission if any of the following conditions prevail and if the
proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the Commission to be necessary to
substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions:
1. The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the structures
occupants.
2. The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of
substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has
obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing, and
environmental clearances.
3. Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a
governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owners control
created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial
hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value
or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been
attempted and exhausted by the owner.
4. Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community.
E. The Commission may recommend to the City Council certain incentive programs to
encourage preservation of landmark buildings in the City.
F. The Commission may accept, in the name of the City of Troy, any grant, loan or aid of
any character from Federal, State or private sources, to be expended for the purposes
contemplated by this chapter, including, but not limited to the making of surveys of
historical structures and/or sites, and the acquisition, restoration and possible resale of
properties of historical or architectural significance. Such funds shall be administered in
accordance with the Charter of the City of Troy, but a separate accounting shall be
made of them and a copy of such accounting given to the Commission at least
quarterly.
G. Budget: There may be appropriated in the annual budget of the City of Troy a sum of
money which may be expended and accounted for in accordance with the Troy City
Charter and the Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act of the State of Michigan.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
6. RULES OF THE COMMISSION
A. The Commission shall elect from its membership a Chair, Vice- Chair and Secretary at
the first meeting each year. The Chair shall preside over the Commission and have the
right to vote. The Vice-Chair shall perform the duties of the Chair in his or her absence.
The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of the proceedings of the Commission.
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-9
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
B. The Commission should meet at least quarterly, and at the call of the Chair, Secretary,
or two (2) members of the Commission, if matters are referred to it by the Planning
Director.
(Rev. 10/03/2011)
C. At least four (4) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of its business. The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its
business which shall provide for the time and place of holding meetings. All meetings of
the Commission shall be open to the public, and any person or his or her duly
constituted representative shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter
before the Commission before it reaches its decision.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
D. The Commission shall keep a record, which shall be open to public view, of its
resolutions, proceedings and actions. The concurring affirmative vote of four (4)
members shall constitute approval of plans before it for review, or for the adoption of
any resolution, motion or other action of the Commission. The Commission shall submit
an annual report of its activities to the City Council.
(Rev. 09/25/1978)
7. PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF PLANS
A. Application for a building permit to construct, alter, move or demolish any resource in a
Historic District shall be made to the Building Official. Plans shall be submitted showing
the resource in question and also showing its relation to adjacent resources.
(10/03/2011)
B. Upon the filing of such application, the Building Official or his or her representative shall
immediately notify the Planning Director of the receipt of such application and shall
transmit it together with accompanying plans and other information to the Commission.
(10/03/2011)
C. The Commission shall review the plans according to the duties and powers specified
herein. In reviewing the plans, the Commission may confer with the applicant for the
building permit, and with the Building Official and/or Planning Director.
(10/03/2011)
D. The Commission shall approve or disapprove such plans, and, if approved, shall issue
a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed, which is to be signed by the
Chair or Vice- Chair, attached to the application for a building permit and immediately
transmitted to the Building Official. The Chair shall also stamp all plans submitted to the
Commission signifying its approval or disapproval.
(10/03/2011)
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-10
E. If the Commission disapproves of such plans, it shall state its reasons for doing so and
shall transmit a record of such action and reasons therefore in writing to the Building
Official and to the applicant. The Commission shall advise what it thinks is proper if it
disapproves of the plans submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make
modifications to the plans and shall have the right to resubmit the application at any
time after so doing.
If the requested permit is denied by the Commission, the Building Official shall
disapprove the application.
(10/03/2011)
F. The failure of the Commission to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove of such
plans within sixty (60) days from the date of application for the building permit, unless
otherwise mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Commission, shall be deemed
to constitute approval and the Planning Director shall proceed to process the
application without regard to a certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed from
the Commission.
(10/03/2011
G. After a building permit is granted, the Building Official or his or her representative shall
inspect the construction or alteration in accordance with the procedures established by
the Building Department of the City of Troy.
(10/03/2011)
I. If the Commission grants a permit for demolition, it may notify the City Manager so that
City Administration may consult with the owner about obtaining anything of historical
significance from the property.
(10/03/2011)
J. If an applicant seeks immediate approval to alter, repair, move or demolish a resource
to prevent an imminent hazard to the safety of the public or a structures occupants, the
Chair of the Commission shall call a special meeting as early as possible, in compliance
with the Open Meetings Act, to make a decision on the applicants request.
K. Upon a finding by the commission that a historic resource within an historic district,
subject to its review and approval, is threatened by demolition by neglect, the
commission may do either of the following:
1. The commission may require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions
contributing to the demolition by neglect.
2. If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the commission or
agents may enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to
prevent demolition by neglect. The cost of the work shall be charged to the
owner and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the
property. The commission or its agents may enter the property for purposes of
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-11
this section upon obtaining an order from the circuit court.
L. The Historic District Commission shall not issue a certificate of appropriateness or
notice to proceed unless an applicant certifies in the application that the property where
the work will be undertaken has, or will have before the proposed project completion
date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the
State Construction Code Act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. as amended.
(Rev. & Renumbered: 12/22/2005)
8. DEMOLITION OR MOVING HISTORIC RESOURCES
The demolition or moving of resources located in Historic Districts shall be discouraged. The
Commission shall not approve demolition except when deemed a hazard to public health or
safety by a responsible public agency, but may issue a certificate of appropriateness for
moving said resource.
The Commission may issue a certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed for the
moving or demolition of any resource. An application for the moving or demolition of a
resource shall be approved by the Commission if any of the following conditions prevail, and if
in the opinion of the Commission the proposed work will materially improve or correct these
conditions:
1. The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program which will be of substantial
benefit to the community;
2. Retention of the resource would cause undue financial hardship to the owner; or
3. Retention of the resource would not be in the interest of the majority of the community.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
9. PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT
Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic architectural,
archeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the City
Council may, at its discretion, adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for permits
within the proposed historic district be referred to the Historic District Commission for review
as provided in this ordinance. The Historic District Commission shall review permit applications
with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic district were an established
historic district. The review may continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one
year, or until such time as the City Council approves or rejects the establishment of the historic
district by ordinance, whichever occurs first.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
10. EMERGENCY MORATORIUM
If the City Council determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to resources
located within an established historic district, City Council may, by resolution, declare an
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-12
emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six months. The City
Council may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six
months upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any
pending permanent application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium
may be summarily denied.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
11. YARD VARIANCES
Due to peculiar conditions of design and construction in Historic Districts, where structures
were often built close to the lot lines, it is in the public interest to retain the District's
appearance by making variances to normal yard requirements. Where it is deemed that such
variances will not adversely affect neighboring properties, the Commission may recommend to
the Zoning Board of Appeals that such variance to standard yard requirements be granted.
(Rev. 10/03/2011)
12. EXCEPTIONS
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance, repair or sale of
any resource within an historic district. Nor shall anything in this chapter be construed to alter,
amend or delete provisions of other Troy City ordinances, or the Troy City Charter pertaining
to the administration, control, or ownership of property owned by the City of Troy.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
13. APPEALS
An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission concerning a permit application may file
an appeal with the state historic preservation review board of the Michigan Historical
Commission. The appeal shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the decision is furnished to the
applicant. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the historic preservation review board
may appeal the decision to the circuit court. Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation
organization in the city, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved by a
decision of the historic district commission concerning a matter other than a permit application,
may appeal the decision to the circuit court.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
14. ESTABLISHMENT, MODIFICATION OR ELIMINATION OF A HISTORIC DISTRICT
A. Establishment of Historic District Study Committee
Before establishing, modifying or eliminating any Historic District, City Council shall
appoint a Historic District Study Committee. The Committee shall contain a majority of
persons who have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic
preservation, and shall consist of at least one (1) member of the Historic District
Commission and shall contain representation from at least one other duly organized local
historic preservation organization. The study committee shall be an ad hoc committee
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-13
established to consider the establishment, modification or elimination of historic districts in
specified areas as determined by City Council and then be dissolved.
B. Duties of the Historic District Study Committee
1. The Historic District Study Committee shall do all of the following:
a. Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed
historic district, following procedures established or approved by the
Michigan Department of History, Arts, and Libraries.
b. Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the historic
resources located within that District;
c. Determine the total number of historic and non-historic resources within a
proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of that
total. In evaluating the significance of the historic resources, the Committee
shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the
Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the National Register of
Historic Places, as set forth in 36 CFR part 60.
d. Prepare a preliminary Historic District Study Committee report that
addresses at a minimum all of the following:
i. The charge of the Committee;
ii. The composition of the Committee membership;
iii. The historic district or districts studied;
iv. The boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing and on
maps;
v. The history of each proposed historic district;
vi. The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient
number of individual resources to fully represent the variety of
resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria.
e. Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review to City Council, the
Planning Commission, the Historic District Commission, the Michigan
Department of History, Arts and Libraries, the Michigan Historical
Commission and the State Historic Preservation Review Board.
f. Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public.
2. The City Council may prescribe the time for preparation and transmittal of the
preliminary report if the Council deems it in the public interest to do so.
3. Not less than sixty (60) calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report,
the Study Committee shall hold a public hearing. Public notice of the time, date,
and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by the Open
Meetings Act, 1976 PA 267, MCL 15.261, et seq. Written notice shall be mailed by
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-14
first class mail not less than fourteen (14) calendar days before the hearing to the
owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of
the City of Troy.
4. The Committee shall have no other powers, express or implied, beyond those
listed in this section, except as may be otherwise expressly authorized by
ordinance or resolution of City Council.
C. Actions to be Taken by the Historic District Study Committee and City Council
After the date of the public hearing, the Historic District Study Committee and City Council
shall take the following actions:
1. The Committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its recommendation
and the recommendation, if any, of the Planning Commission to the City Council. If
the recommendation is to establish, modify or eliminate a historic district or
districts, the final report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance or
ordinances.
2. After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment, modification or
elimination of a historic district or districts, the City Council, at its discretion, may
introduce and pass or reject an ordinance or ordinances establishing, modifying or
eliminating one or more historic districts. If the City Council passes an ordinance or
ordinances establishing, modifying or eliminating one or more historic districts, City
Council shall file a copy of that ordinance or ordinances, including a legal
description of the property or properties located within the historic district or
districts, with the Register of Deeds. City Council shall not pass an ordinance
establishing a contiguous historic district less than sixty days after a majority of the
property owners within the proposed historic district, as listed on the City tax rolls,
have approved the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a written
petition.
3. At any time after expiration of the time limits set in or prescribed by City Council
pursuant to this section for the Historic District Study Committee to act, the City
Council may, in its discretion, proceed to introduce and pass or reject an ordinance
as described in the immediately preceding paragraph 2.
D. Elimination of Districts
If considering elimination of a historic district, the Committee shall follow the procedures
set forth for issuing a preliminary report, holding a public hearing and issuing a final
report, but with the intent of showing one or more of the following:
1. The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled
establishment of the district.
2. The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined.
3. The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures.
Chapter 13 - Historic Preservation
13-15
E. Availability
All writings prepared, owned, used, in possession of or retained by the Committee in the
performance of any official function shall be made available to the public.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
15. ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS
A. After issuance of a certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed or if a violation of
this article is suspected, the citys designated representative may from time to time
inspect the exterior of properties covered by this article.
B. The enforcement of this ordinance shall be the responsibility of this Historic District
Commission, in conjunction with the Planning Director. A person, individual, partnership,
firm, corporation, organization, institution or agency of government that violates this act is
responsible for committing a Municipal Civil Infraction subject to the provisions of Chapter
100 of the Code for the City of Troy. Each day a violation continues is a separate
Municipal Civil Infraction Violation. Sanctions for violation shall include a fine of not more
than $500, costs, damages and injunctive orders as authorized by Chapter 100.
(Rev. 10/03/2011)
C. A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of
government that violates this act may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore
or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved,
excavated, or demolished.
(Rev. 11/17/2003)
Chapter 14 - Officer and Employee Public Disclosure Enforcement
14-1
A. PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a procedure for the enforcement of the
provisions of Section 6.4 and 6.12(f) of the Charter.
B. APPLICATION. This Chapter shall be specifically applicable to the Mayor and to members of the
City Council, candidates for the office of Mayor and for City Council, all members of the City Plan
Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, and the Liquor Committee, and all candidates for
appointment by the City Council to the City Plan Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals and
the Liquor Committee, the City Attorney, the City Manager, all department heads and inspectors
employed by the City; the above-named parties shall for purposes of this Chapter be referred to
as "officers or employees" of the City of Troy; the provisions of this Chapter are intended to be
construed so as to be consistent with Section 6.4 and 6.12 of the Charter.
C. CANDIDATES FAILURE TO FILE FULL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT, DISQUALIFICATION.
1. Any candidate for the office of Mayor or City Council who shall fail to file a full disclosure
statement containing the information set forth in Section 6.12(f) subparagraphs 1 through
4 inclusive prior to expiration of time allowed for completing all other acts necessary to
have his name placed on the ballot, shall be ineligible to have his name placed upon said
ballot.
2. Any candidate and/or applicant whose name is under consideration for appointment to the
City Plan Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals and the Liquor Committee, the City
Attorney, the City Manager, all department head positions and inspector positions who
shall fail to file a full disclosure statement containing the information set forth in Section
6.12(f), subparagraphs 1 through 4, inclusive, shall be ineligible for consideration for such
positions by the City Council and/or those delegated with such appointive power.
(Rev. 09-25-78)
D. OFFICERS FAILURE TO FILE FULL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT, REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
1. Definition. The term officer shall apply to the following positions: Mayor, City Councilman,
all other Municipal elective offices, City Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals and
Liquor Committee, City Manager and City Attorney.
(09-25-78)
2. Any officer of the City of Troy to whom the Full Disclosure Statement is deemed to apply
who shall fail to comply with the requirements of Section 6.12(f) of the Charter, shall be
subject to removal from office for misconduct.
3. The City Clerk shall send a notice by receipted mail to the last known address of any
officer so failing to file the required Full Disclosure Statement, which notice shall advise
said person of such failure and shall further provide not less than ten (10) days notice to
said person of the charge levied against said person and the date, time, and place of
hearing before the City Council for determination of his removal from office for misconduct.
4. The Mayor shall preside over the administration of the hearing; a quorum shall be
necessary for the conducting of a hearing; the officer may appear in person and may be
represented by legal counsel at such hearing and shall be afforded an opportunity to
present all material factual evidence and testimony and cross-examine witnesses in his
Chapter 14 - Officer and Employee Public Disclosure Enforcement
14-2
defense; for purposes of said hearing, the failure to file the Full Disclosure Statement as
set forth in Section 6.12(f) of the Charter shall be prima facie evidence of the requisite
misconduct in office; a sworn statement of the City Clerk that such Full Disclosure
Statement is not on file within his records shall raise a presumption that said statement
has not been filed by the officer as required.
5. Upon the close of the hearing by the presiding officer, a vote shall be taken by all
members of the Council attending such hearing, exclusive of any member whose removal
may be being considered, and a simple majority of those voting shall constitute a decision
of removal.
E. EMPLOYEES FAILURE TO FILE FULL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT. REMOVAL FROM
EMPLOYMENT.
1. Definition. The term Employee shall apply to the following positions:
(a) Those positions set forth in Chapter 11 as the exempt service, excluding the
position of City Manager and City Attorney.
(b) All employment positions with the City which require inspection of the work or
property of third parties.
2. Any employee of the City as defined above to whom the Full Disclosure Statement is
deemed to apply who shall fail to comply with the requirements of Section 6.12(f) of the
Charter, shall be subject to removal from employment for misconduct.
(09-25-78)
3. The City Clerk on April 1 of each year shall notify the City Manager of the employee(s), as
defined herein, in writing of the failure of said employee(s) to have filed a Full Disclosure
Statement pursuant to Section 6.12(f) of the Charter.
4. The City Manager shall thereafter notify the named employee in writing of his failure to
comply with Section 6.12(f) of the Charter. Said notice shall further advise the named
employee that upon his failure to file the Full Disclosure Statement by the 15h of April, the
named employee's employment will be terminated upon that date.
5. The failure of any employee, as defined herein, to file the required Full Disclosure
Statement as set forth in Section 6.12(f) of the Charter shall constitute prima facie
evidence of misconduct in the course of employment; further, a sworn statement of the
City Manager or City Clerk that such Full Disclosure Statement is not on file with the
records of the City shall raise a presumption that said statement has not been filed by the
employee as required.
Chapter 15  Budget Stabilization Fund
15-1
15.10 Creation. There is hereby established a budget stabilization fund.
The fund shall be separate and distinct from the Citys general fund.
Appropriations to the fund and expenditures from the fund shall be
made as provided in this section and shall comply with the
requirements of Act 30 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended,
being M.C.L.A. 141.441 et. seq.
15.20 Purposes. The budget stabilization fund is created for the
following purposes:
(A) To cover a general fund deficit, when the City of Troys
annual audit reveals such a deficit.
(B) To prevent a reduction in the level of public services or in the
number of employees at any time in a fiscal year when the
City of Troys budgeted revenue is not being collected in an
amount sufficient to cover budgeted expenses.
(C) To prevent a reduction in the level of public services or in the
number of employees when in preparing the budget for the
next fiscal year the City of Troys estimated revenue does not
appear sufficient to cover estimated expenses.
(D) To cover expenses arising because of a natural disaster,
including a flood, fire, or tornado. However, if federal or state
funds are received to offset the appropriations from the fund,
that money shall be returned to the fund.
15.30 Appropriations to the Fund. Commencing with the City of Troys
2002-2003 fiscal year and continuing in each fiscal year thereafter,
the City Council may appropriate all or part of a surplus in the
general fund, which results from an excess of revenue in
comparison to expenses, to the budget stabilization fund. The
appropriation shall be made by ordinance or resolution, adopted by
a two-thirds vote of the members elected or serving on City
Council.
15.40 Tax Increase Prohibition. The City of Troy shall not impose
additional taxes producing revenue in excess of that needed for its
estimated budget in order to provide for money to be appropriated
to the budget stabilization fund.
15.50 Consideration of reduced state tax money. In determining whether
the City of Troys revenue is not sufficient to cover its expenses, a
reduction in the amount of money received for the fiscal year from
any source in comparison to the amount of money received for the
previous fiscal year, including a reduction in the allocation of state
tax money, shall be considered.
Chapter 15  Budget Stabilization Fund
15-2
15.60 Investment. The money in the budget stabilization fund may, from
time to time, be invested as permitted by law. All earnings on the
money from the budget stabilization fund shall be returned to the
general fund of the City of Troy.
15.70 Limitations on Budget Stabilization Fund. The amount of money in
the budget stabilization fund shall not exceed either fifteen percent
of the City of Troys most recent general fund budget, as originally
adopted, or fifteen percent of the average of the Citys five most
recent general fund budgets, as amended, whichever is less.
Monies in the budget stabilization fund in excess of the
aforementioned limitations shall be appropriated in the Citys next
general fund budget, but shall not be appropriated to the budget
stabilization fund.
15.80 Prohibitions on Uses of the Fund. The money in the budget
stabilization fund shall not be appropriated for the acquisition,
construction or alteration of a facility as part of a general capital
improvements program.
Chapter 16  Municipal Solid Waste and Recycling
16-1
2.1 Necessity. Regulations governing the storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of
refuse, recyclables, yard recyclables, and other rejected, unwanted or discarded waste
materials within the limits of the City of Troy are necessary to protect the public health
and safety.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.2 Definitions. The following definitions shall apply:
(1) Refuse - Refuse shall be understood to refer to municipal solid waste excluding
recyclables and yard recyclables.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(2) Construction Refuse - Construction refuse shall mean all unwanted, rejected,
discarded or abandoned material(s) resulting from the alteration, repair,
construction, and/or demolition of buildings.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(3) Commercial/Industrial Refuse - Commercial/Industrial refuse shall mean the
rejected, unwanted, discarded or abandoned materials resulting from operations
that are generally identified with manufacturing, assembling, processing and
distributing plants, large office buildings, hospitals, and clinics, and other
producers of quantities of refuse in excess amounts.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(4) Hazardous Waste - Hazardous Waste shall mean a waste, or combination of
wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness or pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health, safety, welfare or to the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, used or disposed of,
or otherwise managed, however, not to include solid or dissolved materials in
irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to
permits under section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1967 as
amended, or source, special nuclear, or by product material as defined by the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(5) Nuisance - Whatever annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, comfort or
repose of the public; interferes with or destroys or renders dangerous any street,
highway, allows accumulation of junk or obnoxious matters on private property;
or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to,
whatever is forbidden by any provision of Chapter 88 and the common and
Chapter 16  Municipal Solid Waste and Recycling
16-2
statute law of this state.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(6) Yard Recyclables - Yard Recyclables shall mean grass clippings, leaves, wood
chips, chipped Christmas trees, small pencil-thin twigs, garden vegetables and
fruit, old potting soil, Halloween pumpkins, shredded bark, sod, weeds, old
flowers, prunings, straw, straw bales, play sand, top soil, old mulch, corn husks,
and any other similar items.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(7) Recyclables - Recyclables shall be defined on an annual basis by the
Southeastern Oakland County Resource Recovery Authority, but is expected to
at least include newspapers, inserts, catalogs, magazines, brown paper grocery
bags, paperboard, corrugated cardboard, telephone books, clear and brown
glass, #1 and #2 plastics, metal cans, metal lids, pie tins, small metal objects,
empty metal paint cans and metal aerosol cans, and household batteries.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.3 Duties of Owners, Occupants.
(1) Every owner, tenant or occupant of any building, or any person responsible for
organizing a gathering place for people for any purpose, shall provide adequate
and sufficient size clean containers to hold the accumulated refuse between
weekly scheduled refuse collections.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to burn refuse within the corporate limits of the
City.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to bury refuse within the corporate limits of the
City.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.4 Containers - General.
(1) Every owner, tenant or occupant of any building, and the owner of any property
or use which generates refuse shall provide sufficient size containers to hold the
accumulated refuse between weekly scheduled refuse collections.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
Chapter 16  Municipal Solid Waste and Recycling
16-3
(2) Cardboard boxes, buckets, bushel baskets, paper bags, paint pails, and other
similar containers are considered unapproved containers and the City may not
collect refuse when placed in these unapproved containers.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(3) The City may also refuse to collect refuse placed in containers that exceed the
size and weight limitation or otherwise do not conform to the provisions of this
article.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.5 Approved Container Size and Weight.
(1) Containers for refuse must be portable, watertight, vermin-proof, of substantial
construction, and have handles and a tight-fitting cover. The container must have
a capacity of at least ten (10) gallons, but not more than thirty-five (35) gallons.
Mechanically lifted carts which exceed 35-gallons may be used with prior
permission of the City Public Works Department.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(2) Strong securely closed plastic bags holding up to 32 gallons of refuse are also
acceptable.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(3) For regular, scheduled pick-up, item(s) of refuse, including containers filled with
refuse, shall weigh less than sixty (60) pounds. In addition, items of refuse shall
not exceed three (3) feet in length or three (3) feet in girth.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.6 Rejection of refuse, tagging of containers.
(1) If any refuse is rejected by the city waste collector because it does not conform
to the requirements of this chapter, the city waste collector shall give notice to
the owner or occupant of the premises by placing a tag on the rejected refuse.
The tag shall advise the owner or occupant of the non-conformity and shall
include a telephone number to call for additional information and possible
alternatives.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(2) If the City of Troy Department of Public Works determines the owner or occupant
has failed to correct the tagged violation, the Department of Public Works may
make a special collection of the rejected refuse. The property owner shall be
liable for any expense(s) the city incurs to make the special collection.
Chapter 16  Municipal Solid Waste and Recycling
16-4
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.7 Disturbing Containers. No person other than the owner of refuse containers or his
agents, or employees of licensees of the City shall disturb, remove, or attempt to
remove refuse containers or their covers or disturb or remove or attempt to remove the
contents of such containers or
disturb, remove or attempt to remove any refuse not in containers whether same is on
public or private property.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.8 Container Maintenance. The refuse containers and contents shall be stored in suitable
places between collection periods. The containers shall be inaccessible to vermin,
domestic animals, and insects, so as to prevent a nuisance.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.9 Quantity of Refuse Collected.
(1) In every case where the owner, occupant, or user of any residential premises
accumulates more than two (2) cubic yards of refuse within any one-week
period, it shall be the responsibility of such owner, occupant, or user to arrange
for private collection and disposal.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(2) Commercial/industrial buildings may place at the curb up to 4 bags or cans per
week for collection. These cans shall not exceed a thirty-five (35) gallon limit nor
weigh more than 60 pounds. If the owner or occupant accumulates more than 4
bags or cans per week, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to
arrange for private collection and disposal.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.10 Preparation of Refuse.
(1) Hazardous waste shall be the responsibility of the producer, or owner thereof
and shall not be disposed of within the City. In addition, hazardous waste shall
not be stored or transported within the City without the written approval of the
City Manager or Public Works Director. Written approval will not be granted
unless the City Manager designates a supervisor who has knowledge of the
safety measures required to protect the public health and safety during the
storage, transport, or disposal of hazardous waste.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
Chapter 16  Municipal Solid Waste and Recycling
16-5
(2) Large residential refuse items shall be broken down or disassembled and placed
in approved containers or securely tied in bundles which do not exceed sixty (60)
pounds in weight, three (3) feet in length, and three (3) feet in girth. No item shall
exceed 60 pounds.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(3) Bulky residential refuse items, such as large appliances or furniture, which
cannot be broken down or disassembled, shall be placed at the curb by 7:00
a.m. on the normally scheduled collection day. For safety reasons refrigerator
doors shall be removed before placing item(s) at the curb. No item shall exceed
250 pounds.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(4) No person shall leave any materials that could ignite waste in a container or
waste collection vehicle.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.11 Preparation of Yard Recyclables.
(1) Yard recyclable collection typically runs for 35 weeks, from mid-April through the
first week in December. The Public Works Director or his designated
representative will announce the yard recyclable collection dates each year.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(2) Yard recyclables shall be placed in container(s) not exceeding thirty-five (35)
gallons that have yard waste sticker(s) affixed to the can. The yard recyclable
container(s) shall be placed so that the yard waste sticker faces the street. The
container shall be placed at the curb on the opposite side of the driveway from
the regular refuse by 7:00 a.m. on the normally scheduled collection day. Thirty
(30) gallon yard waste paper bags may also be used.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(3) At no time will the City collect yard waste packaged in any other manner,
including yard waste that is placed in plastic bags.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(4) Container(s) marked as yard recyclables shall not be used to collect regular
refuse.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
Chapter 16  Municipal Solid Waste and Recycling
16-6
(5) No yard recyclables container shall exceed 60 pounds in weight.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.12 Preparation of recyclables.
(1) Recyclables shall be placed in a City of Troy approved recycling bin. The bin
shall be placed on the opposite side of the driveway as the refuse. The bin shall
be placed at the curb by 7:00 a.m. on the normally scheduled collection day.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(2) Recyclables may also be placed in an approved container with a recyclables
sticker placed on it. The container must conform to all provisions of section 2.4
and 2.5. The container shall be placed so that the sticker faces the street and
the container is clearly distinguished from regular refuse. The container shall be
placed on the opposite side of the driveway as the refuse.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.13.1 Disposal of Construction Refuse - It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor, occupant
or other person responsible for construction work to arrange, at their own expense, the
removal of such construction refuse from the premises within a reasonable time after
the completion of such construction work.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.14 Placing at Curb.
(1) Refuse, recyclables, and recyclable yard waste will be collected Monday through
Friday, beginning at 7:00 a.m., with the exception of the following legal holidays:
New Years Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, and Christmas Day. When a holiday occurs on a weekday, refuse collection
shall be made on the day following the regularly scheduled collection day. If the
normally scheduled collection day is Friday, collection shall be made on
Saturday.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(2) No refuse shall be placed at the curb or street for collection prior to 5:00 p.m. on
the day preceding the day scheduled for collection.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
(3) After the collection of container contents has been made, the empty containers
shall be removed from the curb or street as soon as possible, but in no case later
than twenty-four (24) hours after collection of refuse has been made.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
Chapter 16  Municipal Solid Waste and Recycling
16-7
2.15 Collection of Refuse.
(1) Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or deny the owner or
producer of refuse the right to dispose of their refuse, so long as no provisions of
the Code are violated.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.16 Collection Vehicles. Vehicles used for collection, transportation of refuse within or
through the City shall be water tight, covered, and conform to all laws regulating axle
and road limitations.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.17 Disposal of Refuse. The contractor for the City of Troy shall dispose of all refuse
collected from within the corporate limits of the City at the facilities of the Southeastern
Oakland County Resource Recovery Authority.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.18 Routes to be Designated. The City shall designate the route to be taken by trucks of
haulers of refuse through the City and to the facilities of the Southeastern Oakland
County Resource Recovery Authority.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
2.19 Composting.
(Rev. 10/15/2001)
The restrictions of Chapter 39, Section 39.90.03; Chapter 88, Section 9.13; Chapter 48,
Section 6.101(5), and Section 6.107 shall not be deemed to prohibit composting on
private property.
The construction and maintenance of yard waste composting bins/piles shall be
permitted subject to the following conditions:
(1) The contents of compost bins/piles may consist of a combination of
biodegradable material including those items listed as acceptable by composting
authorities such as the Department of Natural Resources or Southeastern
Oakland County Resource Recovery Authority.
(2) The contents of compost bins/piles shall not include meats, bones, fish, dairy
products, vegetable or animal fats, cooked foods, carnivorous animal manure,
plastics, synthetics, or other non-biodegradable material.
(3) Compost bins/piles are not permitted in drainage or utility easements.
Chapter 16  Municipal Solid Waste and Recycling
16-8
(4) Compost bins/piles are permitted in rear yards, a minimum of three (3) feet from
any lot line and fifteen (15) feet from any dwelling located on adjacent property.
(5) Composting bins/piles are limited in size to a maximum of 3 feet x 3 feet in area
and 3 feet in height. Each parcel is limited to a maximum of three (3) bins/piles.
(Rev. 12/17/2001)
(6) Composting must be maintained in a manner to prevent the escape of offensive,
unwholesome, or nauseous odor to adjacent property and not be an active
attraction /refuge for rodents. In addition, there must be adequate screening to
shield any compost bins/piles from the view of adjoining residential properties.
(Rev. 12/17/2001)
Chapter 17 - Rubbish Fill Operations
17-1
2.21 Purpose. The City of Troy, Michigan, hereby declares that it is necessary to provide and establish
regulations and conditions governing the filling or depositing of household, commercial and other
refuse and debris upon lands within the City, in order to protect the public health, safety, welfare
and comfort.
2.22 License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any filling or depositing
operations within the territorial limits of Troy by depositing or placing household, commercial or
any other types of refuse upon lands or premises within said City without having first obtained a
license for the filling or depositing as herein provided.
2.23 Application. Application for licenses hereunder shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be in
writing and contain the following information:
(1) Names and addresses of the person, persons, firm or corporation making the application.
(2) Name and address of the owners of the land for which a license is applied for.
(3) The full legal description of the land or premises upon which the filling or depositing is to
take place.
(4) Estimated length of time filling activity will consume, and purpose for which license is
desired.
2.24 Contour Map. There shall be filed with the application a map of the premises under consideration,
showing the existing contour lines and proposed contour grades resulting from such filling or
depositing in relation to the topography of the premises together with United States Coast and
Geodetic Datum.
2.25 License Fee. That upon filing such application and information there shall be paid to the City
Clerk a license fee based upon an estimate by the City Engineer of the actual cost of reviewing
said plans and information. Only that any part of the license fee that is not expended shall be
returnable if said application together with necessary materials is disapproved by the City
Engineer.
(Rev. 9-25-78)
2.26 Engineer's Approval. The above license fee includes the cost of one inspection per month during
the operation of said fill. The City Engineer shall have the duty and authority to make more
frequent inspections if he determines said inspections to be necessary to protect the public health,
welfare, safety and comfort. For said additional inspections there shall be imposed a fee arrived
at in the following manner: $4.00 per hour for each City employee. The contractor and/or the
owner will be billed for said additional inspections and failure to pay said inspection fees within
thirty (30) days from date of billing will be grounds for temporary revocation of said license and
upon payment of said additional inspection fees the license shall be reinstated.
2.27 Planning Commission Hearing. Upon receipt of such approval and recommendation from the City
Engineer, the Planning Commission shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter, consider such application and
recommendation of the City Engineer, and shall notify the applicant of the time and place of such
meeting.
Chapter 17 - Rubbish Fill Operations
17-2
(Rev. 9-25-78)
2.28 Recommendation. The City Planning Commission shall, upon completion of its investigation,
forward its recommendation to the City Council, and in arriving at its decision shall consider
particularly whether the proposed fill activities would create or be likely to create a public or private
nuisance, whether it would result in an unreasonable depletion of the natural resources of the City,
whether such activity would create a hazard to the public health, welfare, safety and morals and
whether such excavation would create a place of danger, or impede the coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious physical development of the City.
(Rev. 9-25-78)
2.29 Grant of License. Upon receipt of the application and map, together with the recommendation of
the City Engineer and Planning Commission, the City Council shall consider same, and if, after
due consideration, the Council shall be of the opinion that the proposed filling and depositing shall
not create conditions inimical to the public health, welfare and safety, nor create any drainage,
sewerage problems or other conditions of danger, permission to fill and deposit shall be granted.
(Rev. 9-25-78)
2.30 Fill Operation. If permission to fill or deposit shall be granted the owner, contractor or person shall
so conduct the operations so that sanitary land fill procedure will be followed and as refuse and
debris are dumped on said premises same shall be covered with dirt. The dirt shall be six (6)
inches in thickness. Dirt cells shall be made daily and when dumping operations are stopped a dirt
cell shall be made and at such other intervals as the City Engineer shall deem necessary. That
the grade in land elevation shall, when the said land fill operation is completed, comply with the
topographical map attached to the original application, and any amendments thereto approved by
the City Manager and City Engineer. That the roads on the premises used for the land fill
operation will be oiled if in the opinion of the City Engineer and City Manager a dust hazard is
being created. The premises will be sprayed daily with an insecticide gamma insomer or
benzene, hexochloride from lindane of at least twenty-five (25%) percent if in the opinion of the
City Manager and City Engineer a nuisance of odor and insects is created by said land fill
operation or such other insecticides approved by the City Manager and City Engineer. There will
be no burning of any refuse on the premises. Suitable provision shall be made for drainage
ditches to accommodate storm water.
(Rev. 7-19-71)
2.31 Approvals Required. A license under this Chapter only shall be granted after the applicant shall
have received the written approval of the offices of the Michigan Department of Health, Oakland
County Department of Health, and a certificate from the Oakland County Drain Commissioner to
the effect that the proposed filling operation will not cause increased loading of or interference
with sewers, septic tanks or systems, drains, and ditches in the area affected nor cause or create
any health or safety hazard; the applicant shall also satisfy the City Council that the proposed
operation will not constitute or cause a traffic and safety hazard to the people of the City of Troy.
(Rev. 9-25-78)
2.32 Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter or shall fail to comply
with the same, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred
Chapter 17 - Rubbish Fill Operations
17-3
($500.00) dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the Court. Each and every violation of and non-conformance
with this Chapter, or each day that any provision of this Chapter shall have been violated, shall be
construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.
Chapter 18 - City Water Utility
18-1
1. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this Chapter:
(a) "Department" shall mean the Department of Water and Sewer of the City.
(b) "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, business, corporation, and any other
association of individuals of whatever nature.
(c) "Public Water Supply System" shall mean the public water supply system of the City of
Troy.
(d) "Superintendent" shall mean the Superintendent of the Department of Water and Sewer.
(e) "Water Connection" shall mean that part of the City water distribution system connecting
the water main with the premises served.
(f) "Water Main" shall mean that part of the City water distribution system located within
easement lines or streets designed to supply more than one (1) water connection.
(Rev. 09-25-78)
2. Service Connections. Application for water connections shall be made to the Department on forms
prescribed and furnished by it. Water connections and water meters shall be installed in
accordance with rules and regulations of the Department and upon payment of the required
connection fee, meter installation fee and the water main benefit charge if applicable under the
provisions of Chapter 20. All meters and water connections shall be the property of the City.
Connection fees and meter installation charges shall not be less than the cost of the materials,
installation and overhead attributable to such installations. Such fees and charges shall be
established by resolution of the City Council from time to time, in accordance with the size of the
connection furnished.
(Rev. 09-25-78)
2.43 Water Meters. All premises using water shall be metered, except as otherwise provided in this
Code. No person except an authorized City employee shall break or injure the seal or change the
location of, alter or interfere in any way with any water meter.
(Rev. 04-01-64)
2.44 Meter Location. Meters shall be set in an accessible location and in a manner satisfactory to the
superintendent. Where the premises contain no basement or cellar or other suitable inside location
the meter shall be installed outside in a meter pit, the location of which shall be approved by the
superintendent. Where it is necessary to set the meter in a pit, such pit shall be built at the expense
of the owner as directed by the superintendent.
(Rev. 04-01-64)
2.45 Access to Meters. The superintendent shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any
premises where authorized employees are not able to obtain access to the meter. Any authorized
City employee shall at all reasonable hours, have the right to enter the premises where such
meters are installed for the purpose of reading, testing, removing, or inspecting the meter or for the
purpose of inspecting any pipe or fixture connected to the City Water System, and no person shall
hinder, obstruct, or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of his duties in relation
thereto.
Chapter 18 - City Water Utility
18-2
(Rev. 04-01-64)
2.46 Responsibility for Meter. The owner of the premises upon which a meter is installed, is hereby
made responsible for the same. If by any manner the meter is damaged or stolen such accident
must be reported to the superintendent at once. It shall be the duty of the City to make all meter
repairs and charge same to the party made responsible for the meter.
(Rev. 04-01-64)
2.47 Meter Failure. If any meter shall fail to register properly, the superintendent shall estimate the
consumption on the basis of former consumption and bill accordingly.
(Rev. 04-01-64)
2.48 Meter Testing. A consumer may require that the meter be tested upon payment of the service fee
in advance to cover the cost of the test. If the meter is found defective it shall be repaired or an
accurate meter installed and the service fee payment refunded.
(Rev. 01-01-82)
2.49 Accuracy Required. A meter shall be considered accurate if when tested it registers not to exceed
five (5%) percent more or five (5%) percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through
it. If a meter registers in excess of five (5%) percent more than the actual quantity of water passing
through it, it shall be considered "fast" to that extent. If a meter registers in excess of five (5%)
percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered "slow" to
that extent.
(Rev. 04-01-64)
2.50 Bill Adjustment. If a meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and shall have been
determined to register "fast" the City shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to the percent
"fast" multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by said consumer within the three (3) months
prior to the test, and if a meter so tested is determined to register "slow", the City may collect from
the consumer a sum equal to the percent "slow" multiplied by the amount of all the bills incurred by
the consumer for the prior three (3) months. When the City on its own initiative makes a test of a
water meter, it shall be done without cost to the consumer, other than his paying the amount due
the City for water used by him as above provided, if the meter is found to be "slow".
(Rev. 04-01-64)
2.51 Hydrant Use. No person, except an employee of the City in the performance of his duties, shall
open or use any fire hydrant except in case of emergency, without first securing permission from
the superintendent and paying such charges as may be prescribed.
(Rev. 04-01-64)
12. Outdoor Water Use Restrictions
12.01 The City of Troy, through its contract with the Great Lakes Water Authority, is obligated to take
steps to insure that whenever possible, the use of the municipal water system shall be used during
the non-peak hours of 11pm to 5am. To satisfy this contractual commitment, the following
municipal water use regulations are in effect:
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
Chapter 18 - City Water Utility
18-3
A. For those properties in the City of Troy that are serviced by an underground irrigation
system, outdoor watering, including the sprinkling of lawns and landscaping, shall be
only done during the non-peak hours of 11pm to 5am.
B. A water user may manually irrigate landscaping at any time, provided the irrigation is not
connected to an underground system, and is attended and monitored by the water user.
C. If the above provisions create a practical hardship for a municipal water user, the
municipal water user can petition the Superintendent of the Department of Water and
Sewer or his/her designee, asking for relief from one of the above referenced
restrictions. The petition shall set forth the requested relief, and shall detail the
extraordinary circumstances that would justify the requested relief, as well as the
duration of the requested relief. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee can
grant or deny or modify the petition, taking into consideration the contractual obligations
of the City, as well as the articulated circumstances of the petitioner. The decision of the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall be final.
D. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions, as set forth in
paragraphs A and B, without obtaining relief, as provided in paragraph C, shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
100 of the City of Troy ordinances.
(Rev. 05-19-08)
12.02 Whenever the City Manager or his/her designee receives notification from the Great Lakes Water
Authority or the City Council or the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality that current
conditions of the water system of the City are likely to endanger the general welfare of the City,
then additional emergency regulations can be imposed on all properties connected to the City
water system, including an absolute temporary ban on sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all
outdoor water use.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
Within 24 hours of notification, as set forth above, any additional emergency regulations shall be
posted at the City offices and publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts by the
stations with a normal operating range covering the City. The announcement may also be further
declared in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. The regulations shall become
effective immediately upon the posting and publication of the additional emergency regulations.
Upon notification from the Great Lakes Water Authority in connection with the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality or the City Council, that the emergency regulations are no
longer necessary, the City shall cause a public announcement lifting the water restrictions.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
13. Additional Regulations. The City Manager may make and issue additional rules and regulations
concerning the water distribution system, connections thereto, meter installations and
maintenance, connection and meter installation fees, hydrants and water mains and the
appurtenances thereto, not inconsistent herewith. Such rules and regulations shall be effective
upon approval by the City Council. The rules and regulations now in effect shall continue until
changed in accordance with this section.
(Rev. 09-25-78)
14. Injury to or Obstruction of Facilities. No person, except an employee of the City in the performance
Chapter 18 - City Water Utility
18-4
of his duties, shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, obscure, obstruct or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the City water distribution system.
No person, firm or corporation shall place debris, landscaping, earth or other materials in a manner
that will obstruct, obscure or prevent normal access to or operation of any hydrant, valve, metering
facility, Fire Department water connection or any other water system appurtenances. Any person
violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1 of this Code. The
Superintendent may order the removal of said materials. The expenses incurred in the removal
shall be a debt to the City from the responsible person, firm or corporation, and shall be collected
as any other debt to the City.
(Rev. 09-25-78)
Cross Connections
15. It shall be unlawful for any person to make or maintain, or allow to be made or to be maintained,
upon property owned or controlled by any person or entity, a cross-connection between the potable
water supply system and a secondary water supply system.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
16. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director of the City of Troy or his/her authorized agent, to
cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply system. The
frequency of inspections and re-inspections, based upon potential health hazards involved, shall be
established by the Public Works Director or his/her designee.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
17A. Backflow Preventer Testing. The Public Works Director or his designee shall require testing for
backflow preventers to be completed by private individuals or companies, as required by the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, the State Plumbing Act, or otherwise required by
law. The cost for the required testing shall be borne by the property owner. If the Public Works
Director or his/her designee opines that there are emergency circumstances that require immediate
testing, the Public Works Director may hire a licensed plumber to perform such testing, with the
cost to be borne by the customer.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
17B. Notice of Violation; Compliance Period of Time. The Public Works Director, the Cross Connection
Control Inspector, or his or her duly authorized agent, upon determining that a violation of the
provisions exists, shall notify the owner and/or the occupant of the property so affected, in writing,
of the nature of the violation, including a period of time for compliance which shall be
commensurate with the degree of the hazard involved. Such notice shall be deemed properly
served if a copy is personally served or sent by regular mail to the occupant and/or owner at the
address is listed on the City of Troy Assessing Records. Violations which pose an extreme hazard
may be disconnected immediately. The owner or occupants failure to correct the violation within
the period of time prescribed, and each day thereafter, shall constitute a separate violation of this
Chapter.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
18. The Public Works Director, or his or her representatives, shall have the right to enter, at any
Chapter 18 - City Water Utility
18-5
reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the City
for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems for cross-connections. Upon request,
the owner or occupants of any property so served shall furnish any pertinent information regarding
the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of
access, when requested, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the presence of crossconnections.
If there is a refusal, the City is authorized to discontinue services upon Thirty (30)
days written notice by regular mail given to the address of the occupants and/or owner, as listed on
the City of Troy Assessing Records. The City is also authorized to pursue a Court Order to obtain
access to the premises.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
19. The Public Works Director, or his or her authorized agent is hereby authorized, and may direct the
discontinuance of water service after giving Thirty (30) days advance written notice, to any
occupant and/or property owner, by personal service or regular mail to the address listed on the
City of Troy Assessing Records, if any connection is in violation of this Chapter, and may take such
additional precautionary measures which may be deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the potable water supply system. Where it is determined that the potable water
supply system is being contaminated, such services may be terminated immediately. Water service
to such property shall not be restored until any cross-connection has been eliminated in
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
20. The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall
be protected from possible contamination, as specified by this Chapter, the State of Michigan Safe
Drinking Water Act, the Michigan Plumbing Code and the Michigan Residential Code, which are all
incorporated by reference. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes,
and which is not supplied by the potable system, must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as
"Water Unsafe For Drinking".
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
21. This Chapter shall supplement the Michigan Plumbing Code and the Michigan Residential Code
and the Safe Drinking Water Act which are adopted and incorporated. If a conflict should occur,
the Regulation which is most restrictive shall govern.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
22. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not exceeding Five Hundred and
00/100 ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment of up to ninety (90) days, or both. Each day upon
which a violation of the provisions of this act occur shall be deemed a separate and additional
violation.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-1
19.01.00 DEFINITIONS. In the interpretation of this chapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the content clearly indicates otherwise:
19.01.01 Available public sanitary sewer shall mean a public sanitary sewer system
located in a right of way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses,
adjoins or abuts upon the property and passing not more than 200 feet at the
nearest point from a structure in which sanitary sewage originates.
(Rev. 08-15-2005)
19.01.02 Biochemical Oxygen Demand or B.O.D. shall mean the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in parts
per million by weight.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.03 Inspector shall mean the employee or employees of the City of Troy, who is
responsible for the inspection of the privately owned and maintained On-site
Sewage Disposal Systems within the City of Troy.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
19.01.04 Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system which receives and conveys the discharge from soil, waste and
drainage pipes other than storm drains from within the walls or footings of any
building to the building sewer.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.05 Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.06 Combination sewer or combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both
surface run-off and sewage.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.07 GLWA shall mean the Great Lakes Water Authority.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
19.01.08 Failure shall be defined as follows: 1) the backup of sewage into a structure; 2)
the discharge of effluent onto the ground surface; 3) the connection of an OSDS
to a storm drain; 4) the liquid level in the septic tank is above the outlet invert; 5)
the structural failure of a septic tank; 6) the discharge of sewage into any
watercourse; 7) the liquid level in the disposal field is above the pipe of such
field; or 8) the OSDS which failed to meet operational, effluent or discharge
guidelines as set forth by the MDEQ, Oakland County Health Division Services,
or the City of Troy.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-2
19.01.09 Fixed interval inspection shall mean the process of inspecting and evaluating
the condition and state of the septic tank and septic system to cover a period of
four years of operation for the On-site Sewage Disposal System. This process
includes observations, information gathering, evaluations, and the report of
findings.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.10 Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing
of food, and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of produce.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.11 Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes, solids, or semi-solids from
industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.12 MDEQ shall mean the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.13 Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of water, either surface or ground water.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.14 On-site Sewage Disposal System or OSDS shall include all components or
devices including, but not limited to all septic tanks, pipes, pumps, vents and
absorption systems used to treat and/or dispose of all wastewater from a
structure that is not serviced by the City of Troy sewage disposal system.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.15 Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.16 pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.17 Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the cooking,
preparation and dispensing of food that has been cut or shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any
dimension.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.18 Available public sanitary sewer system shall mean a sanitary sewer or a
combined sanitary and storm sewer used or intended for use by the public for
collection and transportation of sanitary sewage for treatment or disposal.
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-3
(Rev. 08-15-2005)
19.01.19 Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting property have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.20 Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage, and to which storm
and surface waters are not intentionally admitted.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.21 Satisfactory Operation shall mean that there is minimal likelihood of
degradation of groundwater and surface water, or risk to public health caused by
improper construction, location or functioning of an OSDS.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.22 Sewage shall mean any combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business and commercial buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.23 Sewage disposal system shall mean the City of Troy sewage disposal system.
(Rev. 08-15-2005)
19.01.24 Sewage Treatment Plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.25 Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.26 Sewer shall mean any pipe, tile, tubes, or conduit for carrying sewage.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.27 Shall is mandatory. May is permissive.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.28 Storm sewer or storm drain shall mean a sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but which excludes sewage and polluted industrial
wastes.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.29 Structure in which sanitary sewage originates or structure shall mean a
building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities which generate
water-carried sanitary sewage, are used or are available for use for household,
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-4
commercial, industrial or other purposes.
(Rev. 08-15-2005)
19.01.30 Suspended solids shall mean the solids that either float on the surface of, or
are suspended in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.31 System shall be deemed to refer to the said sewage disposal system.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.01.32 Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.02 RESERVED.
(Rev. 08-15-2005)
ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
19.03.01 On-site Sewage Disposal Systems. Unless a structure in which sanitary sewage
originates is connected to a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer under the
provisions of this Chapter, the building sewer shall be connected with a private
on-site sewage disposal system complying with the regulations and orders of the
MDEQ and the Oakland County Health Department, and the provisions of
Chapter 79 of this code (Building Regulations).
(Rev. 08-15-2005)
19.03.02 Discontinuance of System. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to
a property served by a private sewage disposal system, and a direct connection
is made to the public sewer in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter,
any septic tank, privy, privy vault, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Rev. 08-15-2005)
19.03.03 Maintenance of System. The owner shall operate and maintain the OSDS
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the City. Maintenance
of the OSDS shall include:
1. Having a fixed interval inspection and evaluation performed by City staff
or the Oakland County Health Department every four (4) years, this shall
consist of:
(A) Pumping of the septic tank at the time of inspection by a state
licensed septage hauler.
(B) Information gathering on the maintenance, including frequency of
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-5
pumping of the septic tank.
(C) Visual and olfactory observations and inspections of the condition
of the septic tank, absorption system, pumps, filters, and other
important features of the OSDS
(D) Preparation of a report.
2. Having the septic tank pumped on an as needed basis to ensure a
satisfactory operation of the system.
3. Repairs. The cost of all repairs, maintenance and replacements of existing
On-site Sewage Disposal Systems shall be borne by the property owner.
The owner shall make an application to perform such work to the
Inspector or the Oakland County Health Department.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
19.03.04 Inspections. The City of Troy or the Oakland County Health Department will
notify the property owner when the building sewer and OSDS are required to
have an inspection. The Inspector may then inspect said OSDS and associated
appurtenances to determine if the system is operating satisfactorily or is failing.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
19.03.05 Satisfactory operation will be designated to systems with no evidence of an
OSDS failure. Fixed interval inspections will be required every four (4) years
thereafter until the structure is connected to the City of Troys public sanitary
sewer system.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.03.06 If the OSDS and associated appurtenances do not meet the requirements for a
functioning septic system, then the system will be considered a failing system.
The owner of the property will be required to have the system repaired. The
property owner will be responsible for obtaining all necessary repair permits from
the Oakland County Health Department. Once the repairs have been completed,
the property owner will be required to have the OSDS inspected again by the
Inspector to ensure that the system is working properly.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
19.03.07 Inspection Fee. All mandated OSDS inspections, as set forth above, require the
property owner to pay the inspection fee, established from time to time by the
City Council, related to actual costs incurred directly or indirectly to implement
the On-site Sewage Disposal System Inspection Program.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
19.03.08 Additional Requirements. No statement contained in this chapter shall be
construed to interfere with the provisions of the State of Michigan Plumbing Code
or with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MDEQ or the
Oakland County Health Department with respect to on-site sewage disposal
systems.
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-6
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
19.04.01 Permit Required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with or open into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or any appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Building Inspector of the
City.
(Rev. 04-01-1964)
19.04.02 Permit Fee. All connections with the sanitary or combined sewers of the City
shall be made only on written authorization and permits issued by the City on
such forms and on payments of such fees as shall be established from time to
time by the City Council.
(Rev. 09-25-1978)
19.04.03 Connection Permit. Before either a direct or indirect connection is made into any
interceptor sewer system of Oakland County, a connection permit shall be
obtained by the owner or contractor from the Oakland County Department of
Public Works. This permit shall be obtained prior to any work being done on the
connection to the sewer. Such permit shall be obtained in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Oakland County Department of Public Works.
(Rev. 09-08-1968)
19.04.04 Installation Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of said property.
The owner shall indemnify the City from all loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Rev. 04-01-1964)
19.04.05 Plans and Inspection of Plumbing Construction. All applicants for sewer
connection permits shall first allow the Plumbing Inspector to inspect the
premises to be connected. The inspector shall determine whether present
plumbing facilities are free from all safety hazards. Prior to making any
connection, the property owner shall make all changes and improvements in the
system required by the Plumbing Inspector.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
19.04.05 Inspection. The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the Building
Inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The Building Inspector shall then inspect the said building and
plumbing construction therein and if such construction meets the previous
requirements as approved in the construction permit, a sewer connection permit
shall be issued, subject to the applicable provisions of other sections of this
chapter.
(Rev. 04-01-1964)
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-7
19.04.06 Repairs. The cost of all repairs, maintenance and replacements of existing
building sewers and their connection to public sewers shall be borne by the
property owner. Such owner shall make application to perform such work to the
Building Inspector.
(Rev. 04-01-1964)
19.04.07 House Connections. House connections from the lateral sewer in street or
easement to within five feet from the house shall be in accordance with
specifications established by the City of Troy Engineering Department. All joints
shall be tight and when tested for infiltration shall not exceed the infiltration
requirements of this Chapter.
(Rev. 09-25-1978)
19.04.08 Temporary Covering During New Construction. In an open excavated basement,
it shall be the duty and responsibility of all owners, tenants, applicants for
building permits and/or other agents and employees to cause the sanitary sewer
pipe inside the building to be plugged. Also, it shall be the duty of such persons
to prevent any removal, breaking, cracking, loosening, hole drilling, or other
damage to said plug, when removal, breaking, cracking, loosening, hole drilling,
or other damage to such plug results in or causes any storm water, surface
water, ground water, sub-surface drainage, dirt or debris to discharge or run into
the sanitary sewer system. At such time as the plumbing system of such building
or improvement is carried to the first floor, the basement backfilled and the roof
placed on the building, and approved by the Building Department for the City, the
plug may be removed and the building plumbing system connected thereto.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
PROHIBITED USES
19.05.01 Unpolluted Water. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer.
Yard drains, patio drains, catch basins, downspouts, weep tiles, perimeter drains
or any other structures used for the collection and conveyance of storm water
shall not be permitted to discharge either directly or indirectly, into any sanitary
sewer except as provided in this Chapter. Storm water and all other unpolluted
drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designated as
combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the City
Engineer and/or the MDEQ. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters
may be discharged, upon approval of the Chief Building Inspector into a storm
sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.05.02 Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge any industrial or
commercial type wastes into the Troy sewer system, which is deleterious to the
public health and safety of the people of the City of Troy. Any waste will be
considered deleterious that may cause damaging effects as stated under
General Conditions and/or does not conform to the limitations stated under
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-8
Specific Conditions.
(Rev. 04-01-1964)
(1) General Conditions:
(A) Chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the materials of
construction to impair the strength or durability of sewer structures.
(B) Mechanical action that will destroy or damage the sewer structures.
(C) Restriction of the hydraulic capacity of sewer structures.
(D) Restriction of the normal inspection or maintenance of the sewer
structures.
(E) Placing of unusual demands on the sewage treatment equipment
or process.
(F) Limitation of the effectiveness of the sewage treatment process.
(G) Danger to public health and safety.
(H) Obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest.
(I) Any conditions not listed above that are prohibited by the GLWA or
are prohibited by the MDEQ and/or Federal Clean Water Act.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
(2) Specific Conditions:
(A) Acidity or alkalinity must be neutralized to a pH of 7.0 as a daily
average on a volumetric basis, with a maximum temporary variation
of pH 5.0 to 10.0.
(B) Must not contain more than 10 P.P.M. of the following gases:
Hydrogen sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, or any of the halogens.
(C) Must not contain any explosive substance.
(D) Must not contain any flammable substance with a flash point lower
than 187 degrees F.
(E) Must have a temperature within the rage of 32 degrees to 150
degrees F.
(F) Must not contain grease or oil or other substance that will solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150
degrees F.
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-9
(G) Must not contain insoluble substance in excess of 10,000 P.P.M. or
exceeding a daily average of 500 P.P.M.
(H) Must not contain total solids (soluble and insoluble substance) in
excess of 20,000 P.P.M., or exceeding a daily average of 2,000
P.P.M.
(I) Must not contain soluble substance in concentrations that would
increase the viscosity to greater than 1.1 specific viscosity.
(J) Must not contain insoluble substance having a specific gravity
greater than 2.65.
(K) Must not contain insoluble substance that will fail to pass a No. 8
standard sieve, or having any dimension greater than 1/2 inch.
(L) Must not contain gases or vapors, either free or occluded, in
concentrations toxic or dangerous to humans or animals.
(M) Must not have a chlorine demand greater than 15 P.P.M.
(N) Must not contain more than 100 P.P.M. of an antiseptic substance.
(O) Must not contain phenols in excess of .005 P.P.M.
(P) Must not contain any toxic or irritating substance, which will create
conditions hazardous to public health and safety.
(Q) Must not contain in excess of 100 P.P.M. or exceed a daily average
of 25 P.P.M. of any grease or oil or any oily substance.
(R) Must meet all requirements for discharging into the GLWA public
sanitary sewer system.
(Rev. 03-21-2016
All of the preceding standards and regulations are to apply at the point where
industrial or commercial type wastes are discharged into a public sewer and all
chemical and/or mechanical corrective treatment must be accomplished to
practical completion before this point is reached.
19.05.03 Waste Deposits. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit
to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon any public or private property
within the City of Troy, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the said City of
Troy, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
(Renumbered 08-15-2005)
19.05.04 Water Pollution. It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural watercourse or
any storm sewer, within the City of Troy or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the said City, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters,
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-10
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the
standards established by the MDEQ and the provisions of the Federal Clean
Water Act.
(Renumbered 08-15-2005)
19.05.05 Privies and Septic Tanks. Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or based for the disposal of sewage.
(Renumbered 08-15-2005)
INTERCEPTORS
19.06.01 Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the
Building Inspector and/or the MDEQ they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any inflammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Building Inspector and/or the MDEQ
and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable
of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be
substantially constructed, water-tight, and equipped with easily removable covers
which when bolted in place shall be gas-tight and water-tight.
(Rev. 04-01-1964)
19.06.02 Interceptor Maintenance. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors
shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
(Rev. 04-01-1964)
PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES
19.07.01 Preliminary Treatment Facilities. The admission into the public sewers of any
waters or wastes having (1) a five (5) day BOD greater than 300 parts per million
by weight, or (2) containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids, or (3) containing any quantity or substance having the
characteristics described in Section 19.05.02 or (4) having a daily average flow
greater than two (2%) percent of the average daily sewage flow of the City of
Troy, shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Council and/or the
MDEQ or the GLWA. Where necessary in the opinion of the City Council and/or
the MDEQ or the GLWA, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (1) reduce the BOD to 300 parts
per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or (2)
reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits
provided for in Section 19.05.02, or (3) control the quantities and rates of
discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent
information relating to the proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for approval of the City Council and/or of the MDEQ or the GLWA and
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-11
no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are
obtained in writing.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.07.02 Maintenance of Preliminary Facilities. Where preliminary treatment facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and
effective operation, by the owner at his expense.
(Rev. 04-01-1964)
19.07.03 Control Manholes. When required by the City Council and/or the MDEQ or the
GLWA, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the City Council. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be
safe and accessible at all times.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
19.07.04 Measurements and Tests. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made shall be
determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Sewage" and shall be determined at the control manhole or upon suitable
samples being taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest down-stream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
(Rev. 09-25-1978)
19.07.08 Agreements. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the said City for treatment, subject to the payment by the
industrial concern of the estimated cost of such treatment.
(Rev. 04-01-1964)
PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
19.08 No unauthorized person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment, which is a part of the
municipal sewerage system. No person, firm or corporation shall place earth,
debris, landscaping or other materials in a manner that will obstruct, obscure or
prevent normal access to or operation of any manhole, siphon chamber,
pumping station, meter chamber or other sewerage system appurtenance. The
Troy Superintendent of Water and Sewer or his/her designee may order the
removal of said materials by City personnel or contractors. The expenses
incurred in the removal shall be a debt to the City from the responsible person,
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-12
firm or corporation, and shall be collected as any other debt to the City.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
SURFACE AND GROUND WATER DISPOSAL
19.09.01 Yard drains, patio drains, catch basins, downspouts, sump pumps or any
structures used for the collection and conveyance of storm water shall not be
permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer. Any such structure which
conveys storm water either directly or indirectly to any sanitary sewer shall be
disconnected or altered so as to remove the possibility of such conveyance.
19.09.02 No weep tile connection to the sanitary sewer system or below grade patio drain
made after the original adoption of this Section, February 19, 1968, shall be
considered legal and such connections made after that date shall be promptly
disconnected.
19.09.03 In the case of buildings with weep tiles or below grade patio drains which were
permitted to be connected to the sanitary sewer prior to said date, the surface
around the building shall be sloped so as to provide positive drainage of all roof
and surface areas away from the building. Where weep tiles are connected to
the sanitary sewer, downspouts shall be so constructed or altered that they do
not discharge into any flower or shrub bed adjacent to a building wall, nor upon
the ground within five (5) feet of the building wall. When the building is located
less than five (5) feet from the property line or when there are other practical
difficulties, the downspouts shall be discharged in a manner approved by the
Chief Building Inspector.
19.09.04 Downspout piping shall in all cases be permanently affixed to the building wall
and shall be anchored at the discharge end.
(Rev. 06-21-1999)
19.09.05 Requirements for Bulkhead. On all new lateral lines, a watertight bulkhead shall
be installed to prohibit water, sand or other material from entering the existing
sewer system. Such bulkhead shall be left in place until removal is authorized by
the City Engineer.
(Rev. 09-09-68)
19.09.06 Ground Water Infiltration. A test for water infiltration into any newly constructed
sewer system shall be performed by the owner or contractor in accordance with
the procedures established by the City of Troy Engineering Department. When
the owner or contractor has determined that the system meets the following
requirements for maximum infiltration, he shall arrange for the results of such
test to be verified by the Engineering Department.
19.09.07 Ground water infiltration at any time shall not exceed 250 U.S. gallons per inch of
pipe diameter per mile of sewer per 24 hours for the overall system, nor shall
infiltration exceed 500 U.S. gallons per inch of diameter per mile of pipe per 24
hours for any individual run between manholes. It shall be the responsibility of
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-13
the owner or contractor to whom the permit was issued to make whatever
corrections as may be necessary to the system to meet the infiltration
requirement prior to using the sanitary sewer.
(Rev. 09-09-1968)
ENFORCEMENT - PENALTIES
19.10.01 Inspectors. The Inspector and other duly authorized officials or employees of the
City and agents of the MDEQ, Oakland County Health Department, or the GLWA
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at any time during
reasonable or usual business hours. Any person guilty of refusing or obstructing
such entry shall be guilty of a violation of this code.
19.10.02 Notice to Cease Violation. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this
chapter except Section 19.04.08, 19.05.01, 19.05.02, 19.08, and 19.10.03 shall
be served by the City of Troy with written notice stating the nature of such
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of the time stated in such notice,
take such corrective action as may be necessary.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
19.10.03 Continued Violation. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than Twenty-
Five ($25.00) nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment
for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court. Each day or fraction of a day in which such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Any officer, agent, or employee
guilty of aiding or abetting such violation, or, being responsible therefore, refuses
or neglects to take corrective action, shall be guilty as a principal.
(Rev. 09-25-1978)
19.10.04 Civil Liability. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to the City of Troy for any expense, loss or damage occasioned to the City
of Troy by reason of such violation, and recovery therefore may be had in an
appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Rev. 04-01-1964)
19.10.05 Abatement in Equity. Any continued violation, after due notice as provided in
Section 2.91, shall be deemed a public nuisance, per se, and may be abated by
suit in equity by the City of Troy in any court of competent jurisdiction. This
remedy shall be in addition to those heretofore provided.
(Rev. 09-09-1969)
19.10.06 Severability. If any portion of this Chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unenforceable, such portion shall be deemed to be a separate and independent
Chapter 19 - Sanitary Sewer Service
19-14
provision from the remainder of this Chapter, and shall have no effect on the
validity or enforceability of the remainder of this Chapter.
(Rev. 01-13-2003)
Chapter 20 - Water and Sewer Rates
20-1
1. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following definitions shall apply
in the interpretation of this Chapter.
1) "Premises" shall mean each lot, parcel of land, or building having a connection to the
Water Supply System or the Sewer System of the City, or is eligible for such a connection.
2) "Department" shall mean the City Division of Water and Sewer.
3) "Director" shall mean the Director of Public Works.
(Rev. 02-26-1973)
2. Water Benefit Fee. Whenever any person shall seek a connection to a water main, as defined in
Chapter 18 of this Code, he shall pay a benefit fee representing the cost of constructing such
water main, except in those cases where the cost of construction has been financed by special
assessment assessed to said premises or where construction has been financed by agreement
with the City and paid for by the owner of the subject property. The City Council shall from time to
time by resolution determine the cost to be borne by any premises which will benefit by a
connection thereto.
No permit for any connection to any water main shall be granted until the owner of the premises
shall pay or agree to pay the benefit fee attributed to such property.
(Rev. 09-25-1978)
3. Water Improvement Fund Fee. Anyone seeking to make a connection to any public water main
within the City shall first obtain a permit to make such connection from the Department. Prior to
issuance of said permit the applicant must pay a Water Improvement Fund Fee representing the
cost of construction of that portion of the City-wide water system attributable to the proportionate
benefit to be received by the applicant's property.
(Rev. 02-04-1980)
3.01 Computation of Water Improvement Fund Fee. The Water Improvement Fund Fee shall be based
on a unit factor system wherein each single-family residence shall be classified as one unit.
Other occupational uses shall be charged on multiples of units as may be determined by
resolution of the City Council from time to time. Said units and multiples thereof will be established
and computed on the same basis as for the Sanitary Trunk and Interceptor Connection Fee
contained further in this Chapter and the number of units charged to a premise shall be the same
for both water and sanitary sewer.
The Water Improvement Fund Fee shall be in the amount of $700.00 per unit, less any credit
determined under Section 3.02 hereof.
(Rev. 01-01-1982)
3.02 Credit on Water Improvement Fund Fee. In the case of any premises which have been subject to
special assessment for construction of a water main, a credit shall be allowed on the water
improvement fund fee for the amount of such special assessment levied for indirect availability of
water service. The amount of a special assessment for indirect availability of water service shall
be that amount in excess of the amount of that assessment attributable to direct benefit received
by the parcel originally assessed for immediate availability of water service. The assessor shall
prepare and submit to the Council for approval, by resolution, a schedule showing the amount of
all such assessments for indirect availability of water service presently existing and the parcels
Chapter 20 - Water and Sewer Rates
20-2
affected thereby. Each premise shall receive a credit for its pro-rata share of the assessment as
shown by said schedule. No such credit shall exceed one hundred (100%) percent of the water
improvement fund fee for any premises. No such credit shall be given for any premises
connection to the water supply system after July 1, 1993.
(Rev. 09-25-1978)
4. Water Connection Fee. A Water Connection Fee will be charged to each premise where the City
provides labor, equipment or materials to make a connection to the water main and/or to furnish
or install a water meter. Such fees shall not be less than the cost of the materials, installation and
overhead attributable to the particular service.
The City Council will establish, by resolution, such fees in accordance with the size of service
and/or meter to be furnished. The Water Connection Fee shall be paid or the applicant shall make
an agreement to pay the Fee prior to issuance of a connection permit by the City.
(Rev. 09-25-1978)
5. Basis of Charges. All water service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed, as
determined by the meter installed by the Department in the premises of water or sewage disposal
service customers.
(Rev. 06-02-2014; Eff. 07-01-2014)
5.01 Water Rates. Charges for water service to each premises within the City connected with the water
supply system, for each quarterly (3 month) period, shall be $40.50 per 1,000 cubic feet.
Minimum quarterly bills shall be $32.80.
(Rev. 05-06-2019; Eff. 07-01-2019)
Private fire service lines shall be billed at a rate equal to four (4) times the minimum water bill.
Charges for water service to premises outside the City shall be 150% of those for water service
within the City.
(Rev. 05-16-2005)
5.02 Sewer Rates
A. Charges for sewage disposal, operation and maintenance service shall be levied upon all
premises having any sewer connection with the public sewers.
Those premises using metered water shall pay $28.20 dollars per 1,000 cubic foot of
water consumption for sewage disposal and maintenance charges.
(Rev. 05-06-2019; Eff. 07-01-2019)
Where there is no water meter the sewage disposal and maintenance charges shall be
$141.00.
(Rev. 05-06-2019; Eff. 07-01-2019)
Water lines used solely for fire protection shall be exempt from sewage disposal and
maintenance charges.
(Rev. 05-13-2002)
Chapter 20 - Water and Sewer Rates
20-3
B. 1. Rates and charges established are based upon methodology which complies with
applicable EPA regulations.
2. Users of the system must be individually notified annually of costs for operation,
maintenance, replacement and debt service.
C. A ready to serve charge shall be levied on each quarterly bill in the amount of $22.80
dollars less any amount for current consumption up to the maximum of the ready to serve
charge.
(Rev. 05-06-2019; Eff. 07-01-2019)
5.03 Billing. Charges for all water service and sewage disposal service shall be billed and collected
quarterly by the City Treasurer. Water bills rendered shall be immediately due and payable and
may be paid without penalty up to and including the fifteenth day of the month when rendered,
and shall thereafter be subject to a ten (10%) per cent penalty. Bills shall be sent to "Occupant" at
the metered address, unless other arrangements are made by the owner. If the City Manager or
his/her designee determines that there are compelling extenuating circumstances resulting in an
undue hardship, the City Manager or his/her designee may structure a repayment schedule,
reduce or waive water and/or sewerage charges, late fees and penalties in accordance with the
Citys policy.
(Rev. 06-02-2014; Renumbered 05-19-2008)
6. Collection. The Director is hereby authorized to enforce the payment of charges for water service
to any premises by discontinuing the water service to such premises and the payment of charges
for sewage disposal service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing either the water
service or the sewage disposal service to such premises, or both, and an action of assumption
may be instituted by the City against the customer. The charges for water service and sewage
disposal service which, under the provisions of Act 94, Public Acts of 1933 of the State of
Michigan, as amended, are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are hereby
recognized to constitute such lien; and the City Treasurer shall, annually, on April 1, certify all
unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises which, on the 31st day of March
preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of six (6) months, to the City Assessor who shall
place the same on the next tax roll of the City. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the
same manner as general City Taxes. In cases where the City is properly notified in accordance
with said Act 94 of 1933, that a tenant is responsible for water or sewage disposal service
charges, no such service shall be commenced or continued to such premises until there has been
deposited with the City Treasurer, a sum sufficient to cover three (3) times the average quarterly
bill for such premises as estimated by the Director. Where the water service to any premises is
turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges or sewage disposal service charges,
the water service shall not be resumed until all delinquent charges have been paid or in the case
where tenants are responsible for the bill, as set forth above, the required deposit is made, and
there shall be assessed a water turn off  on service charge fee. In any other case where, in the
discretion of the City Treasurer, the collection of charges for water or sewage disposal service
may be difficult or uncertain, he may require a similar deposit. Such deposits may be applied
against any delinquent water or sewage disposal service charges and the application thereof shall
not affect the right of the Treasurer or Director to turn off the water service and/or sewer service,
to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear interest and
such deposit, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the customer making the
same when he shall discontinue receiving water and sewage disposal service or, except as to
tenants at to whom notice of responsibility for such charges has been filed with the City, when any
eight (8) successive quarterly bills shall have been paid by said customer with no delinquency.
(Rev. 05-20-2013, Eff. 07-01-2013)
Chapter 20 - Water and Sewer Rates
20-4
7. Sanitary Trunk and Interceptor Connection Fee. Anyone seeking to make a connection to any
sanitary sewer system within the City of Troy shall first obtain a permit to make such connection
from the Building Department. Prior to issuance of said permit the applicant must pay to the City a
Sanitary Trunk and Interceptor Connection Fee representing the cost of construction of that
portion of the City-wide sewer system attributable to the proportionate benefit to be received by
the applicant's property.
(Rev. 02-26-1973)
7.01 Computation. The Sanitary Trunk and Interceptor Connection Fee shall be based on a unit factor
system of computation wherein each single-family residence shall be classified as one unit. Other
occupational uses shall be charged on multiples of units as may be determined by resolution of
the City Council from time to time. The Sanitary Trunk and Interceptor Connection Fee shall be in
the amount of $200.00 per unit.
(Rev. 01-01-1982)
8. Sewer Benefit Fee. Whenever any person shall seek a connection to a public sewer, as defined in
Chapter 19 of this Code, he shall pay a sewer benefit fee in lieu of paying the cost of constructing
such public sewer, except in those cases where the cost of construction has been financed by
special assessments assessed to said premises, or by agreement and paid by the owner thereof.
The City Engineer shall determine which properties shall be allowed or required to tap the public
sewer based on sewer depth, distance from the public sewer, and other engineering and cost
factors. The sewer benefit fee, representing the cost of construction of that portion of the Citywide
sewer system attributable to the proportionate benefit to be received by the applicant's
property, shall be determined by resolution of the City Council from time to time. No permit for any
connection to any public sewer shall be granted until the owner of the premises shall pay or agree
to pay the sewer benefit fee attributable to such property.
(Rev. 09-25-1978)
9. Inspection Fee. An inspection charge shall be included in the cost of a water connection permit for
all single family residences: Other inspection fees shall be based on estimates of actual cost to
the City for labor, materials and contingencies and shall be computed by the Chief Building
Inspector for Sewer and the Superintendent of Public Services for Water.
(Rev. 05-19-2008)
10. Payment of Fees. The Sanitary Trunk and Interceptor Connection Fee, the Sewer Benefit Fee and
Sewer Permit Fee (collectively in this Section called "Sewer Fees") and/or the Water Improvement
Fund Fee, Water Benefit Fee, and the Water Connection Fee (collectively in this Section called
"Water Fees") shall be paid as follows:
(Rev. 02-26-1973)
10.01 Cash payments shall be made for all Sewer Fees payable for new buildings constructed in areas
where public sewers, as defined in Chapter 19 of this Code, are available, or construction of same
has been approved by the City Council. No building permit shall be issued for construction of a
new building until all Sewer Fees have been paid and the sewer permit has been obtained.
The above regulation is also applicable to building permits for additions to existing structures other
than single-family residences. Cash payment for Sewer Fees shall be made for that portion of the
structure to be added, while extended payment arrangements as hereinafter provided may be
made for that portion of the structure existing prior to the availability of sewer. Regardless of the
method of payment chosen by the owner, sewer permits for the entire structure must be obtained
Chapter 20 - Water and Sewer Rates
20-5
prior to issuance of building permits for such additions.
(Rev. 09-25-1978)
10.02 Cash payments shall be made for all Water Fees payable for new buildings constructed in areas
where public Water Mains, as defined in Chapter 18 of this Code, are available, or construction of
same has been approved by the City Council, and where the Water Main is to be used for such
new building. When the Water Main is to be used to serve such new building, no building permit
shall be issued for construction until all Water Fees have been paid and a water permit has been
issued.
The above regulation is also applicable to building permits for additions to existing structures other
than single family residences and where the Water Main is in use or shown to be used by the
addition. Cash payment for Water Fees shall be made for that portion of the structure to be
added, while extended payment as hereinafter provided may be made for that portion of the
structure existing prior to the availability of water. Regardless of the method of payment chosen by
the owner, when the Water Main is to be used, water permits for the entire structure must be
obtained prior to issuance of building permits for such additions.
(Rev. 09-25-1978)
10.03 Sewer fees and/or water fees for existing buildings may be paid for at the time of permit issuance,
or, at the option of the owner, may be paid in equal installments, including interest at 6% per
annum on the unpaid balance for a period not to exceed 40 years; one installment shall be billed
with each bill for water or sewer service. For purposes of this section, an existing building also
includes a single family home that replaces a previous single family home provided the owner
demonstrates that he/she had an ownership interest in the subject property as of August 15,
2005, and construction on the new home is commenced within six months of the demolition of the
old home.
Additional principal payments may be made with any installment.
(Rev. 07-21-2008)
11. Service Leads. When a sewer lead has not been provided to make an authorized connection to
an available sewer, it shall be the responsibility of the benefiting property to provide same.
(Rev. 06-09-1986)
12. Unauthorized Connections. In the event any connection is made to the City Sewer system without
a permit having been obtained from the City Building Department for such connection, a charge of
double the current Interceptor Connection Fee will be charged to the owners of the property so
connected and will be collected in the same manner prescribed by the Charter for the collection of
unpaid City taxes.
(Rev. 12-03-1979)
13. Additional Charges. Those premises assigned sewage disposal charges for industrial cost
recovery and/or high strength surcharges as required by Federal Law, shall make payment for
said charges as herein provided for water and sewage disposal services.
(Rev. 02-04-1980)
14. Definitions:
Chapter 20 - Water and Sewer Rates
20-6
a) Industrial User: shall mean a source of discharge under regulations issued pursuant to the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. 1342, which source originates from, but is
not limited to, facilities engaged in industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research,
including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
b) Commercial User: shall mean all non-domestic sources of indirect discharge, other than
industrial users, as defined herein including but not limited to the following: A publicly or
privately owned facility where persons are engaged in the exchange or sale of goods or
services, hospitals, retail establishments and facilities operated by state governments.
c) Residential User: shall include schools, churches, municipal buildings and structures
designed for habitation. Structures designed for habitation shall include but not be limited
to single-family homes, apartment buildings, condominiums, town houses and mobile
homes.
d) Non-residential User: shall mean any user other than an industrial user, a commercial user
or a residential user.
15. High Strength Surcharge: A high strength surcharge shall be levied against all industrial and
commercial users, with the exception of restaurants, which users contribute sewage to the system
with pollutant concentration levels exceeding the following:
A) 275 milligrams per liter (mg/l) of Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)
B) 350 milligrams per liter (mg/l) of Total Suspended Solids (TSS)
C) 12 milligrams per liter (mg/l) of Phosphorus (P)
D) 100 milligrams per liter (mg/l) of Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG)
(Rev. 05-11-2009)
16. Non-residential Flow Surcharge: The City of Troy shall pay a quarterly non-residential surcharge
as established from time to time by the Oakland County Water Resources Commissioner or
his/her representative, the State of Michigan, or its authorized representative, or the Great Lakes
Water Authority. The non-residential surcharge shall be based on the total number and size of
water meters used by non-residential users of the system. Where metered water is not available,
the Assigned Water Meter size shall be reported by the City in accordance with the following
schedule:
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
Units Assigned in Accordance With the
Current Oakland County Department of Public
Works Schedule of Unit Assignment Factors
Assigned Water
Meter Size
1 - 4 5/8" and 3/4"
5 - 10 1"
11 - 20 1-1/2"
21 - 32 2"
33 - 64 3"
65 - 100 4"
101 - 200 6"
Chapter 20 - Water and Sewer Rates
20-7
The City shall report quarterly to the Oakland County Water Resources Commissioner and/or the
Great Lakes Water Authority the total number and size of water meters used by non-residential
users or alternatively, the Assigned Water Meter size pursuant to the above schedule.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
17. Sanitary Wastewater Disposal Charge: The City of Troy shall pay a sanitary wastewater disposal
charge. This charge shall be a fixed annual fee as established by the Oakland County Water
Resources Commissioner.
(Rev. 03-21-2016)
Chapter 21 - Underground Electric Lines
21-1
1. Definition.
The following definition shall apply in the interpretation of this Chapter:
(1) Heavily Congested Business District -
Heavily congested business districts shall include but not be limited to B-2, B-3,
O-S-C, O-M and O-1 zoning districts and related land uses.
(Rev. 01-07-1974)
2. All lines for electrical power transmitted by wire or cable, including all individual service
connections, shall be placed underground throughout heavily congested business
districts.
3. In case of an emergency or unusual situation which would make it impossible for an
electric utility to continue service or unreasonably expensive for it to provide temporary
service, the Director of Public Works may issue a temporary permit for the erection of
poles and wires in a heavily congested business district as he may find to be reasonably
necessary to the continuance of such service in said emergency or to the providing of
such temporary service.
4. Each such temporary permit shall expire upon the termination date therein stated, at
which time such emergency or temporary service shall be discontinued and the poles and
wires erected thereunder removed. If no expiration date is stated in any such permit, it
may be terminated by the Director of Public Works at any time upon finding that the
conditions which justified its granting no longer exist, whereupon all poles and wires
placed thereunder shall within such reasonable time as may be fixed by the Director of
Public Works be removed.
5. All underground electric facilities shall be planned and constructed so as not to conflict
with other underground utilities.
6. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the procedures and standards
contained in any franchise or other agreement with the City of Troy or as approved by the
Michigan Public Service Commission.
(07-23-1973)
Chapter 22  Wastewater
22-1
ADOPTED: December 10, 1990; to be effective upon publication by Oakland County.
(Not published as of March 28, 1991)
Chapter 23  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
23.01 Purpose and Interpretation
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens of the City of Troy through the regulation of non-storm water
discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as
required by federal and state law. This Chapter establishes methods for controlling
the introduction of pollutants into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
(MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this Chapter are:
(a) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm water
discharges by any user.
(b) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
(c) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, observations, and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter.
23.02 Definitions
For the purpose of the provisions of this Chapter, the following words and phrases
shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from
the context that a different meaning is intended.
Authorized Enforcement Agency. The City of Troy, through its Ordinances, and/or
through its City Manager, shall designate authorized officials to enforce this
Chapter, which shall specifically include the building official, all inspectors and
code enforcement officials and any other appropriate individual. Where applicable
the term may also mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Administrator or his/her designees, and/or the Director of the Michigan Department
of Environment, Great Lakes & Energy, or any successor agency.
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water,
receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include
treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to: control site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.  1251 et
seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
Construction Activity. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These
include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five acres or more
requiring an issued permit and small construction activities impacting one to five
acres of land deemed to operate under a national permit. Such activities include,
but are not limited to: clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
Chapter 23  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
Illegal Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm
drain system, except as exempted in section 23.03.04 of this Chapter.
Illicit Connections. An illicit connection means either of the following:
(a) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not
limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm
drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the authorized enforcement
agency; or
(b) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by the authorized enforcement
agency.
Industrial Activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40
CFR  122.26(b)(14).
MS4  A Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm water Discharge
Permit. A permit issued by the EPA (or by the State of Michigan under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area-wide basis.
Non-storm water Discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of storm water.
Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or
other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's
agent.
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage,
Chapter 23  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and
noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or
unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking areas.
Storm drainage system. Publicly-owned or privately-owned facilities by which
storm water is collected and/or conveyed including, but not limited to, any roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains,
pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or
altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
Storm water. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
StormWater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). A document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions
to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water
conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water,
discharged from a facility.
23.03 General Provisions
23.03.01 Applicability.
This Chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on
any developed or undeveloped land unless explicitly exempted by the authorized
enforcement agency.
23.03.02 Responsibility for Administration.
The designees identified in the Troy Ordinances and any City Managers
designee(s) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
Chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement
agency may be delegated in writing by the City Manager to persons or entities
acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
23.03.03 Minimum Standards.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this Chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution,
nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
23.03.04 Prohibition of Illegal Discharges.
Chapter 23  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drain system
or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to: pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water
quality standards, other than storm water.
The following discharges or flows are exempt from the prohibitions established by
this Chapter, as long as they are not a significant source of pollutants and/or a
significant contributor to violations of federal and state water quality standards:
(a) Water line flushing or discharges from other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering runoff, diverted stream flows, rising ground water,
ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground
water, foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation,
springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or
wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than one (1)
PPM chlorine) from single, two, or three family residences, fire-fighting
activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
(b) Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(c) Dye testing, as long as there is a verbal notification to the authorized
enforcement agency prior to the time of the test and compliance with state and
federal environmental quality procedures.
(d) Any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or
waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the EPA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
23.03.05 Prohibition of illicit connections.
(a) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(b) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made
in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law
or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(c) A person is considered to be in violation of this Chapter if the person connects
a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
23.03.06 Right of Entry for Inspection.
Chapter 23  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
Authorized enforcement agency representatives shall be permitted to enter upon
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing of suspected non-storm water discharges in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter. Refusal of reasonable access to the
authorized representatives of the Enforcement Agency to any part of the
premises is a violation of this Chapter.
23.03.07 Suspension or Termination of MS4 Access.
(a) Suspension Due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. The authorized
enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the State or United States. If the violator fails to comply with
a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement
agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the MS4 or waters of the State or United States, or to minimize
danger to persons.
(b) Termination of Access Due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this Chapter may have their MS4 access
suspended or terminated by an order of the 52-4 Judicial District Court if such
suspension or termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge.
Additionally, the enforcing agency may suspend the persons access to the
MS4 by sending written notification to a violator, which shall detail the violation,
notify the alleged violator and property owner if the property owner is not the
alleged violator of the suspension and proposed termination of its MS4 access.
Within ten days after such a notice is sent, the violator may submit a written
appeal of the suspension to the Troy City Clerk. If no appeal is timely
received, then the enforcing agency shall immediately terminate the violating
persons access to the MS4. If a timely appeal is received, then the City Clerk
shall submit the written appeal and any supporting documentation from the
appellant or the enforcing agency representatives to the Troy City Manager for
review and decision. Within 30 days of the receipt of a timely written appeal,
the City Manager shall send a written determination to the appellant,
determining whether or not the person discharged to the MS4 in violation of
this Chapter, and if so, whether or not the suspension should be continued,
and/or the persons access to the MS4 should be terminated. The City
Managers decision is final, and appealable only if allowed under Michigan law.
23.03.08 Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized
enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
23.03.09 Monitoring of Discharges.
Chapter 23  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated
with industrial activity, including construction activity.
(a) The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this Chapter as often as may be necessary
to determine compliance with this Chapter. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements
to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(b) Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
observation, or examination and also copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
(c) The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's storm water discharge. Any such equipment shall not be tampered
with, removed, or interfered with so as to adversely affect its intended function
of monitoring and/or sampling.
(d) The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
(e) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility
to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at
the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(f) Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access
to a permitted facility are a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of
this Chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit
to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense
if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to
the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this Chapter.
(g) If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of
the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
Chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this
Chapter 23  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
Chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction, and/or pursue injunctive relief.
23.03.10 Requirement to Prevent, Control, and Reduce Storm Water Pollutants by the Use
of Best Management Practices.
The authorized enforcement agency may adopt requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or
waters of the State of Michigan or the United States The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
wastes into the municipal storm drain system or water courses through the use of
these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the
extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as
necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
23.03.11 Water course Protection.
Every person owning property through which a water course passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the
property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would
pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. However, publicly or privately owned drains that are not owned by
the property owner are the responsibility of the drain owner. In addition, the owner
or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
water course, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function,
or physical integrity of the watercourse.
23.03.12 Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for
a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or
operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which
are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm
water, the storm drain system, or water of the State of Michigan or the United
States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of
hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized and
designated enforcement agency representative(s) in person or by phone or
Chapter 23  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
facsimile or email and/or other electronic or digital means as may be available or
provided by the authorized enforcement agency no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the authorized and designated enforcement agency
representative within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge
of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such
records shall be retained for at least three (3) years.
23.04 Penalties and Enforcement
23.04.01 Enforcement, Notice of Violation.
a. Notice of Violation.
Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may issue a written violation notice to the responsible person
and the owner of the property if the responsible person is not the owner. Such
notice may require without limitation:
(i) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(ii) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(iii) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(iv) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
(v) The payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(vi) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
b. Abatement of a Violation.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the
notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must
be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to
remediate or restore within the established deadline, the enforcing agency may
issue a municipal civil infraction citation and may seek an order from any court of
competent jurisdiction requiring the remediation or restoration to be completed
within an established deadline, and authorizing the enforcing agency or a
contractor to complete the work at the violators expense if not timely completed.
23.04.02 Enforcement Measures.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the enforcement agency or designated contractor to
enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
23.04.03 Cost of Abatement of the Violation.
Chapter 23  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
If the enforcing agency or its contractor are required to restore or remediate the
property or otherwise abate a violation of this Chapter, as set forth above, then the
enforcing agency will send a written invoice detailing the enforcing agencys costs
of the necessary abatement to the property owner within fifteen (15) days after
abatement of the violation. The costs may include administrative costs. If the
amount due is not paid timely, the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of
the assessment.
23.04.04 Injunctive Relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any
of the requirements of this Chapter. If a person has violated or continues to violate
the provisions of this Chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which
would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
23.04.05 Compensatory Action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this
Chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may allow a violator to perform
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. The decision to seek alternative
compensatory actions does not waive the City or authorized enforcement agencys
right to seek legal enforcement from a court of law.
23.04.06 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is
deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared a nuisance,
public nuisance and nuisance per se and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
23.04.07 Violations.
(a) Any person, firm or corporation determined to have been in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
and subject to the provisions of this Code.
(b) The City, in addition to other remedies, may authorize any appropriate legal
action or proceeding to prevent, abate or restrain the violation.
(c) Each day's continuance of a violation shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. Expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as
damages against the violation.
Chapter 23  Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
23.04.08 Remedies Not Exclusive.
The remedies listed in this Chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ordinance Approved 11-25-2019; Effectivee 12-02-2019)
Chapter 26 - Parks - General Regulations
26-1
26.01 Restricted Use of Park. The use and enjoyment of the Parks that are established
and maintained by the City of Troy shall be, and is hereby, restricted to the
following:
(a) Persons permanently residing within the corporate limits of the City of Troy
and their families.
(b) Persons owning and paying taxes on real estate within the corporate limits
of the City of Troy, and their families.
(c) Persons temporarily residing within the corporate limits of the City of Troy.
(d) Bona fide guests of any person referred to in paragraphs a, b, and c above,
attending the parks in the company of such person.
(e) Special permission to use the Park may be authorized by the City Manager
to Civic, Social, Cultural, Church and Club groups and the like, and to
visiting dignitaries, officers of other governmental agencies, City employees,
and in such other special instances where, in the judgment of the Manager,
the issuance of special permission will serve the public benefit and welfare.
26.02 Protection of Park Property. No person shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure,
tamper with, displace or remove any buildings, tables, benches, fireplaces, trees,
shrubs, flowers or any other park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either
real or personal. No structure, booth, tent or stall shall be erected on park property
for any purpose without permission from the City Manager.
26.03 Traffic Regulations. Each person shall comply with all provisions of the City Code
relative to equipment and operation of motor vehicles. No person shall drive or
park a motor vehicle on any park area except roads or parking area, or such
other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking
areas by the City Manager or his/her designee.
26.04 Service and Repair of Autos. No person shall clean, wash, polish, repair, or in any
manner service any motor vehicle or trailer in any public park or playground or
cause the same to be done. For the purpose of this Chapter, the term "repair"
means the replacement of old, worn-out parts of the vehicle with new parts, and
the term "service" means the draining of oil, sludge, gasoline and water and
other engine cooling fluids for the purpose of replacing same with a new supply.
This prohibition shall not apply to the changing of deflated tires or the performing
of necessary emergency work on a disabled car for the purpose of immediate
movement.
26.05 Motor Cycles. Unless authorized, motor vehicles, including, motorcycles, motor
scooters or motor bicycles or motor cars commonly known as "go carts" that are
lawfully permitted to be driven, ridden or operated on public streets shall be
Chapter 26 - Parks - General Regulations
26-2
permitted only on the improved or paved portion of the right of way designated for
vehicles in any public park, playground or any other public property.
26.06 Refuse and Trash Disposal. No person shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles,
broken glass, ashes, boxes, cans, rubbish, waste, garbage or other trash of any
nature in a public park, except in proper receptacles where they are provided.
Where proper receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
26.07 Fires. No person shall kindle or build a fire in any public park or playground except
in receptacles provided therein for public use, or in private receptacles or grills,
provided that the allowable receptacles or grills are placed in areas designated
for that purpose.
26.08 Fireworks. No person shall discharge, ignite, use, possess, activate or throw
consumer fireworks or display fireworks in a public park, unless the Troy Fire Chief
or his/her designee issues a permit to the person in advance and in accordance
with the fire departments permit policy and the person is in compliance with the
permit conditions. Fireworks are defined in the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act,
2011 Public Act No. 256 (MCL 28.451), as amended.
(Revised 04/07/2014)
26.09 Disorderly Conduct. No person shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or
benches or other park area, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive,
insulting or indecent language or behavior, or engage in any disorderly conduct or
behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.
26.10 Merchandising and Advertising. Except for any regularly licensed concessionaire
acting by and under the authority and regulation of the City Manager, or any
organization that is granted a Non-Profit Organizational Permit, no person shall
expose or offer for sale in a park any saleable merchandise. The City Manager
can grant a Non-Profit Organizational Permit to any civic, social, cultural, church,
club groups and the like, or visiting dignitaries or officers of other governmental
agencies or employees, as long as the special permission will serve the public
benefit and welfare. Limitations as to time, location, duration, or other restrictions
may be authorized by the City Manager in the granting of a Non-Profit
Organizational Permit, and a violation of these conditions may result in a
revocation of the Non-Profit Organizational Permit. Persons requesting a Non-
Profit Organizational Permit shall fully complete the application for the Permit,
which shall be available through the Parks and Recreation Department, and
submit it to the Parks and Recreation Department at least ten days prior to the
requested event. No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign,
placard, advertisement, or inscription whatsoever in any park, and no person shall
erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever in any park (with the exception
Chapter 26 - Parks - General Regulations
26-3
of directional signs that are authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee).
The exception to this prohibition is for advertising banners used during special
events for non-profit community based organizations, as long as approval for the
placement of said banners is granted by the City Manager and/or his designee.
The banners shall be limited to 48 square feet in size, and shall not advertise
tobacco, alcohol or political candidates.
26.11 Alcoholic Beverages. No person shall possess or consume alcoholic beverages
in a public park at any time unless the Recreation Director or his/her designee
has issued a written park shelter reservation permit that specifically allows for the
consumption of beer or wine (as defined in the Michigan Liquor Control Code,
Public Acts of 1998 No. 58, as amended; MCL 436.1101), in the park on the
designated date, location and time, and the person is in compliance with the
terms of the issued permit. If such a permit is issued, the possession or
consumption of beer or wine is limited to the park shelter and its immediate
vicinity, and does not extend to the ball diamonds, soccer fields, childrens play
areas, restrooms, parking lots, or other areas of the park.
(Revised 04/07/2014)
26.12 Bicycles, Games and Activities. No person shall take part in or abet bicycle riding,
or the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such
as ball, arrows, or javelins, except in areas specifically set apart for such forms of
recreation.
26.13 Radio Controlled Models. No person shall operate any radio controlled model
planes, rockets, boats or wheeled model vehicles in any park, except in areas
specifically designated and set apart for such forms of recreation.
26.14 Enclosures. No person shall take down, climb over or upon, interfere with, disturb
or displace or walk upon any rails, posts, boards, fence, or other structures
enclosing any park or playground or portion thereof.
26.15 Animals. No person shall permit any dog that is owned by him/her or under his/her
control or custody to enter any park where a sign or signs are posted bearing the
legend "No Dogs Allowed", or other words to that same effect. In park areas where
dogs are permitted, such dogs shall at all times be kept under reasonable control
by means of a leash, except in accordance with the rules for the Daisy Knight Dog
Park. No person shall permit any other animal (either wild or domestic) that is
owned by him/her or under his/her control or custody to enter any park, except
when special permission is granted by the City Manager.
(Revised 09-11-2017; Effective 09-21-2017)
26.16 Loitering. No person shall loiter or remain upon any public park or playground
between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.; provided, however, that this
Chapter 26 - Parks - General Regulations
26-4
section shall not apply to employees of the City of Troy in the course of their duties
or to activities being held under the auspices of the Parks and Recreation
Department. The City Manager is hereby empowered to waive this section when
such action will serve the public benefit and welfare.
26.17 Additional Rules. The City Manager is hereby empowered to make such rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of the City Council, pertaining to the conduct
and use of parks and public grounds as are necessary to administer the same and
to protect public property and the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public.
Each person shall comply with such rules and regulations.
(Rev. 07-18-05)
Chapter 27  Parks and Recreation Board
27-1
27.10 Creation. The Parks and Recreation Board shall consist of eight members, who
shall have the qualifications of electors. All members shall serve without
compensation. A student representative may be appointed for a one (1) year
term by City Council. The student representative shall serve as an ex-officio,
non-voting member of the Board. The Parks and Recreation Director shall serve
as an ex-officio, non-voting member of the Board and shall be responsible to the
City Manager.
27.20 Membership and Terms. The Troy City Council shall appoint the following
members to the Parks and Recreation Board:
(1) Seven at-large representatives, who shall serve for three (3) year
overlapping terms.
(2) One representative from the Troy School Board of Education, who shall be
nominated by the Board of Education and who shall serve for a one (1) year
term.
27.30 Removal and Vacancies. Board members may, after a public hearing, be
removed by the City Council for neglect of duty or malfeasance in office.
Vacancies occurring on the Board shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointment.
27.40 Organization. The Board shall elect its chairman from among its members. The
Board may also elect members for any other offices that the Board deems
necessary. The term of the chairman shall be one year, and the chairman shall
be eligible for re-election. The Board shall hold at least one regular meeting
every two months. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall
keep a record of its actions, which record shall be public record.
27.50 Powers and Duties. The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To recommend to the City Manager a budget providing for a parks and
recreation program.
(2) To recommend to the City Council policies for operating a parks and
recreation program.
(3) To recommend to the City Council a long-term capital improvements
program for parks and recreational facilities, including the acquisition of
park sites.
(4) To promote activities that will benefit the City parks and recreation
program, including the encouragement of organized team athletic
programs.
27.60 Duties of Director. The Parks and Recreation Director shall have the following
responsibilities to the Board:
(1) To attend the meetings of the Parks and Recreation Board, to take part in
discussions of the Board and to keep the Board informed of parks and
recreation activities.
Chapter 27  Parks and Recreation Board
27-2
(2) To inform the City Manager of the recommendations of the Board so that
these recommendations can be acted upon by the City Council and/or the
City Manager.
(Rev. 09/26/2011)
Chapter 28 - Tree Regulations
28-1
1. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
(A) The word "tree" unless the context clearly indicates otherwise also means shrubs, bushes
and all other woody vegetation. Specific enumeration herein is illustrative and not
delimiting.
(B) The term "public utility" shall mean any person owning or operating any pole, line, pipe or
conduit located in any public street or over or along any public easement or right-of-way
for the transmission of electricity, gas, telephone service or telegraph service or any other
means of electronic communication including the television transmission system and/or
co-axial C.A.T.V. cable.
(C) The words "prohibited species" shall mean any tree of the following species:
1) Acer Disycarpum (Silver Maple)
2) Acer Negundo (Box Elder)
3) Ailanthus Altissima (Tree of Heaven)
4) Berberis Vulgaris (European Barberry)
5) Catalpa Speciosa (Northern Catalpa)
6) Juniperus Virginana (Eastern Red Cedar)
7) Populus (Poplar)
8) Salix (Willow)
9) Ulmus Americanana (American Elm)
10) Ulmus Parviflora (Chinese Elm)
(D) The word "Department" shall mean the Department of Parks and Recreation of the City of
Troy.
(E) "Director" shall mean the Director of Parks and Recreation and any and all employees
under his direction authorized by him to seek compliance with provisions of this Chapter.
(F) Provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise specifically stated herein, shall apply only
to public streets, parkways, parks, and other land publicly owned or controlled by the City
or to such land privately owned when such land comes within the purview of this chapter
because of the maintenance or continuation of a hazard injurious to the public in general.
Chapter 28 - Tree Regulations
28-2
2. Responsibility. The Director shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter together with his duly appointed representative and employees operating under his
direction. The Director shall have exclusive jurisdiction and supervision over all trees, other
plants, and grassy areas planted or growing in public places.
(A) Preserve or Remove. The Director shall have the authority and it shall be his duty to plant,
trim, spray, preserve and remove trees and other plants and grassy areas in public places
to insure safety or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public spaces.
(B) Order to Preserve or Remove. The Director shall have the authority and it shall be his
duty to order the trimming, preservation or removal of trees or plants on private property
when he shall find such action necessary to public safety or to prevent the spread of
disease or insects to public trees and places.
(C) Supervision. The Director shall have the authority and it shall be his duty to supervise all
work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(D) Issue Conditional Permits. The Director shall have the authority to affix reasonable
conditions to the granting of a permit hereunder.
(Rev. 2-28-77)
3. Permits for Tree Planting, Care, Removal.
(A) Preserve or Remove. No person shall trim, spray, preserve or remove trees, other plants
and grassy areas in public places without first filing an application and procuring a permit
from the Director.
1) Application Data. The application required herein shall state the number and kind
of trees to be trimmed, sprayed, preserved or removed; the kind of treatment to be
administered, the kind and condition of nearest trees upon the adjoining property;
and such other information as the Director shall find reasonably necessary to a fair
determination of whether a permit should be issued hereunder.
2) Standards for Issuance. The Director shall issue the permit provided for herein
when he finds that the desired action or treatment is necessary and that the
proposed method and workmanship are satisfactory and that such action is in
conformance with this chapter.
(B) Plant. No person shall plant or set out any tree or plant in a public place without first filing
an application and procuring a permit from the Director.
1) Application Data. The application required herein shall state the number of trees
or plants to be planted or set out, the location, grade and variety of each tree or
plant, the method of planting, including the supplying of suitable soil and such
other information that the Director shall find reasonably necessary to a fair
determination of whether a permit shall be issued hereunder.
Chapter 28 - Tree Regulations
28-3
2) Standards for Issuance. The Director shall issue the permit provided for herein
when he finds that the proposed plantings conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
4. Public Tree Removal. The Department shall have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares,
and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure safety or to preserve the symmetry and
beauty of such public grounds. The Director may remove or cause or order to be removed, any
tree or part thereof which is in any unsafe condition or which is prohibited species, or is affected
with any injurious disease, fungus, insect or other pest. Whenever the Department shall remove
any tree, plant or shrub, solely for the purpose of constructing any public work, the Director shall,
if practicable, replace the same at public expense, at some nearby location by planting another
tree, plant or shrub, not necessarily of the same type.
5. Duties of Private Owners. It shall be the duty of any person growing trees within the City:
(A) Trim. To trim his trees so as not to cause a hazard to public places or interfere with the
proper lighting of public highways by the street lights, and so that a minimum clearance of
any overhead portion thereof shall be eight (8) feet above the surface of the street or rightof-
way. Said person shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or
decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The City shall have
the right to trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with vehicular
and/or pedestrian traffic in public places or the proper spread of light along the street from
a street light, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, such trimming
to be confined to the area immediately above the right-of-way.
(B) Treat or Remove. To treat or remove any tree or plant so diseased or insect-ridden as to
constitute a hazard to trees or plants in public places.
(C) Prohibited Species. To refrain from planting any of the following species:
(1) Acer Disycarpum (Silver Maple).
(2) Acer Negundo (Box Elder).
(3) Ailanthus Altissima (Tree of Heaven).
(4) Berberis Vulgaris (Eurpoean Barberry).
(5) Catalpa Speciosa (Northern Catalpa).
(6) Juniperus Virginana (Eastern Red Cedar).
(7) Populus (Poplar).
(8) Salix (Willow).
(9) Ulmus Americana (American Elm).
(10) Ulmus Parviflora (Chinese Elm).
Chapter 28 - Tree Regulations
28-4
(D) Tree Protection Prior to Development. To prevent the unnecessary destruction of trees on
land where a building permit or subdivision approval has not been issued, the destruction
within any five (5) year period, of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the trees on any
parcel of real property within the City, without prior approval of the director shall be
prohibited.
(Rev. 6-5-89)
6. Tree Protection. For All Trees in Public Places: No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or
destroy any tree or shrub, or set any fire within ten (10) feet of any tree or permit any fire, or the
heat thereof, to injure any portion of any tree. No toxic chemicals or other injurious materials shall
be allowed to seep, drain or be emptied on, near or about any tree. No electric wires or any other
lines or wires shall be permitted to come in contact with any tree or shrub in any manner that shall
cause damage thereto, and no person shall attach any electric insulation to any tree. No person
shall use any tree as an anchor except by special written permit from the Director and no material
shall be fastened to or hung on any tree. All persons having under their care, custody or control,
facilities which may interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree, shall, after notice thereof by
the Director, promptly abate such interference in such manner as shall permit the trimming or
removal of such trees by the Department.
7. Tree Protection During Development, For all Trees in Public Places: During any building,
renovating or razing operations, the builder shall erect and maintain suitable protective barriers
around all trees and also for all trees specified to be maintained on private property, so as to
prevent damage to said trees and shall not allow storage of equipment, materials, debris or fill to
be placed in this area except as may be necessary for a reasonable time if no other storage
space is available.
8. Excavations Near Trees. Excavations and driveways shall not be placed within five (5) feet of any
existing tree without a written permit from the Director. Any person making such excavation or
construction shall guard any tree within six (6) feet thereof with a good substantial frame box to be
approved by the Director and all building material and other debris shall be kept at least four (4)
feet from any tree.
9. Covering Surface Near Trees. No person shall place within the street right-of-way any stone,
brick, sand, concrete or other materials which will in any way impede the full and free passage of
water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, except a sidewalk of authorized width and location.
10. Regulations for Planting in a Public Place. Work done under a permit issued hereunder shall be
performed in strict accordance with the terms thereof and with the following regulations
established for the planting, trimming and care of trees in public places:
(A) Trees must not be less than one inch (1") in diameter of trunk one foot (1') above the
ground.
(B) All trees from two (2") to four (4") inches in diameter of trunk one foot (1') above the
ground must be protected and supported by tree guards.
(C) All cuts above one (1") high in diameter must be water-proofed.
(D) All trees will be planted on fifty (50') foot centers, unless a special permit is obtained from
the Director.
Chapter 28 - Tree Regulations
28-5
(E) No tree will be planted closer than three and one-half (3 1/2) feet to the curb, and no
closer than three (3) feet to the sidewalk.
(F) No tree shall be planted on private property within thirty (30) feet of a tree planted in the
right-of-way.
(G) No tree shall be planted within fifteen (15) feet either side of a driveway that opens onto a
public street.
11. Corner Clearance. All shrubs and bushes located on the triangle formed by two (2) right-of-way
lines at the intersection of two (2) streets and extending for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet each
way from the intersection of the right-of-way lines on any corner lot within the city, shall not be
permitted to grow to a height of more than thirty (30) inches from the established street grade, in
order that the view of the driver of a vehicle approaching a street intersection shall not be
obstructed.
Trees may be planted and maintained on private property in this area, provided that all branches
are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of eight (8) feet above the roadway
surface. Any person failing to trim any trees, shrubs or bushes in conformity with this section shall
be notified by the Director in the manner provided in Section 14 of this chapter, to do so and such
notice shall require trimming in conformity with this section within the time prescribed in the notice
as provided in Section 14 B of this Chapter. Upon the expiration of such period, the Director may
cause the trimming to be done and the cost thereof may be collected from the owner of said
property as provided for in Section 14 E of this chapter.
12. Private Trees - Disease and Infestations. When the Director shall discover that any tree growing
on private property within the City is affected with any dangerous and infectious insect infestation
or tree disease, he shall forthwith serve a written order upon the person in the manner specified in
Section 14 of this chapter, describing the tree, its location and the nature of the infestation or tree
disease, and ordering the person to take such measures as may be reasonably necessary. Such
order may require the pruning, spraying or destruction of trees as may be reasonably necessary.
Every such order shall be complied with within ten (10) days after service thereof, or within such
additional time as may be stipulated in such order as provided in Section 14 B.
13. Dutch Elm Disease. Every elm tree, regardless of species or variety, infected with the fungus
ceratostomella ulmi, commonly called dutch elm disease, shall be removed if on public property,
within ten (10) days after the Director shall learn of the condition and, if on private property within
the time prescribed in the order as specified in Section 14 B. No person shall possess, sell, give
away or transport any elm afflicted with the fungus ceratostomella ulmi nor any wood from, or
parts of, any tree so afflicted, except that wood, branches and roots of any tree so afflicted may
be transported to a place for burning, if first sprayed thoroughly with a solution of sevin 50%
wettable solution two (2) tbs/gal. in a manner approved by the Director.
14. Procedure Upon Order to Preserve or Remove. When the director or any one under his
supervision and control shall find it necessary to order the trimming, preservation, or removal of
trees or plants upon private property as authorized by this chapter herein he shall serve a written
order to correct the dangerous condition upon the person.
Chapter 28 - Tree Regulations
28-6
(A) Method of Service. Such order required herein shall be served in one of the following
ways.
(1) By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible.
(2) By leaving the order with some person of suitable age and discretion upon the
premises.
(3) By mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the owner of the
premises by receipted mail.
(4) By affixing a copy of the order to the door at the entrance to the premises in
violation.
(5) By publishing the order in a local paper once a week for three (3) successive
weeks.
(B) Time for Compliance. Such order required herein shall set forth a time limit for compliance
dependent upon the hazard and danger created by the violation. In no case shall the time
limit be less than ten (10) days, except in case of extreme danger, nor more than thirty
(30) days. In case of extreme danger to persons or public property and eliminate or abate
the hazard or danger and assess the costs to the owner as provided in Section 14(E) of
this Chapter. An extreme danger shall be described as any situation or occurrence which
would cause an immediate danger to the life and limb of any person upon any public way
within the City of Troy.
(C) Appeal from Order. A person to whom such order is directed shall have the right, within
forty-eight (48) hours of service of such order, to appeal to the City Manager of the City of
Troy who shall review such order within five (5) working days and file his decision thereon
with the City Clerk with a copy to the appellant which shall be served in any of the methods
herein provided in paragraph (A) hereof, unless the order is revoked or modified it shall
remain in full force and shall be obeyed by the person to whom directed. No person to
whom an order is directed shall fail to comply with such order within ten (10) working days
or such additional time as prescribed in the order after an appeal shall have been
determined.
In case of extreme danger, as described above, the director shall have the authority to
require compliance immediately upon service of the order which expressly dictates that the
matter is of extreme danger.
(D) Failure to Comply. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within
the specified time, the director shall remedy the conditions or contract with others for such
purpose and charge the costs thereof to the person to whom the order is directed. The
person remedying the condition under a contract made hereunder shall be authorized to
enter the premises for that purpose.
Chapter 28 - Tree Regulations
28-7
(E) Lien Against Property. If the cost of remedying a condition is not paid within (30) days
after receipt of a statement, therefore, from the City Treasurer, such cost shall be levied
against the property upon which said hazard exists or existed. Levying of such cost shall
be certified by the Director to the City Treasurer and shall thereupon become a lien upon
such property, and shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the owner or owners
thereof unless paid before, and shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes
against such property.
(Rev. 6-5-89)
15. Private Trees - Inspection. The Director and his representatives and employees shall have the
authority to enter upon private premises for the purpose of examining any trees, shrubs, plants, or
vines for the presence of destructive insects or plant diseases. No damages shall be awarded for
the destruction of any tree, shrub, or plant or fruit or injury to the same, if done by the Director or
those under his direction in accordance with this chapter.
16. Lawn Extensions. On residential streets, the abutting owner or occupants may maintain a
planting strip on the lawn extension between the sidewalk and the street therein in conformity with
this chapter. No person shall willfully injure or destroy any grass, flower or tree upon any such
planting strip or throw papers, refuse, or any other thing thereon. No person shall drive an
automobile, bicycle or any other vehicle upon or over any such planting strip.
17. Private Utilities.
(A) Overhead Lines Trimming Permits. The Director shall grant permission to public utilities to
trim and keep trimmed all trees within the streets, alleys, parks and public places of the
City, in such a manner as shall keep the overhead lines of such public utilities safe and
accessible. Such trimming shall be done in accordance with approved practices and
under the general direction of the Department. Said permission, as provided for in this
section, shall require reasonable prior notice to the City before any work is commenced
thereunder. Provided, however, that in the event of an emergency requiring immediate
maintenance work on the overhead lines of said public utilities, prior notice of commencing
work under said permit shall not be required. The word "emergency" as used in this
section, shall be defined to mean the occurrence or happening of an event which could not
be prevented by the exercise of reasonable care and foresight, which might cause
damage to the overhead lines of the public utilities.
(B) Gas Main Leakage. Gas pipes or mains within any public right-of-way or on any public
property shall be so maintained as to avoid any leakage therefrom. In the event a leak
exists or occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of such pipe and main, and the leak shall
be repaired within twenty-four (24) hours. Any damage to trees, shrubbery or grass
resulting from the escape of gas from a pipe or main shall be repaired, and the cost of the
work, including the cost of removal and the replacement of any trees, shall be levied
against the owner of the pipe or main causing the damage.
18. Rules and Regulations. The Director shall make such rules and regulations supplementary to this
chapter not in conflict herewith, as he may from time to time deem necessary. No person shall fail
to obey any rule or regulation effective hereunder.
(Rev. 3-26-79)
Chapter 29 - Cemetery Ordinance
29-1
1. City Cemeteries Defined. The cemeteries which have been or may be hereafter established or
maintained by the City, of which plats have been or shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk,
shall be known as city cemeteries. This chapter is intended to regulate and control the use of city
cemeteries as hereinabove defined and does not apply to private cemeteries except as herein
otherwise specifically provided.
2. Control of Cemeteries. The Director of Parks and Recreation, subject to the direction of the City
Manager, shall manage, supervise, maintain and improve city cemeteries. The Director shall plat
cemetery grounds and after these plats have been approved by the City Council they will be
filed in the office of the City Clerk.
(Rev. 07-07-08)
3. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Director of Parks & Recreation to see that this Chapter is
enforced. The City Clerk shall be responsible for the selling of lots and all deeds shall be executed
on behalf of the City by the City Clerk.
(Rev. 11-25-68)
4. Unlawful Burials. It shall be unlawful for any person to inter or cause to be interred the corpse of
any person in any part of the City, except within a private or a public cemetery.
5. Interments and Disinterments. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall maintain a register of all
interments or disinterments made in any City cemetery, in which shall appear the name of the
deceased, the date and place of the interment or disinterment and other such information as may
be necessary for proper identification.
(Rev. 03-26-79)
6. Purchase of Burial Spaces. Any person desiring to purchase a burial space in any city cemetery
shall make application to the City Clerk and pay the required amount to the City Treasurer for the
space selected. Upon the purchase of any such burial space, the City Clerk shall prepare and
deliver to the purchaser a duly executed deed for said burial space. Such deed shall convey to the
purchaser the right of interment only and shall be held subject to the provisions of this code,
existing rules and regulations and such ordinances, rules and regulations as may hereafter be
adopted by the City of Troy.
(Rev. 07-07-08)
7. Lot Records. The City Clerk shall keep proper records in which the deeds to all such burial spaces
shall be recorded. In connection with all such records, the City Clerk shall also keep a general
index indicating alphabetically the name of the party or parties to every such burial space. Any
person desiring to transfer his or her burial space to another party shall make application with the
City Clerk. No person shall be recognized as owner or part owner of a burial space until such
ownership is recorded with the City Clerk. The City may buy back a burial space from any owner
of record. The amount paid for a burial space by the city will be the original purchase price.
(Rev. 07-07-08)
Chapter 29 - Cemetery Ordinance
29-2
8. Owner Burial Rights. The owner of any burial space shall allow no interments for remuneration. All
interments in burial spaces shall be determined by the owner of record.
(Rev. 07-07-08)
9. Grave Openings and Closings. No person other than an employee of the City, acting under the
direction of the Director of Parks and Recreation, shall open or close any grave, nor shall any
person grade or fill any burial space or otherwise do work in connection therewith unless such
work be authorized by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
10. Lot Types.
1. Upright Grave Marker Sections. The upright marker section shall include all sections in
which lots were platted prior to January 1, 1969. Either upright or flush type individual
grave markers may be used in these lots. Upright markers shall conform to standards
stated in Section 14.
2. Flush Marker Sections. The flush marker section shall include all those sections platted
after January 1, 1969. In these sections all grave markers shall be of the flush type and
shall conform to those regulations as stated in Section 14.
(Rev. 11-25-68)
11. Decoration of Lots.
A. Definition. Lot decorations shall be deemed to include all structures, ornaments, plantings,
or other embellishments, with the exception of monuments and markers, which are placed
on cemetery lots.
B. Decoration of Lots in Upright Marker Sections. The following rules shall be observed with
regard to the decoration of cemetery lots in the upright marker sections of the cemeteries:
1. Copings, fences, curbs, benches, steps, structures of wood or other equally
perishable material are prohibited. Those structures or enclosures established on
any lot previous to the adoption of these regulations which have, in the judgment of
the Director of Parks and Recreation, become unsightly by reason of neglect or
age shall be removed.
2. No elevated mounds shall be built over graves and no lot shall be filled above the
grade established by the City.
3. Receptacles for cut flowers will be permitted if installed flush with the surface of the
lawn. The use of glass jars or bottles as receptacles for cut flowers is strictly
prohibited.
4. Winter decorations may be maintained on graves until April 1st. If such decorations
are not removed by April 1st, they shall be considered abandoned and may be
disposed of by the Director of Parks and Recreation or his authorized
representative.
(Rev. 07-29-74)
Chapter 29 - Cemetery Ordinance
29-3
5. There shall be no new urns allowed, provided that those erected before the
effective date of this regulation shall be permitted only if properly installed and
maintained. Any urns not in use by June 1st will be removed.
6. Unsightly objects will not be permitted as grave decorations and, when used, they may be
removed without notice.
(Rev. 11-25-68)
7. Plantings shall be permitted only under the supervision of the Director of Parks and
Recreation, and after receiving written permission therefor. Plantings placed on a lot
without a permit will be removed without notice.
8. The City will remove all flowers, trees and shrubs which have become unsightly or
dangerous.
9. No tree or shrub shall be removed or pruned except under the direction and with the
consent of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
C. Decoration of Lots in Flush Marker Sections. The following rules shall be observed with regard to
the decoration of lots in the flush marker sections of the cemeteries.
1. No planting shall be made by anyone other than an employee of the City acting under the
direction of the Director of Parks and Recreation on flush marker sections. Such planting
as may be installed will be limited to areas set aside for that purpose.
2. Cut flowers will be permitted provided they are placed in approved receptacles, installed
flush with the lawn surface.
3. Potted plants will be permitted to remain on lots from May 29th until June 15th. If left after
this date, they will be removed without notice.
4. No other lot decoration of any description will be permitted on lots in flush marker sections.
12. Funeral and Interments.
A. Conditions to be Fulfilled before Interment. No interment shall take place in any city or private
cemetery without a Burial Permit and until the person making arrangements for the interment has
complied with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations relative to burials. Funeral Directors
making arrangements for burials shall be responsible for all interment charges if not paid by the
owner or his agent.
(Rev. 11-25-68)
B. Funerals. All funerals within the cemeteries shall be under the direction of the Director of Parks
and Recreation or his or her authorized representative. The City reserves the right to remove
funeral designs and floral pieces as soon as they become unsightly.
(Rev. 07-07-08)
Chapter 29 - Cemetery Ordinance
29-4
C. Burial Vaults. In all adult interments, the casket shall be enclosed in a burial vault
constructed of concrete or other suitable material.
D. General Interment Restrictions. Only one adult interment in any one grave shall be
permitted, except that cremated remains may be buried above another grave. The Director
of Parks and Recreation and his or her authorized representatives shall not be held
responsible for errors in location of graves on lots arising from improper instructions of lot
owners. Orders from funeral directors shall be construed as orders from owners. Under no
circumstances shall the City assume responsibility for error in opening graves. No graves
shall be opened except under the direction of the Director of Parks and Recreation or his
or her authorized representative.
(Rev. 07-07-08)
13. Disinterment.
A. General Restrictions. Disinterment of a body once properly interred shall not be made
without an order signed by the Oakland County Health Department or other governmental
agency or body having authority to order such disinterment. Graves shall not be opened
for inspection except for official investigation pursuant to proper order. Any markers or
monuments designating the location of an interment shall be removed at the time a
disinterment is made.
14. Markers.
A. Upright Markers. Where permitted, single upright markers shall consist of one piece and
shall not be less than 16 inches nor more than 24 inches in length, nor less than 10 inches
nor more than 12 inches in width, and not more than 16 inches, nor less than 6 inches in
height. These measurements do not apply to government issue markers or to those cases
where the marker is installed adjacent to old markers on the same lot, which do not
conform with this requirement. Double upright markers shall not be less than 40 inches in
length nor less than 12 inches nor more than 16 inches in width, and not less than 16 nor
more than 22 inches in height. The provisions of this section will not apply to the flush
marker sections of the cemeteries.
B. Flush Markers. In sections designated as flush marker sections, all markers shall be set so
that the top is flush or level with the ground. No memorials other than grave markers may
be set on any section so designated. The exposed surface of all single flush markers shall
be of standard size, 24 inches in length and 12 inches in width. Double flush markers shall
be 12 inches in width and not less than 40 inches in length. Flush type markers issued by
the United States Government must be set flush eve if used in a section where upright
markers are permitted.
C. Monuments. Where permitted, a monument shall not exceed 60 inches in length, or 14
inches wide, or 36 inches in height. The provisions of this section will not apply to the flush
marker sections of the cemeteries.
Chapter 29 - Cemetery Ordinance
29-5
D. Location of Markers on a Lot. Markers shall be placed at the head of a grave, as platted.
No marker shall be placed nearer than four inches to a lot line. No corner markers shall be
used. Not more than one marker shall be placed at any one grave. No marker shall
embrace two or more graves, except on a two or three grave lot where a double marker or
monument is permitted. No marker shall be set unless it is first approved by the Director of
Parks and Recreation and the grave space is paid for in full.
E. Monument and Marker Materials. No material except granite shall be used for upright
markers or monuments. No materials except granite or bronze shall be used for flush
markers. All monuments and markers shall be placed on a foundation which shall be
designed to meet the standards of the Building Inspection Department.
(Rev. 09-09-85)
F. Border around Markers or Monuments. No upright marker or monument shall be installed
in any cemetery without also installing a concrete border around such marker or
monument six inches in width. Such border shall be flush with the lawn.
(Rev. 09-09-85)
15. General Regulations.
A. Conduct in Cemeteries. No person shall:
1. Enter a cemetery except through an established gate.
2. Deposit rubbish or debris on cemetery grounds.
3. Pick or mutilate any flowers, either wild or domestic, or disturb any tree, shrub, or
other plant material.
(Rev. 11-25-68)
4. Consume any food or beverage.
5. Permit any domestic animal to enter.
6. Use any form of advertising on cemetery premises.
B. Responsibility of the City. The City shall not be responsible for any damage to lots and
structures or objects thereon, or for flowers or articles removed from any lot or grave.
C. Traffic Regulations. All traffic ordinances of the City of Troy that are applicable to operation
of vehicles in cemeteries shall be strictly observed. A person driving in a cemetery shall be
responsible for any damage done by the vehicle.
16 Fee and Charges.
Fees and Charges shall be in accordance with Chapter 60, Fees and Bonds of the City of Troy
Code of Ordinances.
(Rev. 03-17-03)
Chapter 30 - Municipal Golf Course(s)
30-1
1. The operation of municipal golf courses is a proper public purpose, and is within the
lawful powers of the City of Troy.
(Rev. 06-20-2005)
2. There are two such Municipal Golf Courses in the City of Troy- Sylvan Glen Municipal
Golf Course (Sylvan Glen), operated by the City of Troy; and the Troy Sanctuary Lake
Municipal Golf Course (Sanctuary Lake), which is operated by the City of Troy as lessee
and agent of the Municipal Building Authority of Troy, in accordance with the provisions of
the Building Authority Act, 1948 Public Acts of Michigan 31), (MCL 123.951 et. seq.), as
amended.
(Rev. 03-07-2005)
3. Whenever the words "Golf Course" are referred to in this Chapter, they shall be
understood to mean either Sylvan Glen or Sanctuary Lake, or both, including all
appurtenances thereto and including all extensions and improvements thereto, or which
may hereafter be acquired, as Sanctuary Lake is leased by the City of Troy from the
Municipal Building Authority of Troy pursuant to a certain Contract of Lease dated July
31, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the "Lease").
Whenever the words "revenues" and net revenues" are used in this Chapter, they shall
be understood to have the meanings as defined in the Revenue Bond Act, Section 3,
Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, (MCL 141.103), as amended.
(Rev. 03-07-2005)
4. The City Manager is empowered to make such rules and regulations, subject to the
approval of City Council, pertaining to the conduct and use of the municipal golf
courses, parks and public grounds as are necessary to administer the same and to
protect public property and the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public, and no
person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations.
(Rev. 06-20-2005)
5. No free service shall be furnished by said Golf Course to any person, firm or
corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality.
(Rev. 03-07-2005)
6. Permitted uses of the Golf Course and rates for services furnished by the Golf Course
may, from time to time, be established by resolution. The rates shall be fixed, and
revised from time to time as may be necessary. The rates to be charged for services
furnished by the Golf Course shall be in an amount which is estimated to be sufficient to
provide for the following:
a) payment of the expenses of administration and operation;
Chapter 30 - Municipal Golf Course(s)
30-2
b) maintenance expenses for the Golf Course which are necessary to preserve it in
good repair and working order;
c) timely payment of the owing contractual obligations of the City to the Municipal
Building Authority of Troy, pursuant to the aforesaid Lease between said
Authority and the City of Troy;
d) such other expenditures and funds for the Golf Course as this Chapter may
require.
(Rev. 03-07-2005)
7. The fiscal year for the Golf Course commences on July 1.
(Rev. 03-07-2005)
8. The revenues of the Golf Course shall be accounted for in separate enterprise funds at
the City of Troy.
(Rev. 03-07-2005)
9. The Golf Course is not subject to the rules and regulations governing alcoholic
beverages in public parks, as set forth in Chapter 26 of this Code.
(Rev. 03-07-2005)
10. The Citys sub-contractor has the ability to sell alcoholic beverages on the Golf Course, as
long as the following conditions are satisfied:
a) The sub-contractor has the exclusive right to sell food and beverages on the Golf
Course, pursuant to a lease or other agreement with the City, and the subcontractor
is in compliance with the terms of the lease or other agreement.
b) The sub-contractor has received a license to sell the alcohol from the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission, and is compliant with the Administrative Rules and
Regulations, and federal, state, and local laws concerning the sale of alcohol.
c) Alcoholic beverages sold on the Golf Course proper shall be limited to beer, wine,
and other alcoholic beverages that contain less than 21% alcohol by volume.
(Rev. 03-17-08)
Chapter 33 - Public Right-of-Way
33-1
4.1 Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this Chapter shall be as follows:
1) "Department" means the Department of Public Works of the City.
2) "Director" means the Director of Public Works of the City or any person who holds
the position as head of the Public Works Department.
3) "Superintendent" means the Superintendent of Streets or the designated
representative.
4) "City Engineer" means the City Engineer or designated representative.
5) "Street" means the paved or designated area for vehicular travel within the right of
way.
6) "Right of Way" (R.O.W.) means the land owned or controlled by the City, or other
governmental agency or entity that has been designated for public use which shall
include but not be limited to streets, curbs, sidewalks, shoulders, utilities, landscape
areas and other public uses.
7) "Facility" means any man-made objects.
4.2 Damage and Obstruction Prohibited. No person shall make any excavation or fill in, or
cause any damage to any R.O.W. in the City, except under the conditions and in the
manner permitted in this Chapter. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in
the R.O.W., except under the conditions used in the manner permitted in this Chapter, but
this provision shall not prohibit temporary obstructions as incidental to the expeditious
movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises, nor to the lawful parking of
vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic.
4.3 Permits. Where permits are authorized in this Chapter, they shall be obtained upon
application to the City Engineer upon such forms as he shall prescribe. Permit fees will be
established by resolution by the City Council. Such permit shall be revocable by the City
Engineer for failure to comply with this Chapter, rules and regulations adopted pursuant
hereto, and the lawful orders of the City Engineer or the duly authorized representative, and
shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon.
Application for a permit under the provisions of this Chapter is an agreement by the
applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and
regulations of the City, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on,
over, or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the City from all
damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to person
or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith.Where
liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit, they
shall be for the amounts established by the City Manager.
A properly executed certificate of insurance containing evidence that the pertinent policy of
insurance or endorsement applies to the provisions under which the permit is issued, and
approved as to form by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City Clerk.
Chapter 33 - Public Right-of-Way
33-2
Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit, each deposit shall be
in the amount as determined by the City Engineer, and the deposit shall be used to defray
all expenses to the City arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under or in
connection with the permit. Six (6) months after acceptance of the work done under the
permit, by the City Engineer, any balance of each cash deposit unexpended shall be
refunded. In any case, where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the City,
the deficit shall be paid by the applicant.
4.4 R.O.W. Operations. No person, public utility company, franchisee or licensee shall conduct
any construction, repair or maintenance operations in the R.O.W. without first obtaining a
written permit or annual permit from the City Engineer. No permit shall be granted until the
applicant has filed a liability insurance policy as required by this Chapter and posted a cash
deposit to defray the cost of repairing all damage done to the street surface and installation
on, over, or within the street, as estimated by the City Engineer. A permit shall expire after
30 days or the date specified on the permit unless work has commenced on the project
covered by the permit.
Annual permits may be issued, for emergency repairs, maintenance, small alterations and
small service connections, at the discretion of the City Engineer, with permit fees and cash
deposits established by resolution of the City Council and with liability insurance policies in
amounts established by the City Manager.
Permits for excavation of less than six inches are not required if located outside of the street
and are for the purpose of restoration and/or repair to landscaping or irrigation systems.
Routine operations conducted by a public utility company, franchisee, or licensee will not
require a permit if no excavation is made in the right-of-way.
4.5 Emergency Operations. Permits are not required for emergency work, provided that an
annual permit has been obtained and that the City Engineer is notified of the location and
nature of the emergency work on the following business day and the provisions of this
Chapter will be complied with. However, the City Engineer will review each emergency
operation to assure such operations are not casual. Upon such review, the City Engineer
may require a public utility, franchisee or licensee to get verbal permission before doing any
work in a right-of-way if the City Engineer finds that use of this section is not being used for
bona fide emergencies.
4.6 Backfilling. All trenches in a public R.O.W., except by special permission, shall be backfilled
in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter. Any settlement shall be
corrected within eight (8) hours after notification to do so.
4.7 Underground Structures. All new or upgraded underground structures located within the
public R.O.W. shall conform to the City Engineering Design Standards and Specifications
or to the standards and specifications prescribed or approved by the City Engineer.
4.8 Utility Poles and Structures. When utility poles, overhead equipment and structures are
permitted to be placed in the public R.O.W., placement shall be as prescribed by the City
Engineer. Such poles, overhead equipment and structures shall be removed, relocated or
Chapter 33 - Public Right-of-Way
33-3
placed underground as the City Engineer shall direct when such facilities need to be
relocated as a result of new road construction/road widening or other similar project as
required by the rules of the Michigan Public Service Commission and Chapter 21 of Troy
Municipal Codes.
4.8a Mailbox Supports. Mailbox supports may be placed in the R.O.W. and shall not be
considered obstructions unless any portion of the mailbox or mailbox support extends over
any portion of the travelled street or curb. If any portion of a mailbox or mailbox support
extends over the travelled street or curb, the mailbox or mailbox support shall be
considered an obstruction and prohibited under 4.2 of Chapter 33.
4.9 Maintenance of Facilities in Public R.O.W.. Every owner of, and every person in control of,
any facility located in the public R.O.W. shall maintain the facilities in good repair and
condition at all times and shall indemnify and save harmless the City against all damages
or actions of law that may arise or be brought by reason of such facilities being located and
operated within public right-of-way.
4.10 R.O.W. Improvements. Whenever the City decides to make improvements to the R.O.W.
involving the relocation of facilities belonging to public utilities, licensees and other
franchisees, the City Engineer shall, not less than 120 days prior to commencement of
construction, serve notice upon all public utilities, requiring them to install or relocate all
necessary underground work in advance of the R.O.W. improvement.
4.11 Sewer and Water Connections. When paving or resurfacing shall have been ordered or
declared necessary by the City Council, such sewer and water connections as are
necessary, shall be installed in advance of such paving or resurfacing, and the cost shall be
charged against the premises adjacent, or to be served, and against the owner of such
premises. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed in whole or in part by special
assessment, the cost of such sewer and water connections may be chargeable against the
premises served or adjacent, as a part of the special assessment for such paving or
resurfacing. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed other than by special
assessment, the cost of the sewer and water connections so installed, shall be a lien on the
premises adjacent, or to be served, and shall be collected as provided for assessments on
single lots pursuant to the provisions of the City Charter.
4.12 Determination of Necessity. The necessity for sewer and water connections shall be
determined by the Director which determination shall be based upon the size, shape, and
area of each abutting lot or parcel of land, the lawful use of such land under the zoning
regulations of the City, the character of the locality and the probable future development of
each abutting lot or parcel of land. The Director shall give written notice of the intention to
install such sewer and water connections and to charge the cost to the premises, to each
owner of land abutting the street, to be furnished with such connections, as shown by the
records of the City Assessor in accordance with this Code. Any owner objecting to the
installation of any sewer or water connection, shall file his objections in writing within seven
(7) days after service of the notice, with the Director who shall, after considering the
objection made in writing, make a final determination of the sewer and water connections to
be installed.
Chapter 33 - Public Right-of-Way
33-4
4.13 Prohibited Openings or Excavations. No permit to make any opening or excavation in or
under a paved street, except for emergency repairs indicated in Section 4.5, shall be
granted to any person within a period of two (2) years after the completion of the paving or
resurfacing. If a street opening is necessary as a public safety measure, the City Engineer
may suspend the operation of this section, as to such street opening.
4.14 Utility Placement Zone. A designated zone for the placement of new or relocated
underground facilities, such as gas, electric, communication and other franchised or
licensed facilities shall be determined by the City Engineer. This area shall be a nine (9) foot
horizontally measured space at the outside edge of the right of way. This zone shall not be
located on the side of the street where a water main is situated. If water mains are on both
sides of the street, the south or east side of the street is to be used. If due to technical
reasons the south or east side can not be used nor is the placement zone practical, the
placement shall be at the discretion of the City Engineer. In all cases the utilities are to be
placed within the designated zone unless authorized by the City Engineer. The City
Engineer shall expand the utility placement zone, when necessary, to provide adequate
space for placement. Utilities constructed of non-metallic material are required to have a
traceable metallic wrap or accompanying wire for the purpose of tracing and locating with
conventional locating equipment.
When placed in the R.O.W., utilities or other franchised or licensed facilities constructed of
material susceptible to breakage (i.e. fiber optic, wire, plastic line) must be encased in a
protective plastic conduit, when determined by the City Engineer.
Plastic gas lines are excluded from the requirement for a protective plastic conduit.
Except for emergency repairs indicated in Section 4.5, no opening or excavation may take
place in the utility placement zone for a period of 18 months following construction of new
pavement or new utility in the zone. The City Manager may waive this time period if in his
opinion it is in the best interests of the City.
4.15 Road Oiling and Dust Control. No person shall apply any liquid dust control material or other
liquid surface treatment to any street without first obtaining a permit for said work as
required by this Chapter. The permit fee shall be as established by resolution of the City
Council.
4.16 Curb Cuts. No opening in or through any street curb shall be made without first obtaining
a written permit from the City Engineer. Driveway approaches, including curb cuts and
sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property, shall comply with the
following, except planned commercial and industrial buildings which require separate site
plan approval per Chapter 39 of this Code.
1) No single curb cut or driveway approach shall exceed eighty (80) feet in width, nor
be less than twelve (12) feet in width, except, where joint driveway openings are
permitted on either side of a common property line, the maximum curb cut shall be
forty (40) feet per lot.
Chapter 33 - Public Right-of-Way
33-5
2) The minimum distance between any curb cut or driveway approach and a public
crosswalk shall be five (5) feet.
3) Where sidewalks are required, no single sidewalk driveway approach crossing shall
exceed thirty (30) feet in width.
4) The maximum number of linear feet of sidewalk driveway approach crossing
permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise, shall be forty-five (45%)
per cent of the total abutting street frontage up to and including two hundred (200)
lineal feet of street frontage plus twenty (20%) per cent of the lineal feet of street
frontage in excess of two hundred (200) feet.
5) The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catch
basins, underground structures, street or railway signs, signals, or other public
improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the City.
6) All new driveway approaches along paved streets shall be paved between the curb
cut and the property line with concrete or asphalt in accordance with regulations
established by the City Engineer.
7) All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
City Engineer.
OBSTRUCTIONS
4.17 Obstructions. No person shall occupy any R.O.W. with any materials or machinery
incidental to the construction, maintenance, demolition or repair of any facilities adjacent to
the R.O.W., or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit or an annual permit
from the City Engineer and posting a cash deposit and filing an insurance policy as required
by this Chapter.
4.18 Pedestrian Passage. At least five (5) feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for
the free passage of pedestrians and if the operations are such that free passageway is
impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk, meeting the approval of the City Engineer, and
in accordance with Chapter 79 of this code, where applicable, shall be provided around
such obstruction.
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
4.19 Safeguards. All temporary openings, excavations and obstructions located in a street or
within twelve (12) feet of a street shall be provided with traffic control devices in
conformance with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. All temporary
openings, excavations and obstructions located in a sidewalk or driveway approach shall
be surrounded with lighted barricades. All unattended openings and excavations, located
anywhere in public R.O.W., greater than five (5) feet in depth shall be completely
surrounded by fencing, securely mounted in place as directed by the City Engineer.
Chapter 33 - Public Right-of-Way
33-6
4.20 Shoring Excavations. All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly
and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent cave-ins
or washouts which may injure the thoroughfare or sub-surface structure of the street.
UNLOADING CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT
4.21 Unloading Construction Equipment. No person shall unload from any vehicle or trailer any
power shovel, ditchdigger, trencher, bulldozer, tractor, or any similar construction or
excavating equipment having a weight of one ton or more or which moves about by any
means other than rubber tires, onto or upon any hard-surfaced street without first obtaining
a permit therefor from the Street Superintendent and posting a cash deposit. Such deposit
shall be available for the repair and reconstruction of any street or its appurtenances
damaged as a result of the permitted operation.
ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
4.22 Additional Regulations. The City Manager may make additional regulations pertaining to
openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street obstructions, and house moving,
which shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
4.23 Removal of Encroachment. Encroachments and obstructions in the R.O.W. may be
removed and excavations refilled by the City. The expense of such removal or refilling shall
be charged to the abutting land owner when made or permitted by them or suffered to
remain by them, otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this
Chapter. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in the City
Charter.
4.24 Temporary R.O.W. Closings. The Director shall have authority to temporarily close any
portion of the R.O.W., when any portion is deemed to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable
for use for any reason. The Director shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected in
R.O.W. the indicating that any portion of the R.O.W. is closed to public travel. When any
street or portion shall have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle
upon or over the R.O.W., or portion, except as the same may be necessary incidentally to
any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. No
person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section
without authority from the Director.
Chapter 33  Streets / Fees: Attachment 2-B
33-FEE-1
EXISTING PERMIT FEE:
Permit Fee: $ 5.00
+ 0.02/L.F for underground utilities
Cash Deposit: $ 200.00
Road Oiling - Permit Fee: $ 25.00
Road Oiling - Cash Deposit: $ 200.00
Road Oiling - Bond: $ 1,000.00
Chapter 34 - Sidewalks and Driveway Approaches
34-1
34.01 Definitions
When used in this Chapter, the words defined in this Section shall have the following
meanings:
(a) "Sidewalk" shall mean the improved portion of the street right-of-way designed for
pedestrian travel.
c) Development Standards shall mean the basis for design of public and private
improvements as established by the City Engineer. These Development
Standards incorporate the City of Troy Standard Details and Specifications for
construction as established by the City Engineer.
(b) Director of Building and Zoning means the City of Troy Director of Building and
Zoning, or his/her designee.
(c) "Driveway Approach" shall mean the improved portion of the street right-of-way
designed to provide for vehicular travel from abutting property to a public
roadway.
(d) Director shall mean the Public Works Director of the City, or his/her designee.
(e) Engineer shall mean the City Engineer or his/her designee.
(f) Superintendent shall mean the Public Works Superintendent of Streets and
Drains for the City of Troy.
(Rev. 07-07-2008)
(g) Major Thoroughfare means the following street rights-of-way within the City of
Troy: Adams Road, Beach Road, Big Beaver Road, Coolidge Highway, Crooks
Road, Dequindre Road, Fourteen Mile Road, John R Road, Maple Road, Livernois
Road, Long Lake Road, Northfield Parkway, Rochester Road, South Boulevard,
Square Lake Road, Stephenson Highway, Wattles Road.
(Rev. 09-22-2014; Effective 10-02-2014)
34.02 Permits
34.02.01 No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk or driveway approach without first
obtaining a sidewalk and approach permit from the Director of Building and Zoning, except
that sidewalk or driveway approach repairs of less than fifty (50) square feet of sidewalk or
driveway approach may be made without a permit.
34.02.02 The sidewalk and approach permit shall be prominently displayed on the construction site.
34.02.03 The fee for the sidewalk and approach permit shall be specified in Chapter 60 of the Code.
(Rev. 07-07-2008)
34.02.04 No sidewalk or driveway approach shall be poured until the site has been inspected and
Chapter 34 - Sidewalks and Driveway Approaches
34-2
approved by the Director or his designee.
34.02.05 Each time a proposed sidewalk or driveway approach construction is inspected and
rejected by the City, a re-inspection fee shall be paid prior to re-inspection. The reinspection
fee shall be specified in Chapter 60 of the Code.
(Rev. 07-07-2008)
34.02.06 In the event that a sidewalk or driveway approach is poured without a required permit,
and/or without the required inspection or without a re-inspection, the sidewalk or driveway
approach must be removed and replaced at the expense of the owner.
A. As an alternative to removal and replacement, if all visible portions of the sidewalk or
driveway approach meet the sidewalk and approach specifications, the contractor may
elect to prove that the concrete meets the thickness and strength requirements of the
specifications by having cores taken from the sidewalk or driveway approach and
having them measured and tested by an approved independent testing laboratory.
B. As a second alternative to removal and replacement, if all visible portions of the
sidewalk or driveway approach meet the Citys specifications, the contractor may elect
to deposit a two (2) year cash bond with the City to cover the cost, as estimated by the
Director, for the removal and replacement of the entire sidewalk or driveway in the
event that deficiencies develop within a two (2) year time period.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.03 Line and Grade Stakes
The Contractor or Property Owner shall furnish line and grade stakes as may be
necessary to construct the sidewalk or driveway approach as approved by the City. This
shall include establishment of the property line, adjacent to the sidewalk or driveway
approach to be constructed. This may require the contractor to either locate existing lot
corner irons and monuments; or have a licensed land surveyor establish new lot corner
irons and monuments. All lot corner irons and monuments shall bear the license number
of the surveyor that performed the work.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.04 Sidewalk and Driveway Approach Specifications
All sidewalk or driveway approach construction, rebuild, and/or repair shall conform to the
"Development Standards as established by the Engineer.
(Rev. 07-07-2008)
For new sidewalk construction, any existing objects or improvements which must be
removed or relocated (in the opinion of the Director) to facilitate the construction of a
sidewalk or driveway approach, shall be removed or relocated at the owner's expense.
Such items to be removed or relocated shall include, but are not limited to: trees, ditches,
drainage structures, culverts, fire hydrants, water service valves, utility poles, guy wires,
street lights and transformers.
Chapter 34 - Sidewalks and Driveway Approaches
34-3
Any existing underground structures which must be adjusted to a new elevation (in the
opinion of the Director) to facilitate the construction of a sidewalk or driveway approach,
shall be adjusted to the approved grade at the owner's expense. Such items to be
adjusted in height shall include, but are not limited to: manholes, catch basins, drainage
chambers, gate wells, valve boxes and utility access structures.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.05 Permit Suspension
The Superintendent or Director may suspend any permit issued under the terms of this
Chapter for incompetency or failure to comply with the terms of this Chapter, or the rules,
regulations, plans and specifications for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any
sidewalk or driveway approach, as established by the Superintendent or the Director.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.06 Ordering Construction
34.06.01 The City Council may require the construction of sidewalks in locations where they declare
such construction to be necessary in order to provide a safe and convenient route for
pedestrian and non-motorized vehicular traffic.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.06.02 When construction is determined necessary by City Council, a resolution shall require the
owners of lots and premises to build sidewalks or drive approaches in the public streets
adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises. When the Council resolution is
adopted, the City Clerk shall provide notice of the resolution to the owners of such lots or
premises in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of the Troy City Code. The resolution
shall require the owner to construct or rebuild such sidewalks or drive approaches within
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of the resolution.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.07 Required Construction
All owners of lots and premises abutting dedicated streets open to the public shall be
required to construct sidewalks and driveway approaches at the time of construction of
any new buildings or structures, or additions to buildings or structures, or at the time a
nonconforming use changes to a permitted use in the Zoning District. No occupancy
permit shall be issued until such time as the owners of said property have complied with
the requirements of this provision. The Director of Building and Zoning Director may
extend the time for completion of the required sidewalk and driveway approaches in
accordance with established procedure.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.07.01 Exceptions
The requirement for the construction of sidewalks and driveway approaches, as stated in
Chapter 34 - Sidewalks and Driveway Approaches
34-4
Section 34.07, shall apply in conjunction with all construction, with the following
exceptions:
A. The Director of Building and Zoning may extend the time for completion of the required
sidewalks and driveway approaches upon submission of an adequate cash bond to the
City.
B. Sidewalk and driveway approaches are not required for the construction of an
individual one-family or two family home, on an acreage parcel or lot on those street
frontages which are not major thoroughfares frontages. This exception shall only apply
to subdivisions platted prior to January 1, 1990, and shall not apply to one-family or
two-family residential construction on properties that have been split, combined, and/or
replatted resulting in the possibility, capability, or potential ability to construct two or
more new buildings or structures on these pre-existing parcels or lots.
C. Sidewalk and driveway approaches are not required in conjunction with construction
on industrial parcels or lots within industrial subdivisions platted prior to January 1,
1980, when those street frontages which are not major thoroughfare frontages, or do
not front on Rankin Drive, Chicago Road or Bellingham Drive.
D. Variances from the requirements of Section 34.07 may be granted by the Traffic
Committee, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in Chapter 35.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.08 Construction by City
If the installation, rebuild, or repair of a sidewalk or driveway approach violates the
provisions of this chapter, the Director shall send a written notice of the violation to the
property owner, and shall set forth a deadline for compliance. If the owner of any lot or
premises, after receiving said notice, fails to correct the sidewalk or driveway approach
deficiencies within the allocated compliance time period, the Director is authorized and
required to immediately cause such sidewalk or driveway approach to be constructed or
repaired, and the expense thereof shall be charged to the owner of the premises. The
expenses shall be collected as provided for by law or Charter, including but not limited to
assessing the cost on the next tax roll of the City or filing an action in the circuit court to
recover the costs.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.09 Sidewalk Maintenance
No person shall permit any sidewalk or driveway approach which adjoins property owned
by him or her to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe, or to be blocked or obstructed
with bushes, trees, fixtures, or any other thing so that pedestrians or travelers on that
sidewalk or vehicles traveling on the driveway approach do not have full use of the
sidewalk or driveway approach.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.10 Sidewalk Repair and Maintenance
Chapter 34 - Sidewalks and Driveway Approaches
34-5
It is the duty of the owner to place said sidewalk or driveway approach in a safe condition.
Whenever the Director shall determine that a sidewalk or driveway approach is in a state
of disrepair, unsafe or blocked for use, notice shall be sent to the owner of the lot or
premises adjoining to or abutting said sidewalk or driveway approach of such
determination, which notice shall be given in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of
this Code. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than seven (7) calendar
days, within which such work shall be commenced, and shall further provide that the work
shall be completed with due diligence. If the owner of such lot or premises shall refuse or
neglect to repair, make the sidewalk safe or remove obstruction(s) from said sidewalk or
driveway approach within the allotted time frame, the Director shall have said sidewalk or
driveway approach repaired, made safe or remove the obstruction. If the Director
determines that the condition of said sidewalk or driveway approach is such that
immediate repair or maintenance is necessary to protect the public, then notice is not
required prior to the commencement of the emergency repairs and/or replacement. The
cost of repairs hereunder shall be charged to the owner of the premises that adjoins the
identified sidewalk or driveway. The expenses shall be collected as provided for by law or
the Charter, including but not limited to assessing the cost on the next tax roll of the City or
filing an action in circuit court to recover the costs.
(Rev. 06-17-2002)
34.11 Sidewalks to be Cleared
The occupant or owner of every lot or premise adjoining any street, shall keep all
sidewalks clear of ice and shall clear sidewalks of all accumulations of snow when the
depth of such snow is two (2) inches or greater. Ice or snow shall be cleared within
twenty-four (24) hours following the end of the ice or snow event which led to such
accumulation.
(11-25-2013)
34.11.01 Sidewalks Exempt From Requirement to Clear
For sidewalks adjacent to rear and side yards, a lot or premise shall be exempt from the
requirements of Section 34.11 if all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The lot or premise is used as a single-family or two-family residence; and, the lot or
premise is addressed on a non-major thoroughfare but has a rear or side yard
adjacent to a major thoroughfare;
(11-11-2013)
34.12 Failure to Clear
If any occupant or owner fails to clear ice or snow from the sidewalks adjoining his/her
premises within the allotted time period, or shall otherwise permit ice or snow to
accumulate on such sidewalk contrary to this Code, the owner shall be responsible for a
violation of this Chapter. The Director may then cause the same to be cleared and the
expense of such removal shall become a debt to the City from the occupant or owner of
such premises, and shall be collected as any other debt to the City. Written
correspondence of such action from the City to said occupant or owner may be provided
via first class mail in lieu of notice required by Chapter 1.11 of City Code.
Chapter 34 - Sidewalks and Driveway Approaches
34-6
(11-11-2013)
34.13 Costs Paid from General Fund/CDBG Funds
34.13.01 Individual property owners meeting the income guidelines as established annually by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Community
Development Block Grant program shall be eligible for 100% coverage of the costs of
sidewalk construction, replacement or repair that is required by this Chapter. Such costs
shall be paid from the General Fund.
34.13.02 The duties, requirements, obligations and/or exceptions provided by this Chapter shall not
preclude the City of Troy from utilizing Community Development Block Grant funding to
construct, replace or repair sidewalks within the City of Troy.
(08-23-2004)
34.14 Penalties for Violation
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a violation of any section of Chapter 34 is a
Municipal Civil Infraction subject to the provisions of Chapter 100 of the Code of the City of
Troy. Each day that a violation continues is a separate Municipal Civil Infraction violation.
Sanctions for each violation of Chapter 34 shall include a fine of not more than $500,
costs, damages and injunctive orders as authorized by Chapter 100.
(03-01-2006)
Chapter 35  Traffic Committee
35-1
35.01 Creation and Membership.
35.01.01 The Traffic Committee shall consist of seven (7) members who shall
have the qualifications of electors. The Traffic Committee shall be
appointed by City Council. A student representative may be
appointed by City Council as an ex-officio member of the Committee,
without voting privilege. The term for a student representative shall
be one year.
35.01.02 The Police Chief, Fire Chief and Traffic Engineer or their designated
representative shall be ex-officio members of the Committee without
voting privilege.
35.01.03 The Committee members shall serve for a period of three (3) years,
except that any member can be removed by the City Council acting
as a body by two-thirds (2/3) vote of the City Council.
35.01.04 Committee members shall serve without pay or extra compensation.
35.02 Meetings.
35.02.01 The Traffic Committee shall adopt rules of procedure.
35.02.02 All meetings of the Traffic Committee shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at times when the majority of the Committee has
approved the call of a meeting.
35.02.03 All hearings conducted by the Committee shall be open to the public.
35.02.04 The Traffic Engineer or his representative shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall also keep
records of its hearings and official action.
35.02.05 Four (4) members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for the
conduct of its business.
35.02.06 The Committee shall have the power to subpoena and require
the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and
the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to
matters before it.
35.03 Duties of Traffic Committee.
35.03.01 The Traffic Committee shall be vested with advisory powers with
respect to proposed traffic regulations and traffic safety issues. It
Chapter 35  Traffic Committee
35-2
shall be the duty of the Traffic Committee to advise the City Manager
and City Council on amendments to this Chapter.
35.03.02 It shall also be the responsibility of the Traffic Committee to hold
public hearings to determine whether a requested sidewalk variance,
requesting relief from the requirements of Chapter 34, should be
granted or denied.
35.04 Variances.
35.04.01 Any person or entity that is required to comply with the sidewalk
requirements, as set forth in Chapter 34, may request that the Traffic
Committee grant a variance of the required sidewalk installation.
35.04.02 The sidewalk variance request shall be made by filing with the
Director of Public Works the application that is provided by the Public
Works Department. The application shall specify the reasons why
the variance is necessary.
35.04.03 Once a completed application for a sidewalk waiver is filed with the
Director of Public Works, the property owner shall be temporarily
relieved of the obligation to install the subject sidewalk until the
Traffic Committee has either granted or denied the requested
sidewalk variance. However, where the Director of Public Works
certifies to the Traffic Committee that a stay would cause imminent
peril of life or property, the stay should not be granted unless
otherwise ordered by the Committee or by order of the Circuit Court
or other court with proper jurisdiction.
35.05 Notice of Hearing.
The Traffic Engineer shall submit the completed application, in
addition to all documents relating to the sidewalk variance request, to
the Traffic Committee. The Traffic Engineer shall also set the
requested sidewalk variance request for a public hearing before the
Traffic Committee. This public hearing shall be scheduled as soon as
possible. The Traffic Engineer shall also give notice of the public
hearing to discuss the requested sidewalk variance request to
persons who are assessed for real property within 300 feet of the
subject premises, and to the occupants of single and two family
dwellings within 300 feet of the subject premises. The notice shall be
delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners
and tenants at the address given on the last assessment roll. If the
tenants name is not known, the term occupant may be used.
Chapter 35  Traffic Committee
35-3
35.06 Adjournment of Hearing.
The Traffic Committee may adjourn the public hearing to obtain
additional information, to provide notice to property owners or
occupants, or to enable the applicant to have a full Traffic Committee
decide the matter. If the public hearing is adjourned, notice of the
new hearing does not need to be given to those persons previously
notified.
35.07 Conduct of Hearing.
Any applicant for a sidewalk waiver may appear at the hearing in
person or by a representative. Both the applicant and also the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee are permitted to call
witnesses and introduce evidence at the hearing.
35.08 Decision of the Committee.
The Traffic Committee shall either grant, deny, or partially grant a
requested sidewalk waiver. A copy of the Traffic Committees
decision shall be transmitted to both the applicant and to the Director
of the Department of Public Works. The decision of the Committee is
binding upon the applicant and also the Director of the Department of
Public Works. Any item or condition required by the Traffic
Committee in granting the requested sidewalk variance shall be
incorporated into the sidewalk and driveway approach permit.
35.09 Review by Circuit Court.
A person affected by the decision of the Committee may appeal to
Circuit Court, as provided by law.
Zoning
Ordinance
Effective November 29, 2018
This Document was adopted
by the City of Troy City Council on
April 18, 2011 and became effective on April 28, 2011
This Document was Recommended
by the City of Troy Planning Commission
for City Council Approval on
March 22, 2011
Revised through November 29, 2018
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
I
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table of Contents
Summary Table of Contents
Authority and Administration
Article 1 Title, Purpose and Legal Clauses
Article 2 Definitions
Article 3 Administration and Enforcement
Development Regulations
Article 4 District Regulations
Article 5 Form-Based Districts
Article 6 Specific Use Provisions
Article 7 General Provisions
Processes and Procedures
Article 8 Site Plan Review
Article 9 Special Use Approval
Article 10 Development Options
Article 11 Planned Unit Development
Supplemental Design Regulations
Article 12 Sustainable Design and Environmental Standards
Article 13 Site Design Standards
Nonconformity, Appeals, and Amendments
Article 14 Non-Conforming Lots, Uses, and Structures
Article 15 Zoning Board of Appeals
Article 16 Amendments
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions
II
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Figures & Maps Tables
Table of Contents
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
III
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Article 1 Title, Purpose and Legal Clauses
Section 1.01 Title 1
Section 1.02 Preamble 1
Section 1.03 Purpose 1
Section 1.04 Validity and Severability 2
Section 1.05 Scope and Construction of Regulations 2
Section 1.06 Conflict with Other Laws 3
Section 1.07 Repeal of Ordinance 3
Article 2 Definitions
Section 2.01 Rules of Interpretation 5
Section 2.02 Definitions 6
Article 3 Administration and Enforcement
Section 3.01 Zoning Administration 37
Section 3.02 Duties and Responsibilities 37
Section 3.03 Zoning Compliance 38
Section 3.04 Public Hearing Notice Requirements 39
Section 3.05 Use of Consultants 41
Section 3.06 Performance Guarantee 41
Section 3.07 Fees 43
Section 3.08 Violations and Penalties 43
Section 3.09 Conformance to Court Decree 44
Section 3.10 Planning Commission, Changes and Amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance, and Approvals 44
Article 4 District Regulations
Section 4.01 Districts 47
Section 4.02 Map 48
Section 4.03 Interpretation of District Boundaries 48
Section 4.04 Zoning of Vacated Areas 49
Section 4.05 District Requirements 49
Section 4.06 One-Family Residential Districts R-1A Through R-1E 50
Section 4.07 RT One-Family Attached Residential District 54
Section 4.08 MF Multiple-Family Residential District 58
Section 4.09 UR Urban Residential District 62
Section 4.10 MHP Manufactured Home Park 66
Section 4.11 CF Community Facilities District 68
Section 4.12 EP Environmental Protection District 72
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions
IV
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Figures & Maps Tables
Table of Contents
Section 4.13 CB Community Business District 74
Section 4.14 GB General Business District 78
Section 4.15 IB Integrated Industrial and Business District 82
Section 4.16 O Office District 86
Section 4.17 OM Office Mixed Use District 90
Section 4.18 RC Research Center District 94
Section 4.19 PV Planned Vehicle Sales District 98
Section 4.20 P Vehicular Parking District 100
Section 4.21 Schedule of Use Regulations 102
Article 5 Form-Based Districts
Section 5.01 General Purpose and Intent 107
Section 5.02 Applicability and Organization 108
Section 5.03 Standards Applicable to All Districts 110
Section 5.04 Big Beaver District 128
Section 5.05 Maple Road District 140
Section 5.06 Neighborhood Nodes District 150
Article 6 Specific Use Provisions
Section 6.01 Intent 165
Section 6.02 Adult Foster Care Facilities 165
Section 6.03 Convalescent Center 166
Section 6.04 Adult Use Businesses 167
Section 6.05 Agriculture 174
Section 6.06 Bed and Breakfast 174
Section 6.07 Cemetery 175
Section 6.08 Contractors Yard/Outdoor Storage Facilities 175
Section 6.09 Day Care Facilities 176
Section 6.10 Drive-Through Facilities 176
Section 6.11 Golf Course 177
Section 6.12 Hospital 177
Section 6.13 Commercial Kennels/Animal Day Care 178
Section 6.14 Large-Scale Retail Establishment 179
Section 6.15 Live/Work Units 180
Section 6.16 Lodging Facilities 180
Section 6.17 Materials Recovery Facility 180
Section 6.18 Open Air Business 181
Section 6.19 Outdoor Commercial Recreation 181
Section 6.20 Parking Structure 182
Section 6.21 Places of Worship 182
Section 6.22 Post-Secondary Schools 183
Section 6.23 Primary/Secondary Schools 183
Section 6.24 Self-Storage Facilities 184
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
V
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table of Contents
Section 6.25 Senior Assisted/Independent Living / Congregate Care Facility 184
Section 6.26 Vehicle Repair 185
Section 6.27 Vehicle Sales  New, Used and Vintage 185
Section 6.28 Vehicle Fueling/Multi-Use Station 186
Section 6.29 Vehicle Wash 187
Section 6.30 Wireless Communications Facilities 187
Section 6.31 Antique Vehicle Sale, Ambulance Facility, and Vehicle Rental 192
Section 6.32 Multi-Family Dwelling Units in the IB District 192
Section 6.33 Oil and Gas Well/Development Standards for Special Use Approval 192
Article 7 General Provisions
Section 7.01 Intent 199
Section 7.02 Lot Use and Area Allocation 199
Section 7.03 Accessory Buildings, Structures, and Uses 199
Section 7.04 Corner Clearance 202
Section 7.05 Fences 203
Section 7.06 Voting Place 203
Section 7.07 Essential Services and Other Public Property 203
Section 7.08 General Exceptions 203
Section 7.09 Height Controls Adjacent to Airports 204
Section 7.10 Home Occupations 205
Section 7.11 Storage of Recreational Vehicles and Equipment 206
Section 7.12 Outdoor Parking of Commercial Vehicles in Residential Districts 207
Section 7.13 Temporary Buildings, Structures, and Uses 207
Section 7.14 Temporary Covering of Structures and Uses 211
Article 8 Site Plan Review
Section 8.01 Intent 213
Section 8.02 Site Plan Required 213
Section 8.03 Site Plan Procedures 214
Section 8.04 Administrative Plan Procedures 217
Section 8.05 Submittal Requirements 217
Section 8.06 Site Plan Review Design Standards 221
Article 9 Special Use Approval
Section 9.01 Intent 225
Section 9.02 Procedure 225
Section 9.03 Special Use Standards 226
Section 9.04 Conditions of Approval 227
Section 9.05 Effectiveness 228
Section 9.06 Amendments, Expansions, or Change in Use 228
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions
VI
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Figures & Maps Tables
Table of Contents
Article 10 Development Options
Section 10.01 Average Lot Sizes 229
Section 10.02 Site Condominium Project Regulations 229
Section 10.03 Open Space Preservation Option 231
Section 10.04 One-Family Cluster Option 235
Article 11 Planned Unit Development
Section 11.01 Intent 245
Section 11.02 Uses Permitted 246
Section 11.03 Standards for Approval 246
Section 11.04 Consistency with the Master Plan 248
Section 11.05 Summary of the Approval Process 248
Section 11.06 Step One: Concept Development Plan Approval 249
Section 11.07 Step Two: Preliminary Development Plan Approval 254
Section 11.08 Step Three: Final Development Plan Approval 257
Section 11.09 Amendment 257
Section 11.10 Public Notice for Planned Unit Development Public Hearings 257
Section 11.11 Abandonment 257
Section 11.12 Appeals 258
Section 11.13 Violations 258
Article 12 Sustainable Design and Environmental Standards
Section 12.01 Sustainable Design Option 259
Section 12.02 Stormwater Management 260
Section 12.03 Construction Within Designated Flood Plain Areas 261
Section 12.04 Wind Energy Conversion Systems 263
Section 12.05 Solar Structures and Easements 270
Section 12.06 Environmental Performance Standards 270
Article 13 Site Design Standards
Section 13.01 Intent 275
Section 13.02 Landscaping 275
Section 13.03 Trash Containers 294
Section 13.04 Equipment Screening 294
Section 13.05 Lighting 295
Section 13.06 Parking and Circulation 299
Section 13.07 Woodland Protection 306
Section 13.08 Traffic Impact Analysis 312
Section 13.09 Access Management 312
Section 13.10 Off-Street Loading and Unloading Regulations 314
Section 13.11 Pedestrian Access 314
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
VII
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table of Contents
Article 14 Non-Conforming Lots, Uses, and Structures
Section 14.01 Intent 317
Section 14.02 Nonconforming Lots of Record 318
Section 14.03 Nonconforming Uses of Land 318
Section 14.04 Nonconforming Structures 320
Section 14.05 Repairs and Maintenance 320
Section 14.06 Change of Tenancy or Ownership 320
Article 15 Zoning Board of Appeals
Section 15.01 Board Established 321
Section 15.02 Membership and Terms 321
Section 15.03 Rules Governing the Board of Appeals 322
Section 15.04 Powers and Duties of Zoning Board of Appeals 323
Section 15.05 Rules and Procedures for Variances 327
Section 15.06 Site Plan Requirements 331
Article 16 Amendments
Section 16.01 Authority 333
Section 16.02 Vested Right 333
Section 16.03 Rezoning Procedures 333
Section 16.04 Conditional Rezoning Procedures 335
Section 16.05 Public Notice of Proposed Rezonings and Text Amendments 338
Section 16.06 Protest Petition 338
Section 16.07 Annual Report 338
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions
VIII
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Figures & Maps Tables
Table of Contents
Figures
Building Height 9
Floor Area 16
Grade 18
Lot 20
Lot Types 22
Lot Lines 23
Story 31
Yards 35
Figure 4.06: R-1A - R-1E One Family Residential 51
Figure 4.07: RT One Family Attached Residential 55
Figure 4.08: MF Multiple-Family Residential 59
Figure 4.09: UR Urban Residential 63
Figure 4.11: CF Community Facilities 69
Figure 4.13: CB Community Business 75
Figure 4.14: GB General Business 79
Figure 4.15: IB Integrated Industrial and Business 83
Figure 4.16: O Office 87
Figure 4.17: OM Office Mixed Use 91
Figure 4.18: RC Research Center 95
Figure 5.03.B-1: Form-Based Code Building Form A 117
Figure 5.03.B-2: Form-Based Code Building Form B 119
Figure 5.03.B-3: Form-Based Code Building Form C 121
Figure 5.03.B-4: Form-Based Code Building Form D 123
Figure 5.03.B-5: Form-Based Code Building Form E 125
Figure 5.03.B-6: Form-Based Code Building Form F 127
Figure 13.02-A: Landscape Screening Alternative 1 278
Figure 13.02-B: Landscape Screening Alternative 2 279
Figure 13.02-C: Landscape Screening Alternative 3 280
Figure 13.02-D: Parking Lot Landscaping 284
Figure 13.02-E: Greenbelt 285
Figure 13.02-F: General Site Landscaping Overview 286
Maps
Map 5.04.1: Big Beaver District Regulating Plan 138
Map 5.04.2: Maple Road District Regulating Plan 148
Map 5.04.3: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan Nodes A-C 158
Map 5.04.3: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan Nodes D-G 159
Map 5.04.3: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan Nodes H-J 160
Map 5.04.3: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan Nodes K-N 161
Map 5.04.3: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan Nodes O-Q 162
Map 5.04.3: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan Nodes R-U 163
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
IX
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table of Contents
Tables
Table 4.06: R-1A - R-1E One Family Residential 51
Table 4.07: RT One Family Attached Residential 55
Table 4.08: MF Multiple-Family Residential 59
Table 4.09: UR Urban Residential 63
Table 4.11: CF Community Facilities 69
Table 4.13: CB Community Business 75
Table 4.14: GB General Business 79
Table 4.15: IB Integrated Industrial Business 83
Table 4.16: O Office 87
Table 4.17: OM Office Mixed Use 91
Table 4.18: RC Research Center 95
Table 4.21: Use Table 102
Table 5.03-A-1: Form Based Code Use Groups 111
Table 5.03.B.1: Form Based Code Building Form A Regulations 116
Table 5.03.B.2: Form Based Code Building Form B Regulations 118
Table 5.03.B.3: Form Based Code Building Form C Regulations 120
Table 5.03.B.4: Form Based Code Building Form D Regulations 122
Table 5.03.B.5: Form Based Code Building Form E Regulations 124
Table 5.03.B.6: Form Based Code Building Form F Regulations 126
Table 5.04.C-1: Big Beaver Use Groups Permitted 139
Table 5.04.C-2: Big Beaver Building Forms Permitted 139
Table 5.05.C-1: Maple Road Use Groups Permitted 149
Table 5.05.C-2: Maple Road Building Forms Permitted 149
Table 5.06.C-1: Neighborhood Nodes Use Groups Permitted 164
Table 5.06.C-2: Neighborhood Nodes Building Forms Permitted 164
Table 6.10: Stacking Spaces for Drive Through Lanes 177
Table 13.02-A: Landscape Screening Alternatives 277
Table 13.02-B: Landscape Screening Schedule 281
Table 13.02-C: Minimum Size and Spacing Requirements for Landscape Materials 288
Table 13.02-D: Prohibited Species 290
Table 13.06-A: Schedule of Off-Street Parking Spaces 300
Table 13.06-B: Parking Dimensions 303
Table 13.09-A: Off-Street Loading Requirements 312
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
X
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
1
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 1
Title, Purpose and Legal Clauses
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND LEGAL CLAUSES
SECTION 1.01 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as The City of Troy Zoning
Ordinance, or the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 1.02 PREAMBLE
A. The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, M.C.L.
125.3101 et seq.) establishes the right to adopt comprehensive zoning regulations,
and empowers the City to enact a zoning ordinance and provides for its
administration, enforcement and amendment.
B. The City deems it necessary to enact said regulations for the purpose of promoting
and protecting the health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of its
residents.
C. The City has prepared and adopted a Master Plan designed to guide growth in a
logical and orderly fashion; to lessen congestion on the public streets; to minimize
the burden on public services and utilities; to protect and preserve energy and
natural resources, and to ensure a well-balanced community considering its
present and potential physical, economic, cultural and environmental assets.
D. The City has identified districts and prepared regulations pertaining to such districts
in accordance with the City of Troy Master Plan and in consideration of the
character of the districts and their unique suitability for particular uses, with a view
towards conserving property values and encouraging the most appropriate use of
land throughout the City.
SECTION 1.03 PURPOSE
The purpose of the Ordinance is to promote and safeguard the public health, safety,
and welfare, implement the City of Troy Master Plan, and achieve the following
purposes:
A. Promote and regulate growth of the City to obtain orderly and beneficial
development with a balanced mix of uses that will support economic vitality and
sustainability.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
2
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 1
Title, Purpose and Legal Clauses
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
B. Protect the character and stability of residential neighborhoods.
C. Regulate the intensity and form of land development to ensure compatibility
among land uses and, where applicable, provide transitions between land uses to
reduce potential negative impacts.
D. Promote the wise use and conservation of energy and vital natural resources.
E. Improve the appearance and design quality of development.
F. Prevent an unreasonable burden on public facilities and services.
G. Lessen and avoid congestion on highways and streets, and provide safe and
convenient access for property.
H. Conserve the taxable value of land, buildings, and structures of the City of Troy.
SECTION 1.04 VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this Ordinance to
be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance not
specifically included in said ruling.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any
provision of this Ordinance to a particular parcel, lot, use, building, or structure,
such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, lot,
use, building, or structure not specifically included in said ruling.
SECTION 1.05 SCOPE AND CONSTRUCTION OF REGULATIONS
A. This Ordinance shall be liberally construed in such manner as to best effectuate its
purpose. In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, these provisions
are the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. Wherever any provision
of this Ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or
limitations than are imposed or required by any other law, rule, regulation or permit,
then the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. Whenever any provision of this
Ordinance imposes less stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations
than are imposed or required by any other law, rule, regulation or permit, then the
provisions of the other law, rule, regulation or permit shall control.
B. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
3
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 1
Title, Purpose and Legal Clauses
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except as
permitted by and in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 1.06 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS
A. Except as otherwise provided under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (PA 110 of
2006, as amended, M.C.L. 125.3101 et seq.), this Ordinance shall be controlling in the
case of any inconsistencies between this Ordinance and an Ordinance adopted
under any other law.
B. This Ordinance is not intended to prevent compliance with any Federal, State, or
local law, ordinance, or regulation, provided that where this Ordinance is more
restrictive or imposes a higher standard, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
C. This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate or annul any easement, covenant
or other private agreement. However, where any provision of this Ordinance is
more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or requirement than such easement,
covenant or other private agreement, the provision of this Ordinance shall govern.
D. Nothing within this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent compliance with an
order by the appropriate authority to correct, improve, strengthen, or restore to
a safe or healthy condition, any part of a building or premises declared unsafe or
unhealthy.
SECTION 1.07 REPEAL OF ORDINANCE
The City of Troy Zoning Ordinance, and all amendments thereto, and all prior zoning
ordinances of the City of Troy, are hereby repealed effective coincident with the
effective date of this Ordinance.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
4
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 1
Title, Purpose and Legal Clauses
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
5
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 2.01 RULES OF INTERPRETATION
For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used in this Ordinance shall
be interpreted as follows:
A. The particular shall control the general.
B. In the case of any differences of meaning or implication between the text of this
Ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
C. The word person includes a firm, association, proprietorship, organization,
partnership, trust, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity as well as an
individual.
D. The present tense includes the future tense; the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural number includes the singular.
E. The word shall is mandatory; the word may is permissive.
F. The words used or occupied include the words intended, designed, or
arranged to be used or arranged to be occupied.
G. A building or structure includes any part thereof.
H. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or
more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction and,
or, eitheror, such conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
1. And indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events
shall apply.
2. Or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may
apply singly or in any combination.
3. Eitheror indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events
shall apply singly but not in combination.
I. Terms not defined in this Ordinance shall have the meaning customarily assigned to
them.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
6
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 2.02 DEFINITIONS
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building, or portion thereof, which is supplemental or
subordinate to the main building or to the use of the land and is devoted exclusively to
an accessory use. The various types of accessory buildings shall be further defined as
follows:
A. BARN: A building specifically or partially used for the storage of farm animals such
as, but not limited to: horses, cattle, sheep, goats, and fowl, other than a dog
house.
B. GARAGE: A building, or portion of the main building, of not less than one hundred
eighty (180) square feet designed and intended to be used for the periodic parking
or storage of one (1) or more private motor vehicles, yard maintenance equipment
or recreational vehicles such as, but not limited to boats, trailers, all terrain vehicles
and snowmobiles.
C. STORAGE BUILDING/SHED: A building designed and intended to be used for the
storage of tools, garden tractors, lawn mowers, motorcycles, small recreation
vehicles such as, but not limited to snowmobiles, ATVs, and motor scooters.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure, or portion thereof, which is supplemental or
subordinate to the main building or to the use of the land.
ACCESSORY SUPPLEMENTAL BUILDING: An accessory building used by the occupants
of the principal building for recreation or pleasure, such as a gazebo, a swimming
pool cabana, a building housing a spa or greenhouse. The various types of accessory
supplemental buildings shall be further defined as follows:
A. CABANA: A building used in conjunction with a swimming pool and used for
the housing of pool filter equipment, pool accessories such as, but not limited to
vacuum cleaning equipment, brooms and safety equipment, and/or changing of
clothes.
B. DOG HOUSE: A building designed and used for housing not more than three dogs,
cats or other similar animals owned by the occupant of the parcel on which it is
located.
C. GAZEBO: A detached building which is generally of open, screened, or latticework
construction, and generally used for outdoor seating.
D. GREENHOUSE: A detached building that is used for non-commercial purposes,
constructed of permanent or temporary framing that is set directly on the ground
and is covered with glass panels or plastic or other transparent material, and is used
to grow plants.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
7
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
E. PLAY HOUSE: A detached building designed and used for childrens play.
ACCESSORY USE: A use which is supplemental and subordinate to the main use and
used for purposes clearly incidental to those of the main use.
ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY STRUCTURE: A structure which utilizes mechanically-operated
solar collectors to collect, transfer or store solar energy.
ADULT DAY CARE HOME. A private residence, in which six (6) adults or less are given
care and supervision for periods of time not to exceed sixteen (16) hours in a twenty-four
(24) hour period.
ADULT DAY CARE CENTERS. A center other than a private residence, in which more than
six (6) adults are supervised and receive group care for periods of time not to exceed
sixteen (16) hours in a twenty-four (24) hour period.
ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITIES: A governmental or non-governmental establishment
that provides foster care to adults. It include facilities and foster care family homes for
adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped
who require supervision or an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing
care. An adult foster care facility does not include nursing homes, homes for the
aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation center, residential centers
for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities
which have been exempted from the definition of adult foster care facility by the Adult
Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, 218 of 1979, MCL 400.701, as amended. The types of
licensed adult foster care facilities include the following:
A. FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME: A facility with the approved capacity to
receive twelve (12) or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and
protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or
more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
B. FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME: A facility with approved capacity to receive at
least thirteen (13) but not more than twenty (20) adults to be provided supervision,
personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24)
hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive
weeks for compensation.
C. FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME: A private residence with the approved capacity to
receive six (6) or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for five (5) or more
days a week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care
family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the
residence.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
8
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. FOSTER CARE CONGREGATE FACILITY: An adult foster care facility with the
approved capacity to receive more than twenty (20) adults to be provided with
foster care.
AGRICULTURE: Farms and general farming, including horticulture, floriculture, dairying,
livestock, and poultry raising, farm forestry, and other similar uses, excluding the
following: piggeries, the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal or rendering
plants, the slaughtering of animals except such animals as have been raised or
maintained on the premises for at least a period of one year immediately prior thereto
and for the use and consumption of only the persons residing on the premises.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING: Any structure used for agriculture as defined by this
ordinance, whether the principal use of the property is residential, agriculture or some
other use.
AIRPORT: A landing area, runway, or other facility designed, used, or intended to be
used for the landing or taking off of aircraft, including all necessary taxi-ways, aircraft
storage and tie-down areas, hangars, terminal facilities, and other necessary buildings,
facilities, and open spaces. Airports are designated on the Airport Location and
Height Control Map, and are further controlled by the provisions of Section 7.09 of this
Ordinance.
ALLEY: Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of vehicular access
to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATIONS: Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of
occupancy, any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders. Alterations may be referred to in this Ordinance
as altered or reconstructed.
AMBIENT NOISE: Regularly occurring background noise.
ANTENNA: Any structure designed to transmit or receive television, radio, data,
communications, or other signals from other antennas, satellites, or other services.
AUTOMOBILE: See definition of vehicle.
AVERAGE GRADE: The average elevation of the ground for each face of the building.
(See definition of grade for illustration.)
BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but is so
located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than
the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be
counted as a story.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
9
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner occupied private residence at which overnight
accommodations and a morning meal are provided to transients for compensation.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES: Structural and non-structural practices and techniques
that mitigate the adverse impacts caused by land development or water quality and
quantity.
BUILDING: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof, and used or
built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The term building height shall mean the vertical distance as
measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs,
including walls or parapets that extend above the horizontal roof surface; to the
deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. When a non-residential building is located on sloping
terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at
the building wall. When a residential building is located on sloping terrain, the height
shall be measured from the highest grade adjacent to the front of the structure to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, including walls or parapets that extend above
the horizontal roof surface; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average
height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. For residential
buildings, the major or main roof over the living area shall be used to determine
building height, with the following exception: when the total horizontal roof area of
dormers and/or minor gables enclosing the living area exceeds twenty (20) percent
of the total horizontal area of the roof to which such dormers or gables are attached,
the predominant height of such dormers or gables shall be used as the basis for the
determination of the building height.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
10
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
BUILDING LINE: The front setback line of the existing or proposed building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on
which it is constructed. Also referred to in this Ordinance as the main building.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The person responsible for administering the relevant building
code for the City of Troy.
CEMETERY: Grounds and facilities including any one (1) or a combination of more
than one (1) of the following: a burial ground for earth interment; a mausoleum
for crypt entombment; a crematory for the cremation of human remains; and a
columbarium for the deposit of cremated remains.
CHILD CARE CENTER: A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one (1) or
more preschool or school age children for care for periods of less than twenty-four
(24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. The facility is generally
described as a child-care center, day-care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent
cooperative preschool, play group or drop-in center. The term child day-care center
does not include any of the following:
A. A Sunday school, a vacation bible school or a religious instructional class that is
conducted by a religious organization where children are in attendance for not
greater than three (3) hours per day for an indefinite period, or not greater than
eight (8) hours per day for a period not to exceed four (4) weeks during a twelve
(12) month period.
B. A facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for not
greater than three (3) hours per day while persons responsible for the children are
attending religious services.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Troy.
CITY ENGINEER: The person or firm authorized to advise the City Administration,
City Council or Planning Commission on drainage, grading, paving, storm water
management and control, utilities, and other related site engineering and civil
engineering issues.
CITY OF TROY MASTER PLAN: The policy document outlining the preferred physical
development of the City of Troy, as authorized by the Municipal Planning Act, P.A. 285
of 1931, as amended.
CLINIC: Facilities for medical, dental or psychiatric diagnosis and treatment, exclusive
of major surgical procedures, for sick, ailing and injured persons who are not kept
overnight on the premises.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
11
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
CLUB: An organization and its premises catering exclusively to members and their guests
for social intellectual, recreational, cultural, or athletic purposes not operated for profit.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle used to generate income, and which, by
appearance, is anything other than usual and customary personal family transportation.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: PICK-UP TRUCK: A light truck, including one with an extended
cab or a crew cab, manufactured with an open body, low sides, and a tailgate.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: PASSENGER/CARGO-STYLE VAN: An enclosed truck
manufactured with a unified body permitting unobstructed passenger movement
throughout.
CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT PLAN (CDP): The initial plan submitted for Planned Unit
Development approval in accordance with Article 11. The Concept Development
Plan describes the overall design of the project and its buildings and requires legislative
approval. Considered in tandem with a development agreement, approval of a
Concept Development Plan by City Council also reclassifies the property as PUD on the
Zoning District Map.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT, CONVENTIONAL: A development in which ownership interest
is divided under the authority of the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended)
and in which the condominium unit consists primarily of the dwelling or other principal
structure and most of the land in the development is part of the general common area.
CONDOMINIUM, GENERAL COMMON ELEMENTS: Portions of the condominium
development owned and maintained by the condominium association, as defined in
the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended).
CONDOMINIUM, LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS: Portions of the condominium
development other than the condominium unit reserved for the exclusive use of
less than all of the co-owners of the condominium development, as defined by the
Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended).
CONDOMINIUM, MASTER DEED: The condominium document recording the
condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference
the bylaws for the project and including those items required in Section 8 of the
Condominium Act, P.A. 59 or 1978, as amended.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT, SITE: A development in which ownership is divided under
the authority of the Condominium Act, P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended, and in which the
condominium unit consists of a building site, with or without structures, which along with
associated limited common area elements, constitutes the equivalent of a lot.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
12
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
CONDOMINIUM UNIT: That portion of a condominium development designed and
intended for occupancy and use by the unit owner consistent with the provisions of the
master deed, as defined in the Condominium Act, P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended.
CONTRACTORS ESTABLISHMENT: A facility, building, structure, grounds, or portion
thereof used to store tools, trucks, equipment, supplies, resources, and materials used
by building construction professionals, contractors, and subcontractors. Such facilities
typically will include outdoor storage, assembly or staging areas.
dB(A): A-weighted decibels. This is the standard used to measure environmental noise.
DERRICK: Any portable framework, tower mast and/or structure which is required or used
in connection with drilling or re-working a well for the production of oil or gas.
DESIGN STANDARDS: Standards established within a form-based district that control
specific elements such as materials, site amenities, architectural, pedestrian and
vehicular access, parking location and layout, and other site design features.
DEVELOPMENT: Means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, dredging, filling, grading or
paving.
DRILLING PAD: The area of surface operations surrounding the surface location of a well
or wells. Such area shall not include an access road to the drilling pad.
DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESS: A principal use or accessory use of an establishment that
by design permits customers to obtain goods or services while remaining in their motor
vehicles.
DRY CLEANING AND LAUNDRY ESTABLISHMENT: A commercial establishment providing
dry cleaning and laundry services on-site for businesses and residents and which may
include a dry cleaning plant.
DRY CLEANING PLANT: A facility used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics,
textiles, clothing, laundry or other similar articles by immersion and/or agitation in
solvents or other processes.
DWELLING UNIT: A building, or portion thereof, designed for the occupancy of one (1)
family and having cooking and bathroom facilities.
DWELLING, LIVE/WORK: A multi-story dwelling unit where the first floor is designed as
a storefront for retail, service, office, or artisan studio and a dwelling unit on the upper
floors.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
13
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
three (3) or more families living independently of each other. Multiple-family dwellings
may consist of the following:
A. EFFICIENCY UNIT: a dwelling unit containing not more than one (1) room in addition
to kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities.
B. ONE (1) BEDROOM UNIT: a dwelling unit consisting of not more than two (2) rooms in
addition to kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities.
C. TWO (2) BEDROOM UNIT: a dwelling unit consisting of not more than three (3) rooms
in addition to kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities.
D. THREE (3) OR MORE BEDROOM UNIT: a dwelling unit consisting of not more than four
(4) rooms in addition to kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A building consisting of not more than one (1) dwelling unit
designed exclusively for the use of one (1) family.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A building containing not less than three (3) nor
more than eight (8) one-family dwelling units erected side by side as a single building,
each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by an uninterrupted wall
extending from the basement floor to the roof. No more than one (1) dwelling unit may
be served by a single stairway or by a single exterior door.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2)
families, independent of each other such as a duplex dwelling unit.
ELDERLY: Individuals sixty (60) years of age or older.
ENTRANCE RAMP: A roadway connecting a feeder road with a limited access freeway
and used for access on to such limited access freeway.
ERECTED: Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical
operations on the premises which are required for the construction, excavation, fill,
drainage, and the like, shall be considered a part of erection.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of public
utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical,
steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution system, collection, communication,
supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar
equipment in connection with, but not including buildings which are necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general
health, safety, or welfare.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
14
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
EXCAVATION: Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and
ground care.
EXIT RAMP: A roadway connecting a limited access freeway with a feeder road and
used for access from such limited access freeway to a feeder road.
EXTENDED STAY FACILITY: A hotel or motel that offers overnight accommodation
primarily for periods of one (1) week or more.
FAMILY: Means either of the following:
A. A domestic family, that is, one (1) or more persons living together and related by
the bonds of consanguinity, marriage, or adoption, together with servants of the
principal occupants and not more than one (1) additional unrelated person, with all
of such individuals being domiciled together as a single, domestic, housekeeping
unit in a dwelling.
B. The functional equivalent of the domestic family, that is, persons living together
in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct character
and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family, with a demonstrable and
recognizable bond which constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which
render the domestic family a cohesive unit. This definition shall not include any
society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie organization or group
whose association is temporary or seasonal in character or nature. For the purposes
of enforcement, it is presumed that a functional equivalent of a domestic family is
limited to six (6) or fewer persons.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME: A private home in which one (1) but less than seven (7) minor
children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24)
hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an
adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. The term family day care
home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four (4)
weeks during a calendar year. The owner of the family day care business must also be
the owner and resident of the private home.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: A bank, savings and loan, credit union, mortgage office, or
similar institution, including branch offices and automated teller machines.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Any land area which on the basis of available flood plain
information is subject to one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year
(the 100-year flood).
FLOOD, BASE: Means a flood which has one (1) percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. This flood is also referred as the 100-year flood and is the
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
15
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
basis of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP: Means an official map of the City of Troy
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), where the boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: Means an official map of the City of Troy on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the City of Troy.
FLOOD PLAIN: Means any land area, normally dry, susceptible to being inundated by
water from the unusual and rapid accumulation or run-off of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD WAY: Means the channel of a water course and adjacent land areas which
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of a building, measured
from the interior faces of the exterior walls, or from the centerline of common walls of
adjoining buildings. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall
apply:
A. FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The floor area within the inside perimeter of the walls
of a building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without
deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns,
or other features. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with
surrounding exterior walls shall be the useable area under the horizontal projection of
the roof or floor above. The gross floor area shall not include shafts with no openings
or interior courts.
B. FLOOR AREA, NET: Measurement of the actual occupied area not including
unoccupied accessory areas such as corridors, stairways, toilet rooms, mechanical
rooms, and closets.
C. RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA: For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable
floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. The floor area measurement
is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways,
and enclosed and/or unenclosed porches.
D. COMMERCIAL BUILDING FLOOR AREA: Measurement of the gross floor area shall
be the sum of all the horizontal areas of all floors of the building (including malls,
basements, mezzanines, atriums and service areas), as measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
16
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
E. OFFICE BUILDING FLOOR AREA: (Other than medical office buildings) Measurement
of the gross floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of all floors (including
basements, service areas, mezzanines, atriums and lobbies), as measured from
the exterior faces of the exterior walls. For the purpose of calculating the required
parking, usable floor area shall exclude corridors, lobby areas, vertical shafts
(elevators, pipe chases, etc.) sanitary facilities, mechanical spaces, and storage
areas. In the absence of detailed floor plans, the usable floor area shall be equal to
eighty (80) percent of the gross floor area. When detailed floor plans are available,
they shall be used for the determination of usable floor area and the parking
requirement.
F. MEDICAL OFFICE BUILDING FLOOR AREA: Measurement of the gross floor area shall
be the sum of the horizontal areas of all floors (including basements, service areas,
mezzanines, atriums and lobbies), as measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls. For the purpose of calculating the required parking, usable floor area shall
exclude corridors, lobby areas, vertical shafts (elevators, pipe chases, etc.), sanitary
facilities, mechanical spaces and storage areas. In the absence of detailed floor
plans, the usable floor area of medical office buildings shall be equal to eighty-five
(85) percent of the gross floor area. When detailed floor plans are available, they
shall be used for the determination of usable floor area and the parking requirement.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
17
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The gross building square footage divided by the square footage
of the lot.
FORM BASED CODE: A means of regulating development with enhanced control over
physical form to achieve a predictable, planned outcome.
FREESTANDING TOWER STRUCTURE: An unsupported structure specifically designed to
elevate an apparatus, antenna, or other equipment for technical purposes.
FREEWAY: A multilane highway for continuous traffic flow with all crossroads separated
by grade, with fully controlled access. Interstate 75 is the only freeway within the City of
Troy.
FRONTAGE: Any portion of a parcel of land abutting, touching, or bordering a street,
thoroughfare, or freeway.
GOLF COURSE: A tract of land laid out for at least nine (9) holes for playing the game
of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards and that may include a
clubhouse, driving range, pro shop, shelter, and related accessory uses.
GRADE: A ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number
of stories and the height of the building. The building grade shall be the level of the
ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is
not level, the average grade shall be applied.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
18
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL: A building that is used for wholesale commercial
purposes, constructed of permanent or temporary framing that is set directly on the
ground and is covered with glass panels or plastic or other transparent material, and is
used to grow plants.
GROUND STORY ACTIVATION: The incorporation of specific design characteristics
intended to allow the ground story interior of a building to interact with the public realm
immediately outdoors.
GROUP DAY CARE HOME: A private home in which more than six (6) but not more than
twelve (12) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twentyfour
(24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children
related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. The term
group day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child
for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. The owner of the group day care
business must also be the owner and resident of the private home.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
19
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation carried on by an occupant of the dwelling unit as
a secondary use to the principal use of the dwelling.
HORIZONTAL DRILLING: The drilling of an oil or natural gas well at an angle so that the
well runs parallel to the formation containing the oil or gas.
HOSPITAL, GENERAL: A state licensed medical establishment whose facilities provide
in-patient accommodation; a wide range of medical and surgical care; and other
in-patient health services for sick, ailing or injured persons, rather than a limited scope
of services provided for through special purpose hospitals; and including such related
facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central services, and
staff offices and residences which are integral with and accessory to the principal use of
the establishment.
HOTEL: An establishment providing sleeping accommodations for a fee, with access to
all rooms provided from interior lobbies, courts or halls.
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING OR FRACKING: The process of injecting water, customized
fluids, sand, steam, or gas into a gas well under pressure to improve gas recovery.
INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY: An enterprise conducted entirely within
a building, which receives a fee in return for the provision of some recreational activity
or facility. Such activities and facilities include, but are not limited to. racquetball,
tennis courts, gymnasiums, swimming pools, skating rinks, performance studios, indoor
skateboard parks, climbing facilities, indoor driving ranges, batting cages, firing ranges,
basketball courts, indoor soccer fields and similar activities or facilities. Such facilities
may provide ancillary accessory uses such as pro shops or snack bars.
INTEGRATED COMPLEX: A group of buildings contained within a single development
and under a single approved site plan. An integrated complex may share parking,
signs, access, and other similar features which together form a unified function and
appearance that the Zoning Administrator deems to collectively be a principal use.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: The housing or keeping of any number of dogs for training,
breeding, grooming or boarding for commercial purposes.
LANDSCAPE MATERIAL: Living plant materials such as, including but not limited to
grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees, and non-living durable material
commonly employed in landscape development.
LOADING SPACE: An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of
buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
20
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
LODGING FACILITY: A facility such as a motel or hotel, which provides living and
sleeping accommodations for transient occupancy for a fee.
LOT: The term lot shall mean a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied
by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for
the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open spaces as are
required under the provisions of this Ordinance. A lot may or may not be specifically
designated as such on public records.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot where the interior angle of two (2) adjacent sides at the intersection
of two (2) streets is less than one hundred thirty five (135) degrees. A lot abutting
upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this
Ordinance if the arc is of less radius than one hundred fifty (150) feet and the tangents
to the curve, at the two (2) points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight
street line extended, form an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty five (135)
degrees.
LOT COVERAGE: That part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings, including
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
21
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
accessory buildings and accessory supplemental buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured
along the median between the side lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets.
LOT FRONTAGE: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured between
the points where said lot lines intersect the street right-of-way. Said frontage shall be
continuous and unbroken, and shall be measured along the constructed portion of the
right-of-way only.
LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: The line bounding a lot as defined in this Ordinance:
A. FRONT LOT LINE: In the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot from the
right-of-way or planned future right-of-way identified in the City of Troy Master
Plan (the street). In the case of a corner lot, both lines separating said lot from the
street shall be considered front lot lines. In the case of a double frontage lot, a
line separating said lot from that street which provides access to the lot shall be
considered the front lot line; the other shall be considered a rear lot line.
B. REAR LOT LINE: That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of an irregular or
triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front
lot line not less than ten (10) feet long in length farthest from the front lot line and
wholly within the lot. In the case of a corner lot, one (1) of the non-front lot lines shall
be considered a side lot line; the other non-front lot line shall be considered a rear lot
line.
C. SIDE LOT LINE: Any lot line other than the front lot line or the rear lot line. A side lot
line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. In the case of
a corner lot, one (1) of the non-front lot lines shall be considered a side lot line; the
other non-front lot line shall be considered a rear lot line. In the case of a double
frontage lot, yards that have neither front nor rear yards shall be considered side
yards.
LOT WIDTH: The straight-line distance between side lot lines, measured at the two (2)
points where the minimum building line, or setback, intersects the side lot lines.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
22
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
23
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): Site design and stormwater management techniques
that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, and detain runoff close to its source, and that result
in maintaining a sites presettlement hydrology.
MAIN BUILDING: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon
which it is situated.
MANUFACTURED HOME: Any structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which is built on a chassis and designed to be sold as a dwelling with or without
permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure.
Manufactured housing does not include recreational vehicles or equipment.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person
on which three (3) or more manufactured homes are located on a continual nonrecreational
basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of
whether a charge is made therefore, together with any building, structure, enclosure,
street, equipment or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a
manufactured home and which is not intended for use as a temporary trailer park.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
24
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
MANUFACTURING, COMPOUNDING, OR PROCESSING: An enclosed establishment
engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into
new products, including the assembling of component parts, the creation of products,
and the blending of materials, usually in a continuous and regular action or succession
of actions.
MARGINAL ACCESS ROAD: A service roadway parallel to a feeder road; and which
provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
MASTER PLAN: The comprehensive plan including graphic and written proposals
indicating the general location of streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all the
physical development of the municipality, and includes any unit or part of such plan,
and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT: A development of a tract of land, building, or structure with
a variety of complementary and integrated uses as permitted by the applicable zoning
district, in a compact urban form.
MORTUARY ESTABLISHMENT: A facility used for the preparation of the deceased
for burial and for visitation and for the conduct of memorial and funeral services.
Commonly referred to as funeral home.
MOTEL: An establishment providing sleeping accommodations for a fee with a majority
of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through
the main lobby of the building.
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION: A facility designed and constructed to compress
natural gas that originates from a gas well or collection of such wells operating as a
midstream facility for delivery of gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline,
natural gas processing plant or underground storage field, including one or more natural
gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes, valves, tanks and other equipment.
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT: A facility designed and constructed to remove
materials such as ethane, propane, butane, and other constituents or similar substances
from natural gas to allow such natural gas to be of such quality as is required or
appropriate for transmission or distribution to commercial markets but not including
facilities or equipment that is designed and constructed primarily to remove water,
water vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids from the natural gas.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING: A building or portion thereof, existing at the effective
date of this Ordinance or amendments thereto that does not conform to the provisions
of this Ordinance relative to height, bulk, area, or yards for the zoning district in which it
is located.
NON-CONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the
effective date of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, that does not conform to the
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
25
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
NURSERY (PLANT MATERIAL): A space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for
the storage of live trees, shrubs, or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including
products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery within the
meaning of this Ordinance does not include any space, building or structure used for
the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees.
OFF-STREET PARKING LOT: A facility other than for single-family dwellings providing
vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as
to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three (3) vehicles.
OIL AND GAS: Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed methane gas, propane,
butane and/or any other products or similar substances that are produced by drilling an
oil or gas well.
OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT: The well site preparation, construction, drilling, redrilling,
hydraulic fracturing, and/or site restoration associated with an oil or gas well of any
depth; water and other fluid storage, impoundment and transportation used for such
activities; and the installation and use of all associated equipment, including tanks,
meters, and other equipment and structures whether permanent or temporary; and
the site preparation, construction, installation, maintenance and repair of oil and gas
pipelines and associated equipment and other equipment and activities associated
with the exploration for, production and transportation of oil and gas. The definition
does not include natural gas compressor stations and natural gas processing plants or
facilities performing the equivalent functions.
OIL OR GAS WELL: A pierced or bored hole drilled or being drilled in the ground for the
purpose of, or to be used for, producing, extracting or injecting gas, oil, petroleum or
another liquid related to oil or gas production or storage, including brine disposal.
OIL OR GAS WELL SITE: The location of facilities, structures, materials and equipment
(whether temporary or permanent), that are necessary for or incidental to the
preparation, construction, drilling, production or operation of an oil or gas well. This
definition also includes exploratory wells.
OPEN AIR BUSINESS: A permanent business including the sales and/or display of retail
merchandise or services outside of a permanent structure.
OPEN SPACE: A parcel or area of land that is intended to provide light and air, and is
designed for resource protection, aesthetic, or recreational purposes. Open space uses
may include, but are not limited to lawns, decorative plantings, walkways, active and
passive recreation areas, land use buffers, playgrounds, fountains, woodlands, wetlands
and bio-retention facilities. Open space shall not include streets, driveways, parking lots,
or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular traffic.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
26
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Open space within or related to a development, not in
individually owned lots, which is designed for and dedicated to the common use or
enjoyment of the residents of the development or general public.
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION: An enterprise conducted primarily outdoors,
which receives a fee in return for the provision of some recreational activity or facility.
Such activities and facilities include, but are not limited to soccer, baseball, football, or
other athletic fields, outdoor miniature golf courses and driving ranges, tennis, basketball
or other athletic courts, and other similar facilities or activities.
OPERATOR: Includes the owner, licensee, manager, or person in charge of any
premises.
PARKING SPACE: An area of definite length and width, said area shall be exclusive of
drives, aisles, or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the
storage or parking of permitted vehicles.
PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY STRUCTURE: A structure which uses natural and architectural
components to collect and store solar energy without using external mechanical
energy.
PERFORMANCE STUDIO: A building or a portion of a building where the principal use of
the space is the provision of instruction in the various arts, including but not limited to
dance, theater, music, and singing. This shall not preclude student performances.
PERFORMANCE THEATER: A building or portion of a building where the principal use of
the space is dramatic, dance, or musical performances or similar activities, in front of
an audience, including performances on film, television, music video, or multimedia.
Performance theaters shall include theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar
places of assembly.
PERSON: An individual, firm, association, proprietorship, organization, partnership, trust,
corporation, limited liability company, or other entity.
PLACES OF ASSEMBLY: Unless otherwise identified and defined by this Ordinance,
places of assembly means any building, structure, and/or grounds where groups of
more than twenty (20) people meet or are assembled. Places of assembly shall include,
but are not limited to auditoriums, lecture halls, stadiums, sports arenas, convention
spaces, and other similar facilities.
PLACES OF WORSHIP: A site used for or intended for the regular assembly of persons for
the conducting of religious services and accessory uses therewith.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A development consisting of a combination of
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
27
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
land uses in which the specific development configuration and use allocation is based
upon a comprehensive physical plan meeting the requirements of this Ordinance.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Troy.
PLANNING DIRECTOR: The chief administrator of the City of Troy Planning Department.
PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN (PDP): The second step in the review process for
a Planned Unit Development. The PDP includes specific information concerning the
phasing and design of detailed elements within the PUD.
PRINCIPAL USE: The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal
purpose for which the premises exists. Commonly referred to as main use.
PRODUCTION FACILITY, MULTIMEDIA: A facility for creating, recording, editing, or
producing multimedia content, in any digital media format, film or videotape. Such
activities shall include, but not be limited to, motion pictures, television series or specials,
commercials, music videos, sound recordings, digital animation, and video games.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, or corporation, municipal department, board or
commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal
regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication,
telegraph, transportation or water.
RECREATION VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT: Vehicles and equipment designed to be used
for travel, recreation, and vacation use or periodical and occasional family recreation
and vacation use, and may or may not be used as a temporary dwelling. Recreational
vehicles shall include, but are not limited to boats and boat trailers, snowmobiles, trail
cycles, all-terrain vehicles, travel trailers, camp trailers, tent trailers, motor homes, utility
trailers, floats and rafts and similar equipment, and trailers, cases, and boxes used for
transporting recreational equipment.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, COMMERCIAL: A recreation facility operated as a business
and open to the public for a fee.
REGULATING PLAN: A plan which dictates building forms and uses allowed on every
property within an area regulated by a form based code.
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE: A line established in a form based district on which a building
or a portion of a building must be located.
RESTAURANT: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and
beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method
of operation is characteristic of a fast food, standard restaurant, bar/lounge, or
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
28
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
combination thereof, as defined below:
A. RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: A restaurant whose method of operation involves delivery of
prepared food so as to allow its consumption in a motor vehicle or elsewhere on the
premises, but primarily outside of an enclosed building.
B. RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: A restaurant in which the method of operation involves
minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the customer for
consumption on the premises either inside or outside of the structure, or for
consumption off the premises, but not intended to be consumed in a motor vehicle
at the site.
C. RESTAURANT, STANDARD: A restaurant in which the method of operation involves
either:
1. The delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers seated at
tables within a completely enclosed building; or
2. The preparation of food to be delivered to customers at a cafeteria line and
subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely enclosed
building.
D. BAR/LOUNGE: A type of restaurant which is operated primarily for the dispensing of
alcoholic beverages with the ancillary sale of prepared food or snacks. If a bar or
lounge is part of a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure
so designated or operated.
RETAIL BUSINESS OR RETAIL SALES: An establishment engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and
rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
RETAIL SALES, LARGE SCALE: A retail establishment, commonly referred to as a big box
store, which exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in gross floor area.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY: A building or group of buildings containing fully enclosed,
compartmentalized stalls or lockers which are rented or leased as individual units for
the storage of personal property customarily related to residential, office, and/or local
commercial activities.
SENIOR HOUSING: An institution other than a hospital or hotel, which provides housing
or room and board to non-transient persons primarily sixty (60) years of age or older.
Housing for seniors may include:
A. INDEPENDENT LIVING: A multiple-family housing form with full facilities for selfsufficiency
in each individual dwelling unit.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
29
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
B. CONGREGATE CARE: A dependent elderly housing facility with cooking facilities
within the unit, but with a central dining service option. Limited medical care is
available.
C. ASSISTED LIVING: A dependent elderly housing facility without cooking facilities in
individual rooms and with and only central dining service. Limited medical care,
including memory care, may be provided.
D. CONVALESCENT HOME: A state licensed medical establishment providing
accommodation and care for aged or infirmed persons, or for those who are bedfast
or needing considerable nursing care, but not including facilities for the treatment
of sickness or injuries or facilities for surgical care. Commonly referred to as nursing
home.
SETBACK, REQUIRED: The distance required to meet the front, side, or rear yard open
space requirements of this Ordinance.
SHOPPING CENTER: A minimum of three (3) commercial or service establishments within
a single building served by a common parking area.
SIGN: Any structure or wall or other object used for the display of any message, and
includes but is not limited to any bill, poster, placard, handbill, flyer, painting, balloon,
streamer, or other similar object in any form whichever, which contains printed or written
matter in words, symbols, or pictures, or in any combination thereof attached to or
affixed to the ground or any structure, as defined and regulated by Chapter 85, Signs, of
the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
SOLAR ACCESS EASEMENT: A right, expressed as an easement, covenant, condition or
other property interest in any deed or other instrument executed by or on behalf of any
landowner, which protects the solar skyspace of an actual, proposed or designated
solar energy collector at a described location by forbidding or limiting activities,
land uses, structures and/or trees that interfere with access to solar energy. The solar
skyspace must be described as the three (3) dimensional spaces in which obstruction is
prohibited or limited. Any property owner may give or sell his right to access to sunlight.
Such Solar Access Easements shall be recorded and copies shall be kept on file with the
Troy Clerks Department.
SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device or combination of devices, structures, or parts thereof,
that collects, transfers or transforms direct solar, radiant energy into thermal, chemical,
or electrical energy, and that contributes significantly to a structures energy supply. In
addition to such functions, solar collectors may also serve as a part of a structures roof,
wall, window or other structural member.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy (direct, diffuse, and reflected) received from the sun.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
30
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SOLAR SKYSPACE: The space between a solar energy collector and the sun which must
be free of obstructions that shade the collector to an extent which precludes its costeffective
operation.
SIGNIFICANT OR SUBSTANTIAL PORTION: Means thirty (30) percent or more of the term
modified by such phrase.
STORAGE WELL: A well used for and in connection with the underground storage of
natural gas, including injection into or withdrawal from an underground storage reservoir
for monitoring or observation of reservoir pressure.
STORY: That part of a building, except a mezzanine, included between the surface of
one (1) floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is not a floor above, then the
ceiling next above. A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more
than fifty (50) percent by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining
ground.
STORY, HALF: An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof, the usable floor area of
which, at a height of four feet above the floor, does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the
floor area in the story directly below and the height above at least two hundred (200)
square feet of floor space is seven feet four inches (74). When the usable floor area of
such a story, at a height of four (4) feet above the floor, does exceed two-thirds (2/3) of
the floor area of the story directly below, it shall be counted as a full story.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
31
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
STREET: A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property.
A. MAJOR ARTERIAL STREET: An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large
volume traffic-way for both the immediate area and the region beyond. Any street
with a right-of-way width, existing or proposed, of one hundred twenty (120) feet or
greater, as designated in the City of Troy Master Plan, shall be considered a major
arterial street. Also commonly referred to as major thoroughfare.
B. MINOR ARTERIAL STREET: A street which is intended to serve as a traffic way for the
immediate area, with less volume and shorter trips than major arterial streets.
C. COLLECTOR STREET: A street carrying traffic from local streets to the system of arterial
streets.
D. LOCAL STREET: A street used primarily for access to abutting properties, providing for
minimum speeds and traffic volumes.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the
ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of
a structure, the cost of which exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
32
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
structure either (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure
has been damaged and is being restored, as before the damage occurred. For the
purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building occurs,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term
does not, however, include (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply
with existing State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or, (2) any alteration of a structure listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
TEMPORARY METEOROLOGICAL TOWERS (TMT): A tower of monopole design which is
designed and built to hold wind resource testing devices such as anemometers, wind
vanes and accessory equipment and which is to remain in place for no more than
eighteen (18) months.
TEMPORARY USE OR BUILDING: A use or building permitted to exist during periods of
construction of the main building or use, or for special events.
UNDEVELOPED STATE: A natural state preserving natural resources, natural features,
or scenic or wooded conditions; open space; or a similar use or condition. Land in an
undeveloped state does not include a golf course, but may include a recreational
trail, picnic area, childrens play area, greenway, or linear park. The term greenway
shall mean a contiguous or linear open space, including habitats, wildlife corridors and
trails that link parks, nature reserves, cultural features, or historic sites with each other for
recreational or conservation purposes.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for
which land or a building is or may be occupied.
VARIANCE: The term variance shall mean a modification of the literal physical
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals in accordance with the authority bestowed upon that Board by the provisions
of this Ordinance.
VEHICLE: A piece of mechanical equipment used for transportation such as an
automobile, truck, van, motorcycle and similar devices.
VEHICLE, ANTIQUE OR CLASSIC: An automobile or other vehicle that is classified as
historical or is eligible to be classified as historical by the State of Michigan, which is over
twenty-six (26) years old, and which is owned as a collectors item and used primarily for
exhibition and educational purposes.
VEHICLE FILLING/MULTI-USE STATION: A building or premises used primarily for the
dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles;
together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles such as
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
33
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
filling tires with air, checking fluid levels, adding water to batteries or radiators, and
similar activities; as well as selling convenience foods and other such items through a
convenience store.
VEHICLE REPAIR FACILITY: A facility which offers and provides for, repair of mechanical,
electrical, cooling, exhaust, brake, and power system repairs, including collision shops,
transmission repair shops, shops used for the internal repair or engine components and
drive train repair, and radiator repair shops.
VEHICLE WASH: A building, or portion thereof, the primary purpose of which is that of
washing vehicles either by automatic or self-service means.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: A facility maintained by or for the use of a licensed veterinarian
in the diagnosis, treatment, or prevention of animal diseases and injuries.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): Any device such as a turbine, windmill or
charger that converts wind energy to a usable form of energy. WECS shall fall within
two (2) classifications: on-site or commercial, and shall typically be defined as horizontalaxis
or vertical-axis.
A. ON-SITE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION: A WECS, the energy from which is used only by
the primary residence or residences in a cooperative effort, business or agricultural
operation and not sold or transferred to the electrical grid for commercial profit. This
does not exclude the sale of excess energy sold to a utility through net metering for
on-site WECS when the WECS produces more energy than can be stored or used onsite.
B. COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM: Any WECS that is exclusively
designed and built to provide electricity to the electric utilitys power grid as an
ongoing commercial enterprise or for commercial profit.
C. HORIZONTAL-AXIS WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS: Conventionally designed
systems that have a main rotor shaft that is parallel to the ground and a series
of blades that are perpendicular to the ground, as in a traditional agricultural
windmill. Horizontal-axis wind energy conversion systems are traditionally mounted
on a tower or pole and must be pointed into the wind.
D. VERTICAL-AXIS WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS: Systems that have a main
rotor shaft that is perpendicular to the ground and the system does not need to
be pointed into the wind. These systems are more common in areas where wind
direction is variable. These systems often resemble a drum, cylinder, or helix.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: All structures and accessory facilities relating
to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving
radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers,
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
34
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
telephone devices and exchanges, micro-wave relay facilities, telephone transmission
equipment building and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included
within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short wave receiving facilities;
amateur (ham) radio facilities; satellite dishes; and, governmental facilities which are
subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory
authority. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following additional terms are defined:
A. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA (WCA): Shall mean any antenna used for
the transmission or reception of wireless communication signals excluding those
used for dispatch communications by public emergency stations, ham radio
antennas, and satellite antennas, those who receive video programming services
via multi-point distribution services which are forty (40) inches or less in diameter
and those which receive television broadcast signals. Antenna may be affixed
to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles,
and the like. A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly
established shall not be included within this definition.
B. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURES: Shall mean structures erected
or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures
within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers,
light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which appear to be
something other than a mere support structure.
C. COLLOCATION: Shall mean the location by two (2) or more wireless
communication providers of wireless communication facilities on a common
structure, tower, or building, with the view toward reducing the overall number
of structures required to support wireless communications antennas within the
community.
YARD: The open spaces on the same lot with the main building, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this
Ordinance, and as defined in this Ordinance:
A. FRONT YARD: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which
is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest line of
the main building.
B. REAR YARD: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which
is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest line of
the main building. In the case of a corner lot, one of the non-front yards shall be
considered a side yard; the other side shall be considered a rear yard. In the case
of a corner lot, the rear yard shall not extend into the front yard.
C. SIDE YARD: An open space between a main building and the side lot line,
extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
35
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
distance from the nearest point of the side lot line to the nearest point of the main
building. In the case of a corner lot, one of the non-front yards shall be considered a
side yard; the other side shall be considered a rear yard.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The official of the City of Troy charged with the administration
of this Zoning Ordinance.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area or areas within the incorporated area of the City of Troy
within which regulations and requirements governing use, lot area, lot size, and other
provisions are uniform.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
36
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 2
Definitions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
37
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 3
Administration and Enforcement
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 3.01 ZONING ADMINISTRATION
This Zoning Ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator or such
deputies as designated by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall be
designated by the City Manager.
SECTION 3.02 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
The duties and responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator shall include the following:
A. Receive and review for completeness all applications for site plan review,
special land uses, planned unit developments, or other matters regulated by this
Ordinance and refer such applications, as required, to the Planning Commission for
determination.
B. Receive and review for completeness all applications for appeals, variances,
or other matters that the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to decide under
this Ordinance and refer such applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
determination.
C. Receive and review for completeness all applications for text or map (rezonings)
amendments to this Ordinance and refer such applications to the Planning
Commission and City Council for determination.
D. Make periodic site inspections to determine Ordinance compliance.
E. Implement the decisions of the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and
City Council.
F. Enforce and interpret the meaning and applicability of all provisions and
requirements of the Ordinance.
G. Coordinate with the Building Official or Planning Director where necessary to
administer this Ordinance.
H. Investigate complaints regarding violations of the Zoning Ordinance.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
38
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 3
Administration and Enforcement
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 3.03 ZONING COMPLIANCE
A. When Required. Zoning Compliance is required for all structures or uses erected,
used, or created after the effective date of this Ordinance.
B. Application. Applications for Zoning Compliance shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator. An application for Zoning Compliance shall be accompanied by a
plot plan as required in this Section, unless a site plan is required under Article 8, Site
Plan Review, in which case the provisions of this Section shall not apply. Such plot
plan shall be drawn to a measurable scale, submitted in three (3) copies, and shall
provide the following information:
1. Scale, date, and north arrow.
2. Location, shape, dimensions of the lot, and rights-of-way.
3. Shape, size, and location of all buildings or structures to be erected, altered, or
moved, and all existing buildings or structures.
4. A clear description of existing and intended uses of all structures, including
the number of units (residential and otherwise) the building is intended to
accommodate.
5. Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential
for determining whether the provisions of the Ordinance are being observed.
C. Review.
1. All plans to be submitted to the Building Official for a building permit shall
first be submitted for review by the Zoning Administrator who shall review to
ensure compliance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning
Administrator shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for
Zoning Compliance and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after
filing. If the application or the plans do not conform to all requirements of this
Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons for rejection. Building permits shall not be issued unless
Zoning Compliance has been granted by the Zoning Administrator and is in
effect.
2. In all cases in which a Certificate of Occupancy is required, but a Building Permit
is not required, the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued unless Zoning
Compliance has been granted by the Zoning Administrator, and is in effect.
3. Zoning Compliance shall not be issued for any use or structure, unless said use
or structure and the lot upon which it is situated meets all the requirements of
this Ordinance. Zoning Compliance may be issued for a legally existing nonAuthority
and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
39
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 3
Administration and Enforcement
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
conforming use, structure, or lot, provided the non-conformity is not increased.
In such case, Zoning Compliance shall clearly list each and every legal nonconformity.
Zoning Compliance shall not be issued for any use, structure, or lot if
any illegal non-conformity exists thereon.
4. Issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be subject to the following
conditions:
a. No Certificate shall be issued until the required fees have been paid.
b. All work or use shall conform to the approved application and plans for which
the Certificate has been issued and any amendments approved in writing.
c. All work or use shall conform to the approved final site plan, if required.
D. Amendments or Revisions. Amendments or revisions to a plan, application, or other
records accompanying the same may be filed at any time before completion of the
work for which the Certificate was approved and before a Certificate of Occupancy
is issued. Such amendments shall be deemed part of the original application and
shall be filed immediately.
E. Expiration and Revocation.
1. Zoning Compliance shall expire six (6) months after the date of filing unless
such application has been diligently pursued or a Building Permit was issued,
or a Certificate of Occupancy was issued for a use not requiring a building
permit. For reasonable cause, the Zoning Administrator may grant not more
than two (2) extensions of time, for periods not exceeding ninety (90) days each.
Zoning Compliance shall become invalid if the authorized work is suspended or
abandoned for a period of six (6) months after commencement of work.
2. In the case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application
or on the plans on which the Certificate was based, any Certificate of Zoning
Compliance shall be revoked by the Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 3.04 PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
A. When Required. Public hearings are required in these instances where public
hearings are required by this Ordinance and Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as
amended.
B. Notice Requirements. Notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before
each public hearing at which an application will be considered. Notice shall be
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
40
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 3
Administration and Enforcement
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
given by publication in a newspaper that circulates in the City of Troy, and by
personal delivery or mailing, where required, to the following:
1. The applicant, and the owner(s) of the property, if the applicant is not the owner.
2. All persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of
the boundary for the property for which approval has been requested, as shown
by the latest assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner and property is
located within the City of Troy.
3. The occupants of any structures within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary
for the property for which the approval has been requested, regardless of
whether the owner and property is located within the City of Troy, except as set
forth below.
4. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure,
except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial
area owned or leased by different persons, one (1) occupant of each unit or
spatial area shall be given notice. If a single structure contains more than four (4)
dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different persons,
notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be
requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.
5. The notice under 3.04.B is considered to be given when personally delivered
or when deposited during normal business hours for delivery with the United
States Postal Service or other public or private delivery service. If the name of
the occupant is not known, the term occupant may be used for the intended
recipient of the notice.
C. Actions Exempt from Notification.
1. Requirements for individual notice to property owners shall not apply to
Ordinance text amendments.
2. For any group of adjacent properties numbering eleven (11) or more that is
proposed for rezoning, the requirement for individual notice as set forth in Section
3.04.B 3 and 4 does not apply to that group of adjacent properties.
D. Content of Notice. The notice shall include:
1. The nature of the request.
2. The property(ies) for which the request has been made.
3. A listing of all existing street addresses within the property(ies) which is (are) the
subject of the request. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
41
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 3
Administration and Enforcement
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
if no such addresses exist. If there are no street addresses, another means of
identification may be used.
4. The location where the application documents can be viewed and copied prior
to the date the application will be considered.
5. The date, time, and location of when the hearing on the application will take
place.
6. The address at which written comments should be directed prior to the
consideration.
SECTION 3.05 USE OF CONSULTANTS
From time to time, at the cost of the applicant, the City may employ planning,
engineering, legal, traffic, or other special consultants to assist in the review of special
use permits, site plans, rezoning applications, or other matters related to the planning
and development of the City.
SECTION 3.06 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
A. Purpose and Intent. In the interest of insuring compliance with the Zoning Ordinance
provisions, protecting the natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City and future users or inhabitants of an area for which a site plan for
a proposed use has been submitted, the City may require the applicant to deposit a
performance guarantee for any or all site improvements required by this Ordinance.
The purpose of the performance guarantee is to insure completion of improvements
connected with the proposed use as required by this Ordinance, including but not
limited to, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, drainage, fences, walls, screens, and
landscaping.
A performance guarantee may be a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable
bank letter of credit, in the amount of the cost of the improvements based upon
an estimate submitted by the applicant and verified by the City. The City shall be
authorized to employ the City Engineering Department and/or City consultants
to review cost estimates and conduct periodic inspection of the progress of
improvements.
B. Procedure.
1. When a performance guarantee is required, said performance guarantee
shall be deposited with the City prior to the issuance of a building permit for
the development and use of the land. Upon the deposit of the performance
guarantee, the City shall issue the appropriate building permit, and the City shall
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
42
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 3
Administration and Enforcement
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
thereafter deposit the performance guarantee, if in the form of a cash deposit or
certified check, in an interest bearing account to the applicant.
2. At the time the performance guarantee is deposited with the City and prior to the
issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with
the City incorporating the performance guarantee provisions.
3. The agreement shall also prescribe the period of time within which the
improvements for which the performance guarantee has been required are to
be completed. The period will begin from the date of the issuance of the building
permit.
4. In the event the performance guarantee deposited is a cash deposit or a
certified check, the City shall rebate to the applicant fifty percent (50%) of the
deposited funds when the applicant has completed seventy five percent (75%)
of the required improvements as confirmed by the City. The remaining fifty
percent (50%) of the deposited funds shall be returned when the applicant has
completed one hundred percent (100%) of the required improvements and there
is compliance with the Ordinance as confirmed by the City.
5. The return of the performance guarantee, as set forth above, shall be with interest
earned thereon. However, the City is not required to deposit the performance
guarantee in an interest-bearing account, and instead is able to use internal
accounts as long as any interest can be calculated.
6. In the event the applicant defaults in making the improvements for which the
performance guarantee was required within the time period established by the
City, the City shall have the right to use the performance guarantee deposited
and any interest earned thereon to complete the improvements through contract
or otherwise, including specifically, the right to enter upon the subject property to
make the improvements.
7. If the performance guarantee is not sufficient to allow the City to complete
the improvements for which such guarantee was posted, the applicant shall
be required to pay the City the amount by which the cost of completing the
improvements exceeds the amount of the performance guarantee deposit.
Should the City use the performance guarantee, or a portion thereof, to
complete the required improvements, any amounts remaining after said
completion shall be applied first to the City's administrative costs including,
without limitation, attorney fees, planning consultant fees, and engineering
consultant fees in completing the improvement with any balance remaining
being refunded to the applicant.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
43
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 3
Administration and Enforcement
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
C. Guarantee with Other Agencies. If the applicant has been required to post a
performance guarantee or bond with another governmental agency other than the
City to insure completion of an improvement associated with the site, the applicant
shall not be required to deposit with the City a performance guarantee for that same
improvement.
SECTION 3.07 FEES
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses, and a
collection procedure, for all applications for zoning and building permits, Certificates of
Occupancy, appeals, and other matters pertaining to the Zoning Ordinance. The City
shall have the authority to include costs for the necessary use of engineering, planning,
legal, or other special consultants. The schedule of fees shall be available at the Clerks
Office, the Planning Department, and the Building Department, and may be altered
or amended only by the City Council. No permit, certificate, special use approval, or
variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees, or expenses have been
paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on proceedings before the Zoning Board of
Appeals, unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.
SECTION 3.08 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Violations: Except as specified in other sections of this Chapter, any person, firm, or
corporation violating the provisions of this Chapter is responsible for committing a
Municipal Civil Infraction and subject to the provisions of Chapter 100 of the City of
Troys Code of Ordinances.
B. Public Nuisance Per Se: Any building or structure which is erected, altered, or
converted, or any use of premises or land, which is begun or changed subsequent to
the time of passage of this Chapter and in violation of any of the provisions thereof
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of
any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Fines and Other Sanctions: The owner of any building, structure, or premises, or
part thereof, where any condition in violation of this Chapter shall exist or shall be
created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall
be responsible for a separate offense and subject to fines, costs, damages, and
injunctive orders as authorized by Chapter 100.
D. Each Day a Separate Offense: A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues.
E. Rights and Remedies are Cumulative: The rights and remedies provided herein are
cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
44
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 3
Administration and Enforcement
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 3.09 CONFORMANCE TO COURT DECREE
An amendment to conform a provision of the Zoning Ordinance to the decree of
a court of competent jurisdiction as to any specific lands may be adopted by the
legislative body and the notice of the adopted amendment published without referring
the amendment to any other board or agency provided for under this act.
SECTION 3.10 PLANNING COMMISSION, CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING
ORDINANCE, AND APPROVALS
A. Planning Commission: The City Planning Commission, heretofore created pursuant
to Public Act 285 of 1931, MCL 125.31, et. seq., as amended, and Public Act 33 of
2008, MCL 125.3811, et. seq., as amended, is hereby continued. Pursuant to section
301(2) of Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, MCL 125.3301(2), all powers and duties of
a zoning commission are hereby transferred to the City Planning Commission, which
shall perform the duties of said Commission as provided in the Statute in connection
with the amendment of this Chapter.
B. Members, Terms: The City Planning Commission shall consist of nine (9) members
who shall represent insofar as possible different professions or occupations and who
shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval by a majority vote of the
City Council. No member shall hold any other municipal office except that one (1)
of such members may be a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals. Each member
shall receive as compensation for their services a sum to be determined by City
Council (Resolution #2004-10-537-E14). The term of each member shall be three
(3) years, except that three (3) members of the first commission so appointed shall
serve for the term of one (1) year, three (3) for a term of two (2) years, and three (3)
for a term of three (3) years. All members shall hold office until their successors are
appointed. Members may, upon written charges and after a public hearing, be
removed by the Mayor for misfeasance, nonfeasance, or malfeasance in office,
subject to the approval by a majority vote of City Council. Vacancies occurring
otherwise than through the expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term
by the Mayor, subject to the approval by a majority vote of City Council.
C. Powers and Duties.
1. The City Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties vested in it by the
laws of the State of Michigan and the Ordinance Code of the City of Troy, and
shall consider and make its recommendations to the City Council on any matters
referred to it by the City Council relating to such duties including:
a. The making and adopting of a Master Plan for the physical development of
the municipality. Such Plan shall show, among other things, the Commissions
recommendations for the general location, character, and extent of streets,
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
45
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 3
Administration and Enforcement
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, parks, location of public buildings and
utilities, and the change of use, extension, removal, relocation, widening,
narrowing, vacating, or abandoning of any of the foregoing.
b. Recommendations related to the adoption of a Zoning Ordinance for the
control of the height, area, bulk, location, and use of buildings and premises,
and all changes and amendments thereto, including conditional rezoning
applications as set forth in Section 16.04.
c. The recommendation of approval to City Council of all preliminary plats
subdividing land, planned unit developments, some special use approval
applications, and any amendments or alterations thereof.
d. The recommendation to City Council on ordinance text amendments, street
and alley vacations or extensions, and historic district designations.
e. Acting as the approval authority on site plans, site condominiums, and most
special use approval applications.
2. In cases where the City Planning Commission is empowered to approve certain
use of premises under the provisions of this Ordinance, the applicant shall furnish
such surveys, plans, or other information as may be reasonably required by said
Commission for the proper consideration of the matter. The Planning Commission
shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and shall notify such
parties, who may be in its opinion to be affected thereby, of the time and place
of any hearing which may be held relative thereto as required under its rules of
procedure. The Planning Commission may impose such conditions or limitations
in granting approval as may in its judgment be necessary to fulfill the spirit and
purpose of this Ordinance. Any approval given by the Commission, under which
premises are not used or work is not started within twelve (12) months or when use
or work has been abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months, shall lapse and
cease to be in effect.
D. Voting Requirements: The concurring vote of five (5) members of the Planning
Commission is necessary to decide in favor of the applicant on site plan review and
special use requests, unless the Planning Commission does not have final jurisdiction
on the matter. The concurring vote of six (6) members of the Planning Commission
is necessary for approval of Master Plan or future land use plan amendments. All
other issues before the Planning Commission, including but not limited to rezoning
proposals, site condominium plans, planned unit developments, ordinance text
amendments, subdivision plats, street and alley vacations or extensions, and historic
district designations, are recommendations to City Council and the concurrence of
a majority of the Planning Commission members present is necessary to recommend
an action to the City Council.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
46
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 3
Administration and Enforcement
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
E. Finances: The City Planning Commission may be allowed such funds for expenses as
deemed advisable by the City Council, and all debts and expenses incurred by the
City Planning Commission shall be limited by such amount.
F. Annual Report: The City Planning Commission shall at least once per year prepare
for the Troy City Council a report on the administration and enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance and recommendations for amendments or supplements to the
Ordinance.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
47
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION 4.01 DISTRICTS
The City of Troy is hereby divided into the following Districts:
R-1A One-Family Residential District
R-1B One-Family Residential District
R-1C One-Family Residential District
R-1D One-Family Residential District
R-1E One-Family Residential District
RT One-Family Attached Residential District
MF Multiple-Family Residential District
UR Urban Residential District
MHP Manufactured Housing District
CF Community Facilities District
EP Environmental Protection District
CB Community Business District
GB General Business District
IB Integrated Industrial and Business District
O Office District
OM Office Mixed Use District
RC Research Center District
PV Planned Vehicle Sales District
P Vehicular Parking District
The City of Troy is also divided into the following Form-Based Districts, set forth in Article
5:
BB Big Beaver District
MR Maple Road District
NN Neighborhood Node Districts
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
48
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.02 MAP
The boundaries of the districts set forth in Section 4.01, Districts are shown upon the
map attached hereto and made a part of this Ordinance, which map is designated
as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Troy. The Zoning Map, along with all notations,
references and other explanatory information, are available at the City of Troy offices.
SECTION 4.03 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any district indicated on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets,
highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerlines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed
as following the lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as
following city limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway
between the main tracks.
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers,
canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow the centerline.
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features indicated in
subsections A through E of this section shall be so construed.
G. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the
scale of the Map.
H. Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by
subsections A through G of this section, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret
the district boundaries.
I. Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the Zoning Map
by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is
intended that the district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-ofway.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
49
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.04 ZONING OF VACATED AREAS
Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the City of Troy has been vacated
by action of the City Council, and the land within the vacated area is attached to and
becomes a part of adjoining property, such lands formerly within the vacated area
automatically, and without further action of the City Council, are subject to the same
zoning regulations as are applicable to adjoining property to which the vacated land
has been attached.
SECTION 4.05 DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
A. The Districts set forth herein guide the establishment of district boundaries to further
the objectives of the City of Troy Master Plan. The intent of each district defines
interrelationships between conflicting and compatible land uses and between land
uses and resources such as transportation, utilities, cultural and institutional facilities
and the natural environment.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, district regulations shall be applied in the following
manner:
1. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall be permitted by right only if specifically listed
as permitted uses in the various zoning districts or are similar to such listed uses.
2. Accessory Buildings, Structures, and Uses. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses
are permitted only if such uses are clearly incidental to the permitted principal
uses. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses are subject to the provisions of
Section 7.03.
3. Special Uses. Special land uses are permitted as listed, subject to the procedures
set forth in Article 9 and any specific standards applicable to a particular use.
C. If a proposed use is not explicitly listed, the Zoning Administrator shall make a
determination as to which listed use the proposed use is most similar to and
compatible with, and in which district(s) said use shall be permitted. In making this
determination, the Zoning Administrator shall consider factors such as peak hourly
and average daily traffic generation, noise, light, demands on public utility systems
and potential environmental impacts. The Zoning Administrator may refer any
proposed use to the Planning Commission for determination of the appropriate
district(s) in which said use may be permitted.
D. Properties located within designated historic districts, as set forth in Chapter 13,
Historic Preservation, of the City Code, shall be subject to the zoning requirements of
the district in which they are located.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
50
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.06 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS R-1A THROUGH R-1E
A. Intent. The Master Plan recognizes that single-family residential neighborhoods are
vital components of the City, and comprise the majority of the land area within the
City. The intent of the R-1A through R-1E Districts is to provide areas for single-family
dwellings with the primary distinction being a range of densities, implemented
through varying lot sizes. The R-1A through R-1E Districts are further intended
to preserve and improve upon the quality of residential neighborhoods while
permitting a limited number of other compatible uses which support residential
neighborhoods.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
within the R-1A through R-1E Districts.
C. Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to
the R-1A through R-1E Districts:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
51
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Minimum Lot Size Per Dwelling Unit Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback (R)
(Per Lot in Feet)
Minimum Floor Area Per
Unit (Square Feet)
Maximum % of Lot Area
Use Covered by Buildings
District
Area in
Sq. Ft.
Width
in Ft.
Frontage
in Ft. In Stories In Feet
Front Sides Rear
LeastOne
LeastTwo

R-1ANS 30,000 150 150 2 1/2 40 15 30 45 1,400 30%
R-1AS 21,780 120 120 2 1/2 40 15 30 45 1,400 30%

R-1BNS 21,780 110 110 2 1/2 40 15 30 45 1,400 30%
R-1BS 15,000 100 100 2 1/2 40 10 25 45 1,400 30%

R-1CNS 21,780 110 110 2 1/2 30 15 30 40 1,200 30%
R-1CS 10,500 85 85 2 1/2 30 10 20 40 1,200 30%

R-1DNS 21,780 110 110 2 1/2 25 15 30 40 1,000 30%
R-1DS 8,500 75 75 2 1/2 25 8 20 40 1,000 30%

R-1ENS 21,780 110 110 2 1/2 25 15 30 35 1,000 30%
R-1ES 7,500 60 60 2 1/2 25 5 15 35 1,000 30%
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
52
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. Whenever a lot or acreage parcel abuts a major arterial, the yard setback
abutting said major arterial shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the existing rightof-
way line, whichever is greater. This ordinance does not prohibit expansion
behind the fifty (50) foot setback. This requirement shall not apply to subdivisions
for which Tentative Approval was granted prior to January 1, 1976.
2. Whenever a lot or parcel abuts I-75, the yard setback abutting the right-of-way
of I-75 shall not be less than seventy-five (75) feet.
3. The side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than the greater of the
side yards required for the District in which located when there is a common
rear yard relationship in the block and a common side yard relationship with the
block directly across the common separating street. In the case of a rear yard
abutting a side yard or when a side yard is adjacent to a front yard across a
common separating street, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than
the minimum front yard of the District in which located, and shall be considered
as a front yard.
4. Variation in Appearance. In any one-family residential district, there shall be
variation in the appearance of the one-family detached residential dwellings.
Variation shall be defined as a minimum of three (3) substantial structural or
architectural differences. A dwellings front elevation shall only occur in the
same or a substantially similar structural or architectural form once within
three (3) contiguous lots on the same street frontage. Substantial architectural
differences include but are not limited to the following:
a. Hip roof versus gable roof.
b. Standard window versus bay window projections.
c. Side entry garage versus front entry garage.
d. Two car garage versus three car garage.
e. Gable roof versus reverse gable roof.
f. Differing window designs involving architectural styles and sizes.
g. Use of dormers versus no dormers.
5. Maximum lot coverage may be modified for projects obtaining Sustainable
Design Project status for measures specifically related to the proposed
modification, as set forth in Section 12.01, Sustainable Design Options.
6. Lot Frontage on Corner Lots, Curved Roads, and Culs-de-Sac.
a. On all corner lots, the frontage set forth shall be measured on one (1) street
only.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
53
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
b. For lots on curved streets that have curvilinear frontages, frontage shall be
determined by measuring the linear distance along the curve.
c. In the event that the lot is situated on a cul-de-sac, the frontage shall be
measured along the minimum setback line for the zone in which said lot is
located.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
54
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.07 RT ONE-FAMILY ATTACHED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. Intent. The intent of the RT, One-Family Attached Residential District is to provide
medium density residential areas in those areas which are served with public sewer
and water, and where attached forms of residential development achieves the
objectives of the Master Plan. The District is designed primarily to permit attached
residential dwellings which may serve as a transition between high intensity or nonresidential
use areas, and lower density residential land use areas. The RT District is
further intended to provide medium density residential development in compact
areas so as to encourage walkability.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
within the RT District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to
the RT District:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
55
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Minimum Lot Size Per Dwelling Unit Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback
Minimum Floor Area Per
Unit (Square Feet)
Maximum % of Lot Area
Covered by Buildings
Area in
Sq. Ft.
Width
in Ft. Frontage
in Ft.
In Stories In Feet
Front Sides Rear
Least
One
Total
Two
15,000
without
sewers
75 N/A
2 1/2 30 25 5 15 35 1,000 30%
5,000
with
sewers
40 40
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
56
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. All units that abut a major arterial shall have a yard setback of not less than fifty
(50) feet in depth as measured from the right-of-way line of the major arterial.
2. Whenever a lot or parcel abuts I-75, the yard setback abutting the right-of-way
of I-75 shall not be less than seventy-five (75) feet.
3. The side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than the greater of the
side yards required for the District in which located when there is a common
rear yard relationship in the block and a common side yard relationship with the
block directly across the common separating street. In the case of a rear yard
abutting a side yard or when a side yard is adjacent to a front yard across a
common separating street, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than
the minimum front yard of the District in which located, and shall be considered
as a front yard.
4. Variation in Appearance. In any one-family residential district, there shall be
variation in the appearance of the one-family detached residential dwellings. A
dwellings front elevation shall not re-occur in the same or a substantially similar
structural form on another dwelling within the same street frontage without
there being at least one (1) other dwelling with a different elevation between
the dwellings that repeat the frontage elevation. Different colors alone will not
constitute different front elevations.
5. Maximum lot coverage may be modified for projects obtaining Sustainable
Design Project status for measures specifically related to the proposed
modification, as set forth in Section 12.01, Sustainable Design Options.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
57
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
58
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.08 MF MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. Intent. The intent of the MF, Multiple-Family Residential District, is to provide for
multiple-family residential development located in areas which are compatible
with single-family residential districts and are adequately served with public utilities
and services. This District requires significant open space which will enhance the
residential desirability and compatibility of the subject properties and adjacent
low density residential areas. This District is also intended to allow higher-density
projects which will complement and support mixed-use areas of the City, the formbased
districts of the City, or one another.
Development in the MF District can offer an urban character while serving as
transitional zones between areas of higher and lower intensity of development. The
MF District is further provided to accommodate existing multiple-family areas of the
City which were developed to serve the need for a variety of housing types in an
otherwise predominantly low-density, single-family community.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
within the MF District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to
the MF District:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
59
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Maximum density: 24 units per acre, 10 acres per acres
Maximum Density Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback Distance
Between
Buildings
Minimum Floor Area Per
Unit (Square Feet)
Maximum % of Lot Area
Units Per Acre In Stories In Feet Front Rear Sides Covered by Buildings
When not
abutting
single-family
residential
24 8 100
30 30 30 30
Efficiency or 1 BR - 600
2 BR - 800
3 BR - 1,000
4 BR - 1,200
35%
When abutting
single-family
residential
10 2 25
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
60
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. Setbacks Adjacent to Residential. Where a property is abutting a one-family or
one-family attached district, all setbacks abutting said district shall be equal to
the height of the building.
2. Primary Entrance. The primary building entrance to each building shall be
clearly identifiable.
3. Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear, obvious,
publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon which the
building fronts and the site. The pedestrian connection shall be fully paved and
maintained surface not less than five (5) feet in width.
4. Off-Street Parking Location.
a. Off-street parking shall be located predominantly in the side or rear yard. No
more than fifty (50) percent of the required front yard shall be occupied by
off-street parking.
b. For a corner lot, no more than fifty (50) percent of the required yards along
public road frontage shall be occupied by off-street parking.
5. Recreation Space. All multiple-family developments in an MF District shall
contain an area or areas provided for common recreation which is the
equivalent of four hundred and fifty (450) square feet per dwelling unit. Such
common recreation areas shall be located and designed in a manner which is
appropriate to meet the recreational needs of the prospective residents of the
development. Such recreational facilities may include, but not be limited to,
swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, picnic areas, playfields, and jogging
trails.
6. Maximum lot coverage may be modified for projects obtaining Sustainable
Design Project status for measures specifically related to the proposed
modification, as set forth in Section 12.01, Sustainable Design Options.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
61
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
62
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.09 UR URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
A. Intent. The Troy Master Plan recognizes that certain areas of the City may be
conducive to high-density residential dwellings, particularly when located in close
proximity to more intense mixed use and non-residential development. The intent
of the UR District is to provide high-density multiple-family housing which provides for
an urban character, supports transit, and encourages walkability.
In addition to high-density residential dwellings, the UR District permits a limited
number of non-residential uses which are compatible with and supportive of a
residential environment.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
within the UR District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. For all developments in the UR District, the following
dimensional requirements shall apply:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
63
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Maximum density: 35 units per acre
Maximum Density Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback
Minimum Floor Area Per Unit
(Square Feet)
Maximum % of Lot Area
Units Per Acre In Stories In Feet Front Rear Sides Between Covered by Buildings
Buildings
35 No limit 10 0 0 30
Efficiency or 1 BR - 600
2 BR - 800
3 BR - 1,000
4 BR - 1,200
50%
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
64
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. Setbacks Adjacent to Residential. Where a property is abutting a one-family or
one-family attached district, all setbacks abutting said district shall be equal to
the height of the building.
2. Primary Entrance. The primary building entrance to each building shall be
clearly identifiable.
3. Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear, obvious,
publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon which the
building fronts and the site. The pedestrian connection shall be fully paved and
maintained surface not less than five (5) feet in width.
4. Off-Street Parking Location.
a. Parking shall not be located in the front yard.
b. No more than fifty (50) percent of the total sites linear feet along the front
building line shall be occupied by parking lot.
c. For a corner lot, the cumulative total of the sites linear feet along any
building line facing a right-of-way occupied by parking shall be no more
than sixty (60) percent, and the building shall be located in the corner of the
lot adjacent to the intersection.
5. Recreation Space. All multiple-family developments in an RM District shall
contain an area or areas provided for common recreation which is the
equivalent of three hundred (300) square feet per dwelling unit. Such
common recreation areas shall be located and designed in a manner which is
appropriate to meet the recreational needs of the prospective residents of the
development. Such recreational facilities may include, but not be limited to,
swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, picnic areas, playfields, and jogging
trails.
6. Maximum lot coverage may be modified for projects obtaining Sustainable
Design Project status for measures specifically related to the proposed
modification, as set forth in Section 12.01, Sustainable Design Options.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
65
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
66
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.10 MHP MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
A. Intent. The MHP, Manufactured Home Park District is intended to provide for
manufactured home parks and to require that such manufactured home parks
be developed with the character of residential neighborhoods. This Ordinance
recognizes that manufactured homes in manufactured home parks require
locations, services, and facilities similar to any other single-family and multiple-family
dwelling units that are developed at higher densities. It is further the intent of this
Ordinance that various supporting uses common to higher density residential areas,
as well as those that are unique to manufactured home communities, be permitted
in this district.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted accessory and special land uses
in the MHP District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. Section 4.10.D sets forth dimensional requirements for
the MHP District.
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. The Manufactured Housing Code, as established by the State of Michigan
under the authority of 1987 PA 96, as amended, regulates development
of manufactured housing parks. All manufactured housing parks must be
constructed according to the standards of the Code.
2. In addition to the rules and standards of the State of Michigan, the City imposes
the following conditions:
a. Manufactured housing parks shall be constructed, licensed, operated, and
managed in accordance with the provisions of the Mobile Home Commission
Act, Act 96, PA 1987, and subsequently adopted rules and regulations
governing mobile home parks.
b. Manufactured housing parks shall not be permitted on parcels less than
fifteen (15) acres in size.
c. Individual manufactured housing sites within a manufactured housing park
shall have a minimum lot size of five thousand five hundred (5,500) square
feet per mobile home being served. This five thousand five hundred (5,500)
square foot minimum may be reduced by twenty (20) percent, provided
that the individual site shall be equal to at least four thousand four hundred
(4,400) square feet. For each square foot of land gained through this
reduction of the site below five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet, an
equal amount of land shall be dedicated as open space. In no case shall
the open space requirements be less than that required under the Michigan
Administrative Code governing manufactured housing parks.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
67
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
d. The on-site storage of boat trailers, boats, camping units, horse trailers and
similar recreational equipment shall be prohibited on manufactured housing
sites and in designated open space areas. The manufactured housing park
may provide, within the confines of the park, a common outdoor storage
area for the storage of the above mentioned equipment.
e. The minimum setback for manufactured housing parks shall be fifty (50) feet
from a public right-of-way. Manufactured housing parks shall be landscaped
as follows:
i. If the manufactured housing park abuts an existing residential
development, the park shall be required to provide screening along the
park boundary abutting the residential development.
ii. If the park abuts a non-residential development, the park need not
provide screening.
iii. In all cases, however, a park shall provide screening along the park
boundary abutting a public right-of-way.
f. Required landscaping shall consist of evergreen trees or shrubs of minimum
three (3) feet in height which are spaced so they provide a continuous
screen at maturity. Alternative screening devices may be utilized if they
conceal the manufactured housing park as effectively as the required
landscaping described above.
g. Manufactured housing parks shall be subject to preliminary plan review
requirements in accordance with 1987 PA 96, as amended.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
68
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.11 CF COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT
A. Intent. The CF, Community Facilities District is intended to provide areas for those
public, quasi-public, or private institutional and service uses necessary to serve the
cultural, educational, and physical needs of the community. The unique nature
and requirements of the uses contained within this District, and their need for a
location within the residential portion of the community, warrant the establishment
of a separate zoning classification which contains land use controls that will insure
that such uses will be compatible with adjacent land uses and not contrary to the
spirit and purpose of this Ordinance.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
within the CF District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to
the CF District:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
69
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback
Maximum % of Lot Area
In Stories In Feet Front Rear Sides Covered by Buildings
2 25 50 50 50 30%
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
70
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental Development Regulations.
1. Setbacks Adjacent to Residential. When a property is abutting a one-family or
one-family attached district, a setback of fifty (50) feet or equal to the setback
of the adjacent one-family or one-family attached district, whichever is greater,
shall be provided.
2. Off-Street Parking Location.
a. Parking shall not be located in the front yard.
a. No more than fifty (50) percent of the total sites linear feet along the front
building line shall be occupied by parking lot.
c. For a corner lot, the cumulative total of the sites linear feet along any
building line facing a right-of-way occupied by parking shall be no more
than sixty (60) percent, and the building shall be located in the corner of the
lot adjacent to the intersection.
3. Maximum lot coverage may be modified for projects obtaining Sustainable
Design Project status for measures specifically related to the proposed
modification, as set forth in Section 12.01, Sustainable Design Options.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
71
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
72
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.12 EP ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DISTRICT
A. Intent. Natural features and open space areas constitute important physical,
aesthetic, recreation and economic assets of the City. Therefore, the City of Troy
has enacted a series of development options and Zoning Districts which have, as a
portion of their intent, the conservation, preservation and provision of open space
and natural resource areas. The intent of the EP, Environmental Protection District
is to act in concert with these development options and Zoning Districts and to
recognize other areas warranting preservation, conservation, or protection, in such
a manner as to: provide for the protection, preservation, use, and maintenance of
natural resource areas, minimizing disturbance to them, and to prevent damage
resultant from their loss; protect natural resource and open space areas for their
economic support of property values when allowed to remain in an undisturbed
natural state; provide for the paramount public concern for these natural resource
areas in the interest of health, safety, and the general welfare of the residents of
the City of Troy; and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by
preventing or minimizing loss or damage to property, and personal injury, due to
flooding.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
within the EP District. No building or structure, either permanent or temporary, shall
be erected on land zoned in the Environmental Protection classification, except as
otherwise provided in this Article. Any existing structure or use existing at the time of
establishment of the EP District, which is not in conformity with the provisions of the
Article, may be continued subject to the general provisions for non-conforming uses
or structures.
C. Location. The EP, Environmental Protection District may be applied to the following
property:
1. Privately or publicly owned property containing significant natural assets or
features.
2. Privately owned property consisting of those portions of a development area
which are or will be established as open space or natural preserves under the
terms of development requirements contained herein or through private actions
achieving the same purpose.
3. Flood plains or flood way areas designated or specified by related City, County
or Federal standards or programs.
4. Wetlands, determined by engineering and/or soil surveys, whose inherent
conditions preclude development in a normal manner.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
73
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
5. Privately owned property committed for use for non-commercial outdoor
recreation purposes.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
74
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.13 CB COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. Intent. The CB, Community Business District is intended to provide for retail business
and service uses which primarily meet the day-to-day convenience, shopping, and
service needs of persons in the immediate residential areas, but to a more limited
extent serve a larger consumer population. The CB Districts are the least intense
commercial districts within the City, but do contain a variety of potential uses. The
CB District is also intended to protect and enhance existing commercial areas of
the City where non-residential uses are and ought to be the primary use of the
property. The CB District is unique in this more limited purpose, as the form based
and other mixed-use districts within the City also allow and encourage the on-site
integration of business and service uses with office and residential uses.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
within the CB District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply in
the CB District:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
75
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback
Minimum Floor Area in
In Stories In Feet Front Rear Sides: Least Sides: Total Feet
2 30 10 30 20 40 500
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
76
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. Modification to Setback Requirements.
a. In CB Districts, no building shall be closer than seventy-five (75) feet from the
boundary of any single-family residential zoning district.
b. No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the District or
along side lot lines in common with any non-residential district, provided all
related conditions of this Ordinance are met. If walls of structures facing such
interior or common side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side
yards of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided.
2. Faade Variation. The maximum length of an uninterrupted building faade
facing public streets and/or parks shall be thirty (30) feet. Faade articulation or
architectural design variations for building walls facing the street are required to
ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance. Building wall offsets
(projections and recesses); cornices, varying building materials, or pilasters shall
be used to break up the mass of a single building.
3. Pedestrian Access / Entrance.
a. Primary Entrance. The primary building entrance shall be clearly identifiable
and useable and located facing the right-of-way.
b. Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear,
obvious, publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon
which the building fronts and the building. The pedestrian connection shall
comply with the following:
i. Fully paved and maintained surface not less than five (5) feet in width.
ii. Unit pavers or concrete distinct from the surrounding parking and drive
lane surface.
iii. Located either within a raised median or between wheel stops to protect
pedestrians from vehicle overhangs where parking is adjacent.
4. Off-Street Parking Location.
a. No more than fifty (50) percent of a sites required parking as set forth in
Section 13.06 may be located in a front yard.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
77
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
b. Through the Sustainable Development Option as set forth in Section 12.01 of
the Ordinance, relief may be granted to allow greater than fifty (50) percent of
a sites required parking to be located in a front yard.
c. For a corner lot, the cumulative total of the sites linear feet along any building
line facing a right-of-way occupied by parking shall be no more than sixty (60)
percent, and the building shall be located in the corner of the lot adjacent to
the intersection.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
78
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.14 GB GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. Intent. The GB, General Business District is intended to provide areas for more
diversified retail and service uses, a City-wide or regional market area, and/or
arterial exposure. The General Business Districts are typically located along major
arterials and/or adjacent to Community Business Districts. The GB District also
permits an opportunity for mixed-use development consistent with the intent of the
Master Plan to support transit and walkability.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
in the GB District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply in
the GB District:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
79
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback
Minimum Floor Area in
In Stories In Feet Front Rear Sides: Least Sides: Total Feet
3 40 10 30 20 40 500
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
80
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. Modification to Setback Requirements.
a. In CB Districts, no building shall be closer than seventy-five (75) feet from the
boundary of any single-family residential zoning district.
b. No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the District or
along side lot lines in common with any non-residential district, provided all
related conditions of this Ordinance are met. If walls of structures facing such
interior or common side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side
yards of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided.
2. Faade Variation. The maximum length of an uninterrupted building faade
facing public streets and/or parks shall be thirty (30) feet. Faade articulation or
architectural design variations for building walls facing the street are required to
ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance. Building wall offsets
(projections and recesses); cornices, varying building materials or pilasters shall
be used to break up the mass of a single building.
3. Pedestrian Access / Entrance.
a. Primary Entrance. The primary building entrance shall be clearly identifiable
and useable and located facing the right-of-way.
b. Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear,
obvious, publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon
which the building fronts and the building. The pedestrian connection shall
comply with the following:
i. Fully paved and maintained surface not less than five (5) feet in width.
ii. Unit pavers or concrete distinct from the surrounding parking and drive
lane surface.
iii. Located either within a raised median or between wheel stops to protect
pedestrians from vehicle overhangs where parking is adjacent.
4. Off-Street Parking Location.
a. No more than fifty (50) percent of a sites required parking as set forth in
Section 13.06 may be located in a front yard.
b. Through the Sustainable Development Option as set forth in Section 12.01 of
the Ordinance, relief may be granted to allow greater than fifty (50) percent
of a sites required parking to be located in a front yard.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
81
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
c. For a corner lot, the cumulative total of the sites linear feet along any building
line facing a right-of-way occupied by parking shall be no more than sixty (60)
percent, and the building shall be located in the corner of the lot adjacent to
the intersection.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
82
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.15 IB INTEGRATED INDUSTRIAL AND BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. Intent. The City of Troy Master Plan recognizes that a significant area of the City has
been devoted to manufacturing and industrial uses, but may be conducive to be
redeveloped to other uses. The IB District is intended to continue to recognize more
traditional manufacturing and industrial use and encourage redevelopment and
reuse of existing buildings and sites by permitting other compatible uses.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
in the IB District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply in
the IB District:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
83
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback
Maximum % of Lot Area
In Stories In Feet Front Rear Sides: Least Sides: Total Covered by Buildings
4 50 30 20 10 20 40%
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
84
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. Modification to Setback Requirements. No building shall be located closer than
fifty (50) feet from the boundary of any single-family residential district.
2. Delivery/Loading Options. Loading docks, trash collection, outdoor storage,
and similar facilities and functions shall not be located in any portion of the front
yard. Visual and acoustic impacts of these functions shall be fully contained
and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets. Use of screening
materials that are different from or inferior to the principal materials of the
building and landscape is prohibited.
3. Off-Street Parking Location.
a. Parking shall not be located in the front yard, except in cases where a site
plan has prequalified Sustainable Development Project status specifically
awarded for measures related to the inclusion of front yard parking.
b. No more than fifty (50) percent of the total sites linear feet along the front
building line shall be occupied by parking lot.
c. For a corner lot, the cumulative total of the sites linear feet along any
building line facing a right-of-way occupied by parking shall be no more
than sixty (60) percent, and the building shall be located in the corner of the
lot adjacent to the intersection.
4. Maximum lot coverage may be modified for projects obtaining Sustainable
Design Project status for measures specifically related to the proposed
modification, as set forth in Section 12.01, Sustainable Design Options.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
85
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
86
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.16 O OFFICE DISTRICT
A. Intent. The O, Office District is intended to provide areas for office uses and limited
related retail and service uses which support an office environment. These districts
are typically located along commercial corridors in the City, or on the periphery of
regionally prominent retail and service centers. The O District is not so diverse as to
include prominent retail or other commercial components, which are more broadly
available in the similar, but more intense OM, Office Mixed Use District, which is
specifically designed for that purpose. Consequently, due to its less intense nature,
the O District is suited to serve as a conventional transitional zone or in support of
more regionally prominent areas and districts with a more intense concentration of
uses.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
in the O District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply in
the O District:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
87
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback
Minimum Floor Area in
In Stories In Feet Front Rear Sides: Least Sides: Total Feet
3 36 10 30 20 40 500
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
88
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. Modification to Setback Requirements. No building shall be located closer than
fifty (50) feet from the boundary of any single-family residential district.
2. Faade Variation. The maximum linear length of an uninterrupted building
faade facing public streets and/or parks shall be thirty (30) feet. Faade
articulation or architectural design variations for building walls facing the street
are required to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance.
Building wall offsets (projections and recesses); cornices, varying building
materials or pilasters shall be used to break up the mass of a single building.
3. Pedestrian Access / Entrance.
a. Primary Entrance. The primary building entrance shall be clearly identifiable
and useable and located facing the right-of-way.
b. Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear,
obvious, publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon
which the building fronts and the building. The pedestrian connection shall
comply with the following:
i. Fully paved and maintained surface not less than five (5) feet in width.
ii. Unit pavers or concrete distinct from the surrounding parking and drive
lane surface.
iii. Located either within a raised median or between wheel stops to protect
pedestrians from vehicle overhangs where parking is adjacent.
4. Off-Street Parking Location.
a. No more than fifty (50) percent of a sites required parking as set forth in
Section 13.06 may be located in a front yard.
b. Through the Sustainable Development Option as set forth in Section 12.01 of
the Ordinance, relief may be granted to allow greater than fifty (50) percent
of a sites required parking to be located in a front yard.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
89
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
90
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.17 OM OFFICE MIXED USE DISTRICT
A. Intent. The OM, Office Mixed Use District is intended to provide areas for large
office uses which serve large numbers of people, as well as the retail, service,
restaurant, lodging, and residential options that should be provided to support such
large employment centers. A major purpose of this District is to provide areas for
buildings of greater height and more intensive land use activity in an otherwise lowdensity
community, while providing amenities on-site or within the same immediate
area to foster a walkable, compact, dense urban environment. The OM District is
also intended to encourage the development of uses and services that will support
and enhance the marketability of the City of Troy as a vibrant and desirable place
to work where a high quality of life can be offered for both workers and residents.
As such, it is a primary role of the OM District, along with the IB, RC, CB and GB
Districts to preserve the economic vitality of the area.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
in the OM District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply in
the OM District:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
91
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback
Maximum Percentage of
In Stories In Feet Front Rear Sides: Least Sides: Total Lot Coverage by Building
5 75 10 30 20 60 40%
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
92
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. Modification to Setback Requirements. No building shall be located closer than
fifty (50) feet from the boundary of any single-family residential district.
2. Faade Variation. The maximum linear length of an uninterrupted building
faade facing public streets and/or parks shall be thirty (30) feet. Faade
articulation or architectural design variations for building walls facing the street
are required to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance.
Building wall offsets (projections and recesses); cornices, varying building
materials or pilasters shall be used to break up the mass of a single building.
3. Pedestrian Access / Entrance.
a. Primary Entrance. The primary building entrance shall be clearly identifiable
and useable and located facing the right-of-way.
b. Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear,
obvious, publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon
which the building fronts and the building. The pedestrian connection shall
comply with the following:
i. Fully paved and maintained surface not less than five (5) feet in width.
ii. Unit pavers or concrete distinct from the surrounding parking and drive
lane surface.
iii. Located either within a raised median or between wheel stops to protect
pedestrians from vehicle overhangs where parking is adjacent.
c. Secondary Entrance. In addition to the primary faade facing front faade
and/or the right-of-way, if a parking area is located in the rear or side yard,
must also have a direct pedestrian access to the parking area that is of a
level of materials quality and design emphasis at least equal to that of the
primary entrance.
4. Off-Street Parking Location. No more than fifty (50) percent of the sites total
parking shall be located in a front yard.
5. Maximum lot coverage may be modified for projects obtaining Sustainable
Design Project status for measures specifically related to the proposed
modification, as set forth in Section 12.01, Sustainable Design Options.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
93
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
94
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.18 RC RESEARCH CENTER DISTRICT
A. Intent. The RC, Research Center District is intended to provide areas for industrialresearch
and office uses in planned developments. Such districts are to be located
and developed so as to complement the significant light industrial character of
the community, while at the same time providing for the necessary related nonmanufacturing
uses such as corporate office and research facilities. The RC District
is intended to encourage the development of uses and services that will support
and enhance the office environment in the RC District, primarily for the benefit
of tenants and local residents. Further, the Research Center District is intended
to provide for those major industrial-research, and office, and training uses which
require proximity to major non-residential areas, rather than office uses serving a
local market, which could reasonably be located in commercial and service areas
elsewhere in the community.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
in the RC District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. For all developments in the RC District, the following
dimensional requirements shall apply:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
95
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Maximum Height Minimum Yard Setback
Maximum Percentage of
In Stories In Feet Front Rear Sides: Least Sides: Total Lot Coverage by Building
3 40 30 20 20 40 40%
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
96
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. Modification to Setback Requirements. No building shall be located closer than
fifty (50) feet from the boundary of any single-family residential district.
2. The front yard shall remain as open space, unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward except for landscaping, plant materials, or vehicle access
drives. Off-street parking spaces, aisles, loading areas, and maneuvering lanes
shall not be located in such yards. All yards abutting upon a public street
or freeway shall be considered as front yards for setback and open space
purposes.
3. Faade Variation. The maximum linear length of an uninterrupted building
faade facing public streets and/or parks shall be thirty (30) feet. Faade
articulation or architectural design variations for building walls facing the street
are required to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance.
Building wall offsets (projections and recesses); cornices, varying building
materials or pilasters shall be used to break up the mass of a single building.
4. Pedestrian Access / Entrance.
a. Primary Entrance. The primary building entrance shall be clearly identifiable
and useable and located facing the right-of-way.
b. Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear,
obvious, publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon
which the building fronts and the building. The pedestrian connection shall
comply with the following:
i. Fully paved and maintained surface not less than five (5) feet in width.
ii. Unit pavers or concrete distinct from the surrounding parking and drive
lane surface.
iii. Located either within a raised median or between wheel stops to protect
pedestrians from vehicle overhangs where parking is adjacent.
5. Off-Street Parking Location.
a. No more than fifty (50) percent of a sites required parking as set forth in
Section 13.06 may be located in a front yard.
b. Through the Sustainable Development Option as set forth in Section 12.01 of
the Ordinance, relief may be granted to allow greater than fifty (50) percent
of a sites required parking to be located in a front yard.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
97
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
c. For a corner lot, the cumulative total of the sites linear feet along any building
line facing a right-of-way occupied by parking shall be no more than sixty (60)
percent and the building shall be located in the corner of the lot adjacent to
the intersection.
6. Maximum lot coverage may be modified for projects obtaining Sustainable
Design Project status for measures specifically related to the proposed
modification, as set forth in Section 12.01, Sustainable Design Options.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
98
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.19 PV PLANNED VEHICLE SALES DISTRICT
A. Intent. The PV, Planned Vehicle Sales District is intended to build on the existing
concentration of automobile sales establishments in this area, supporting the
Master Plans creation of the Automall future land use district. The District as
established herein is comprised of existing facilities, but is designed to grow
incrementally, as necessary, to the potential maximum limits identified in the Master
Plan. The concentration of similar automobile sales facilities in this location is valued
by the City of Troy in that is provides a strong regional amenity while managing any
potential negative elements stemming from the intensity and scale of these land
uses.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
in the PV District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. For all developments in the PV District, the dimensional
requirements of the IB, Industrial Business District shall apply.
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. The minimum lot area shall be fifteen (15) acres and so arranged that ample
space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait or be stored or
parked.
2. All other dimensional requirements of the PV District shall be the same as those
established for the IB, Industrial Business District.
3. Uses normally accessory to new car sales establishments such as major engine
repair or rebuilding, body repair, painting, and undercoating shall be permitted
provided such uses are clearly subordinate and incidental to the principal use
and provided further that such cases shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
99
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
100
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.20 P VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT
A. Intent. The P, Vehicular Parking District is intended to permit the establishment of
areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use
incidental to a principal use. This District will generally be established to serve a use
District which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities, or on
portions of sites where it is intended that building construction will not occur.
B. Use Regulations. Section 4.21 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses
in the P District.
C. Dimensional Requirements. For all developments in the P District, the following
dimensional requirements shall apply:
D. Supplemental District Standards.
1. The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with one or
more businesses or industrial establishments, located in adjacent non-residential
Districts.
2. A private driveway, public street, or public alley may separate the P District from
the related non- residential Districts.
3. Such parking areas will be used solely for the parking of private passenger
vehicles, for periods of less than one (1) day, and shall not be used as off-street
loading areas.
4. No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sales or display activity,
shall be conducted in such parking areas.
5. No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits, and
conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking areas.
6. No buildings other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon the
premises, and such buildings shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
7. Side and Rear Yards: Where the P District is contiguous with the side and/or rear
lot lines of premises within a Residential District, screening shall be maintained in
accordance with Section 13.02.B, Screening Between Land Uses.
8. Front Yards: Where the P District is contiguous to a Residential District which
has common frontage on the same block, or where the P-1 District is across
the street from a Residential District a setback equal to that of the adjacent
Residential District shall be maintained. Also, there shall be provided a screen
wall not less than thirty (30) inches in height, located on this setback line,
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
101
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
comprised of a common or face brick or similar appearing material, or of a
masonry material similar to or compatible with that on the front face of the
building which the related parking area serves.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
102
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 4.21 SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS
A. In all Districts, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected
except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided
in this Article.
B. The Schedule of Use Regulations identifies uses as follows:
1. P identifies uses permitted as of right.
2. S identifies uses requiring special approval.
3. A identifies accessory uses.
4. NP identifies uses not permitted.
Uses Districts
R-1A
through R-1E
RT
MF
UR
MHP
CF
EP
CB
GB
IB
O
OM
RC
PV
P
Residential
One-family dwellings P P P P P P NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Two-family dwellings NP P P P NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
One-family attached
dwellings NP P P P NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Home occupations A A A A A A NP A A A NP A NP NP NP
Multiple-family dwellings
(2-8 stories) NP NP P P NP NP NP NP NP P NP NP NP NP NP
Multiple-family dwellings
(9+ stories) NP NP NP P NP NP NP NP NP P NP NP NP NP NP
Multiple-family dwellings
(on upper floors
only in a mixed-use
building)
NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP P NP NP NP
Senior assisted/independent
living S S P P NP S NP P P P NP P NP NP NP
Live/work units NP NP P P NP NP NP P P P NP P NP NP NP
Bed and breakfast S S S S S NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Recreation
Publicly owned and
operated parks,
parkways, and recreational
facilities
P P P P P P NP P P P P P P NP NP
Golf courses S S S S S S NP S S S NP NP NP NP NP
Swimming pool clubs S S S S S S NP S S S NP NP NP NP NP
Institutional
Primary/secondary
schools S S S S S P NP P P P P P P NP NP
Places of worship S S S S S S NP P P P P P P NP NP
Publicly owned/
operated office and
service facilities
S S S S S P NP P P P P P P P P
Convalescent centers NP NP S S NP P NP P P P P P NP NP NP
Fine and performing
arts facilities NP NP NP NP NP P NP P P P NP S NP NP NP
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
103
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Uses Districts
R-1A
through R-1E
RT
MF
UR
MHP
CF
EP
CB
GB
IB
O
OM
RC
PV
P
Post-secondary
schools (high schools,
colleges, commercial
schools)
NP NP NP NP NP P NP P P P P P P NP NP
Bus/transit passenger
stations, taxicab
offices, dispatching
centers
NP NP NP NP NP P NP P P P P P P P P
Hospitals NP NP NP NP NP S NP NP S S NP S NP NP NP
Family day care
homes P P P P P P NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Group day care
homes NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Day care centers and
preschools S S S S S S NP P P P P P P NP NP
Adult foster care,
family home P P P P P P NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Adult foster care,
small group home S S S S S S NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Adult foster care,
large group home S S S S S S NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Adult foster care, congregate
facility S S S S S S NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Adult day care home P P P P P P NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Adult day care center S S S S S S NP P P P P P P NP NP
Retail, Entertainment, and Service
Restaurants, standard NP NP NP A NP NP NP P P P NP A NP NP NP
Restaurants, fast food NP NP NP A NP NP NP P P P NP A NP NP NP
Restaurants, drive-in NP NP NP A NP NP NP P P P NP A NP NP NP
Bar/lounge NP NP NP A NP NP NP P P P NP A NP NP NP
Outdoor dining areas NP NP NP A NP NP NP A A A NP A NP NP NP
Retail, general NP NP NP A NP NP NP P P P NP A NP NP NP
Retail, large-format NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP NP NP NP NP
Shopping centers NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP NP NP NP NP
Health fitness centers,
athletic clubs, martial
arts studios, and other
similar uses
NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP A NP NP NP
Building and lumber
supply NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S P P NP NP NP NP NP
Garden centers/
nurseries NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S P P NP NP NP NP NP
Commercial greenhouse
NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S P P NP NP NP NP NP
Indoor commercial
recreation NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP NP NP NP NP
Outdoor commercial
recreation NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S P P NP NP NP NP NP
Dance, music, and art
studios NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP A NP NP NP
Dry cleaners and
laundry NP NP NP A NP NP NP P P P NP A NP NP NP
Pharmacies, durable
medical goods sales/
rental
NP NP NP A NP NP NP P P P NP A NP NP NP
Open air businesses,
as a principal use NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S S NP NP NP NP NP
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
104
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Uses Districts
R-1A
through R-1E
RT
MF
UR
MHP
CF
EP
CB
GB
IB
O
OM
RC
PV
P
Open air businesses,
subordinate to principal
use
NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S S NP NP NP NP NP
Lodging NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S S NP S NP NP NP
Extended stay facility NP NP S S NP NP NP S P P NP S NP NP NP
Private clubs, fraternal
organizations, and
lodge halls
NP NP NP NP NP S NP S S P S S NP NP NP
Conference, meeting,
and banquet facilities NP NP NP NP NP S NP S P P NP P S NP NP
Personal services NP NP NP A NP NP NP P P P NP A A NP NP
Home service and
repair NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP A A NP NP
Photographic studios NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P P P P NP NP
Financial institutions NP NP NP A NP NP NP P P P P P P NP NP
Commercial kennels /
Pet day care NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP NP NP NP NP
Drive-up / Drivethrough
facilities NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S A S S NP NP NP
Theatres and places
of assembly NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP S S NP NP
Adult use businesses NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S NP NP NP NP NP
Mortuary / Funeral
home NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP NP NP NP NP
Office
Offices, general NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P P P P NP NP
Professional and
medical offices NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P P P P NP NP
Business services NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P P P P NP NP
Medical clinics NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P P P P NP NP
Veterinary clinics or
hospitals NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P P P P NP NP
Industrial
Prototype or experimental
product
research and development
NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P P NP NP
Any use of basic
research, design, and
pilot or experimental
product development
NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P P NP NP
Manufacturing and
assembly NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P NP NP NP NP NP
Laboratories NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P P NP NP
Warehouse and
wholesale establishments
NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P NP NP NP NP NP
Truck terminal facilities NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P NP NP NP NP NP
Central dry cleaning /
laundry plants NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P NP NP NP NP NP
Outdoor storage
facilities NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S NP NP NP NP NP
Mini-warehouse or
self-storage NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S P NP NP NP NP NP
Materials recovering
facility NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S NP NP NP NP NP
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
105
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Uses Districts
R-1A
through R-1E
RT
MF
UR
MHP
CF
EP
CB
GB
IB
O
OM
RC
PV
P
Automotive/Transportation
Vehicle, recreational
vehicle sales NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S NP NP NP P NP
Vehicle repair stations NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S P NP NP NP S NP
Vehicle fueling/multiuse
stations NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S NP NP NP S NP
Oil change facility NP NP NP NP NP NP NP P P P NP NP NP P NP
Vehicle washes NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S NP NP NP S NP
Vehicle auctions NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S NP NP NP S NP
Antique and classic
vehicle sales NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S P NP NP NP P NP
Ambulance facilities NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S P NP NP NP NP NP
Vehicle rental NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S S P NP NP NP S NP
Miscellaneous
Accessory buildings
and uses A A A A A A NP A A A A A A A A
Agriculture P P NP NP P NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Cemeteries P P P P P P NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
Parking structures
and off-street parking
areas as a principal
use
NP NP NP NP NP S NP S S P S S S S P
Utility and public
service buildings and
facilities (without storage
yards)
S S S S S P NP P P P P P P P P
Utility and public
service buildings and
facilities (with outdoor
storage yards)
NP NP NP NP NP S NP NP NP S S S S S S
Commercial wind
energy conversion
systems and temporary
meteorological
towers
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
Oil and Gas Well
or Development NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S NP NP NP NP NP
Production facility,
multimedia NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP S P NP NP P NP NP
Wireless communication
facility (complies
with Section 6.30.B.1)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Wireless communication
facility (freestanding
tower)
NP NP NP NP NP S NP S S S S S S S S
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
106
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 4
District Regulations
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
107
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 5
FORM-BASED DISTRICTS
SECTION 5.01 GENERAL PURPOSE, INTENT, AND USE
A. The Zoning Ordinance regulates the intensity and use of development, which is
appropriate in most parts of the City. There are also areas within the City in which
the Master Plan places greater emphasis on regulating urban form and character
of development as well as use and intensity of use.
B. These regulations are based on two (2) significant factors: site context and building
form.
Site context is derived from existing and desired characteristics of the area where
these regulations are applied. Areas are distinguished from one another by their
size and configuration of the site, street patterns, location, and intensity of use.
Therefore, considering site context provides a customized approach to the inherent
conditions of the areas where these regulations are applied.
Building form addresses the manner in which buildings and structures relate to their
lots, surrounding buildings, and street frontage. Building form standards control
height, placement, building configuration, parking location, and ground story
activation applicable to the site context.
C. The general purpose of these regulations is as follows:
1. Ensure that development is of human scale, primarily pedestrian-oriented and
designed to create attractive streetscapes and pedestrian spaces.
2. Promote infill development and redevelopment to expand the employment
and economic base.
3. Promote mixed-use development in both a horizontal and vertical form.
4. Ensure reasonable transition between higher intensity development and
adjacent neighborhoods.
5. Improve mobility options and reduce the need for on-site parking by
encouraging alternative means of transportation.
D. Regulations are tailored to meet a more specific intent of each district. These
districts and intents are set forth elsewhere in this Article.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
108
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
E. The form-based districts use regulating plans, which rely on street and site types
to determine allowable uses and building forms for a given property. The steps to
determine the regulations that apply to a specific property within a form-based
district are as follows:
1. Find the site in question on the appropriate regulating plan map (Figures
5.04.1, 5.05.1, and 5.06.1 for the Big Beaver District, Maple Road District, and
Neighborhood Nodes Districts, respectively).
2. Identify the site type for the site in question. Sites will be classified BB:A, BB:B, or
BB:C for the Big Beaver District, MR:A or MR:B for the Maple Road District, or NN:A
or NN:B for the Neighborhood Nodes Districts.
3. Identify the street type or types adjacent to the site in question. Streets will be
classified BB:A, BB:B, or BB:C for the Big Beaver District, MR:A or MR:B for the
Maple Road District, or NN:A or NN:B for the Neighborhood Nodes Districts.
4. Consult the Use Groups and Building Forms Permitted tables for the District
in which the site is located. (Tables 5.04.C-1, and 5.04.C-2 for the Big Beaver
District, 5.05.C-1, and 5.05.C-2 for the Maple Road District, and 5.06.C-1, and
5.06.C-2 for the Neighborhood Nodes Districts, respectively). The tables will
identify if a use group or building form is permitted, permitted after special use
approval, or not permitted for the site type and street type combination unique
to the site in question.
5. Follow the regulations for the chosen building form when designing the
development application. Building form regulations are established in Tables
5.03.B-1 through 5.03.B-6.
6. Follow the design standards unique to the District in which the site is located. All
three form-based districts have unique design standards.
7. Obtain site plan approval or special use approval for the chosen building form
and use, as appropriate.
SECTION 5.02 APPLICABILITY AND ORGANIZATION
A. Applicability.
1. Any new use or expansion of existing use that requires site plan review shall
comply with the requirements of this Article and other applicable requirements
of this Ordinance.
2. The requirements of this Article shall not apply to:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
109
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. Continuation of a permitted use within an existing structure.
b. Changes of use within existing structures that do not require increased parking.
c. Normal repair and maintenance of existing structures that do not increase its
size or parking demand.
d. Continuation of a legal non-conforming use, building, and/or structure, in
accordance with Article 14.
e. The expansion of a legal non-conforming use, building, and/or structure in a
manner that does not increase its level of nonconformity, in accordance with
Article 14.
B. Regulating Plans. Each area of the City to which these standards apply shall be
governed by a regulating plan that is specific to each area. The regulating plan
determines building form and allowable use for each property within a form-based
district.
C. Authorized Use Groups. Authorized land uses are organized by use groups.
Authorized use groups, as set forth in Section 5.03.A, are specifically applied to each
District based upon the regulating plan.
D. Building Form Standards. Building form standards, set forth in Section 5.03.B, establish
the parameters for building form, height, and placement, and are specifically
applied to each District based upon the regulating plan.
E. Design Standards. Design standards are established for each district and are
supplementary to other requirements of the Ordinance. Generally, the design
standards regulate parking, landscaping, and other site design requirements.
F. Modification of District Boundaries. Any modification to the boundaries of any formbased
district shall require rezoning, in accordance with the provisions of Article 16,
Amendments.
G. Modification of Regulating Plan. Specific standards applied within each regulating
plan are based upon the designation of site type and street type. Any modification
of site type or street type may be determined by the Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator shall consider the following in making a determination to modify
a site type or street type designation:
1. The applicants property cannot be used for the purpose permitted in the formbased
district.
2. Area has been added to or deleted from the subject property in question,
requiring the modification.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
110
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. The proposed modification and resulting development will not alter the essential
character of the area.
4. The proposed modification meets the intent of the district.
5. Existing streets have been improved and/or new streets constructed that may
result in the modification of a specific site type or street type.
SECTION 5.03 STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS
A. Authorized Use Groups.
1. Authorized uses are categorized by use groups as set forth in Table 5.03-A-1. Use
groups generally contain similar types of uses in terms of function, character,
and intensity.
2. Use groups are designated in locations within each district based on the
regulating plan. Use groups are classified in the following manner:
a. Permitted Use Groups. These use groups are permitted as of right in the
locations specified, and are depicted with the symbol P.
b. Permitted Use Groups in Upper Stories. These use groups are permitted as of
right in upper stories only in the location specified and are depicted with the
symbol UP.
c. Special Use Groups. These use groups are permitted after review and
approval by the Planning Commission, in accordance with the procedures
set forth in Article 9 and the standards in this Ordinance. Use groups requiring
special use approval are depicted with the symbol S.
d. Prohibited Use Groups. These use groups are prohibited in the locations
specified, and are depicted with the symbol NP.
e. Uses permitted in all locations within the District. Public parks and essential
public services are permitted by right in all locations.
f. Similar Uses. If a use is not listed but is similar to other uses within a use group,
the Zoning Administrator may make the interpretation that the use is similar to
other uses within a use group.
The Zoning Administrator may also make the determination whether the use is
permitted as of right, permitted in upper stories only, or permitted as a special
use. The Zoning Administrator may obtain a recommendation from the
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
111
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Planning Commission as to whether or not the proposed use is similar to a use
permitted as of right, permitted in upper stories only, or permitted as a special
use.
g. If a site is adjacent to two (2) different street types, the more intense street type
shall control for the purpose of determining allowable use groups.
TABLE 5.03-A-1
USE GROUPS BY CATEGORY
PRINCIPAL USE
Use Group 1
Residential Uses:
One-Family dwellings
Two-Family dwellings
Use Group 2
Residential/Lodging Uses:
One-Family attached dwellings
Multiple-Family dwellings
Live/Work units
Senior assisted/independent living
Child care centers
Use Group 3
Office/Institution:
General office
Professional and medical office
Hospitals
Medical office
Primary/secondary schools (private)
Post-secondary schools
Places of worship
Data centers
Technology centers / Office research
Publicly owned/operated office and service facilities
Funeral homes
Veterinary clinics or hospitals
Use Group 4
Auto/Transportation Uses:
Vehicle sales
Vehicle service station
Vehicle repair station
Vehicle body repair
Vehicle wash
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
112
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Use Group 5
Retail, Entertainment, and Service Uses:
Lodging*
Financial institutions
General retail
Retail, large-format
Shopping centers
Fitness, gymnastics, and exercise centers
Theatres and places of assembly
Indoor commercial recreation establishments
Restaurant
Personal services
Business services
Use Group 6
Miscellaneous Commercial Uses:
Building & lumber supply
Garden centers, nurseries
Outdoor commercial recreation
Indoor commercial recreation
Self-Storage
Commercial kennels / pet day care
Drive-through facilities
Use Group 7
Industrial Uses:
Contractors equipment storage
Food products
Commercial outdoor storage
Manufacturing, processing, etc.
Metal plating
Plastics
Printing
Tool & die, gauge & machine shops
Truck/trailer rental
Warehousing/wholesale
Experimental research & testing labs
* Lodging uses in all Form-Based Districts are permitted subject to Special Use
Approval in compliance with Article 9.
B. Building Form Standards.
1. The form-based districts permit a series of potential building forms, dependant
on the sites location. The six building forms, set forth in Tables 5.03.B.1 through 6,
are established in this section as follows:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
113
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. Building Form A. Small, generally single purpose buildings for retail, office,
restaurant, or service uses. Typically situated in an out lot of a larger
classification building form, or on a smaller, more remote site location within
the district.
b. Building Form B. Smaller, multiple-tenant buildings for retail, restaurant, office,
service, or residential uses. This category also includes multiple-tenant center
style development, although it requires a second story to encourage a mix
of uses or higher-density projects than those conventionally associated with
classic roadside retail shopping centers.
c. Building Form C. This category is primarily designed for attached residential
or live-work residential units. Townhouses and urban-style residential
developments that are compatible with higher-density urban character are
the primary buildings permitted under this building form.
d. Building Form D. This category includes multi-story, mixed-use developments
with a residential component on upper floors and retail, office, service,
or restaurant uses on the first and lower floors. The category takes into
consideration residential and commercial parking, access, and connectivity,
and requires buildings that are between three (3) and six (6) stories, to
complement the higher-intensity areas within the district.
e. Building Form E. This category provides an opportunity for large-format retail
or entertainment uses within the district under specific conditions. These
buildings are over 20,000 square feet, but unlike classic large-format retail or
entertainment uses, they directly abut the right-of-way, provide parking in the
rear or side yards, and contribute to the street atmosphere by providing a
consistent street front with other, more pedestrian-oriented projects. They may
be set back from the right-of-way, but only when they provide out-lots within
the same project for category A, B, C, or D building forms on the same or on
separate lots.
f. Building Form F. This category is designed for large-scale buildings of unlimited
height which serve as anchors within the district. These buildings function
much like category E building forms, but with a minimum five (5) story height.
They may incorporate a series of mixed uses, typically are supported by lesserclassified
building forms, and require complex solutions for parking and access.
2. Building forms are designated within each district location based on the
regulating plan. Building forms are classified in the following manner:
a. Permitted Building Forms. These building forms are permitted as of right in the
locations specified, and are depicted with the symbol P.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
114
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
b. Special Building Forms. These building forms are permitted after review and
approval by the Planning Commission, in accordance with the procedures
set forth in Article 9 and the standards in this Ordinance. Building Forms
requiring special use approval are depicted with the symbol S.
c. Prohibited Building Forms. These building forms are prohibited in the locations
specified, and are depicted with the symbol NP.
d. Exceptions: For all building forms in all locations, awnings may project into the
right-of-way beyond the required building line by up to 5 feet.
3. The regulating plan dictates the site type and street type for each individual
property in the district. Building forms are identified within each district as
permitted, permitted subject to special use approval, or not permitted based
upon the combination, the site type, and the street type of each property.
4. It a site is adjacent to two (2) different street types, the more intense street type
shall control the purpose of determining allowable building forms.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
115
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
116
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 5.03.B.1
Building Form A
Building Form A: Small, generally single-purpose buildings for retail, office, restaurant, or service uses. Typically situated in an out
lot of a larger classification building form, or on a smaller, more remote site location within the district.
Height
Minimum
Stories 1 story
Feet 14 feet
Maximum
Stories 3 stories
Feet 45 feet
Ground story minimum Feet 14 feet
Placement
Front
Required building line1
10 feet. 75% of the building faade must meet the
required building line, while up to 25% of the faade can
be set back to allow for architectural consideration.
Minimum setback N/A
Side Minimum setback N/A (building may be placed up to the property line, but
is not required to be)
Rear Minimum setback 30 feet
Lot
Required open space 30 percent
Lot coverage by all buildings N/A
Access and circulation
Driveways may access the site from any side, pedestrian
pathways must be provided from the right-of-way,
and cross access shall be provided in instances where
a development is within an out lot of a higher classified
building form.
Parking location
Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard; when
located in a side yard and abutting the required building
line adjacent the primary building, parking shall be
screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry wall on the
required building line, or within 5 feet of the required
building line, provided that a landscape treatment is
added between the wall and the required building line.
1 The Planning Commission may adjust the required building line to a maximum of 30 feet beyond the property line for projects
incorporating a permanent space for an outdoor caf, public space, or a cross access drive with an adjacent parcel. Outdoor
cafs or public spaces must be developed as part of the primary building and must incorporate a permanent wall or landscaping
area along the required building line.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
117
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Figure 5.03.B-1
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
118
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 5.03.B.2
Building Form B
Building Form B: Smaller, multiple-tenant buildings for retail, restaurant, office, service, or residential uses. This category also includes
multiple-tenant strip mall style development, although it requires a second story to encourage a mix of use.
Height
Minimum
Stories 2 stories
Feet 24 feet
Maximum
Stories 6 stories
Feet 72 feet
Ground story minimum Feet 14 feet
Placement
Front
Maximum setback 60 feet
Minimum setback N/A
Side Minimum setback N/A (building may be placed up to the property line, but is
not required to be)
Rear Minimum setback 30 feet
Lot
Required open space 15 percent
Lot coverage by all buildings N/A
Access and circulation
Driveways may access the site from any side, pedestrian
pathways must be provided from the right-of-way, and
cross access shall be provided.
Parking location
Parking shall be located in any yard, however, only one
row of parking and a maneuvering lane shall be permitted
in a front yard. When parking is located in a side
yard and abuts the required building line adjacent to a
primary building that abuts the right-of-way, parking shall
be screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry wall on the
required building line, or with 5 feet of the required building
line, provided that a landscape treatment is added
between the wall and the required building line.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
119
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Figure 5.03.B-2
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
120
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 5.03.B.3
Building Form C
Building Form C: This category is primarily designed for attached residential or live/work residential units. Townhouses and urbanstyle
residential developments that are compatible with the higher-density and more urban character of this area, as envisioned
by the Big Beaver Corridor Study, are the primary buildings permitted under this building form.
Height
Minimum
Stories 2 stories
Feet N/A
Maximum
Stories 4 stories
Feet 55 feet
Ground story minimum Feet N/A
Placement
Front
Required building line1
10 feet. 75% of the building faade must meet the required
building line, while up to 25% of the faade can be set
back to allow for architectural consideration.
Minimum setback N/A
Side Minimum setback N/A (building may be placed up to the property line, but is
not required to be)
Rear Minimum setback 30 feet
Lot
Required open space 15 percent
Lot coverage by all buildings 30 percent
Access and circulation
Driveways must access garages, if provided, integrated into
buildings from the rear, in an alley configuration; detached
garages or multi-garage structures are permitted only in a
rear yard, or behind primary buildings in an alley; pedestrian
pathways shall be provided from the right-of-way.
Parking location
Parking shall be located in a rear yard or in an alley between
buildings; parking may also be provided in integrated
garages or detached garages when accessed from an
alley or rear yard; on-street parking within private roads in
development is highly encouraged.
1 The Planning Commission may adjust the required building line to a maximum of 30 feet beyond the property line for projects
incorporating a permanent front yard, enclosed space that shall incorporate a permanent wall or landscaping area along the
required building line.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
121
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Figure 5.03.B-3
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
122
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 5.03.B.4
Building Form D
Building Form D: This category includes multi-story mixed-use developments with a residential component on upper floors and
retail, office, service, or restaurant uses on the first or lower floors. The category takes into consideration residential and commercial
parking, access, and connectivity, and requires buildings that are between 3 and 6 stories, to complement the higherintensity
areas within the district.
Height
Minimum
Stories 3 stories
Feet 35 feet
Maximum
Stories 6 stories
Feet 66 feet
Ground story minimum Feet 14 feet
Placement
Front
Required building line1
10 feet. 75% of the building faade must meet the
required building line, while up to 25% of the faade can
be set back to allow for architectural consideration.
Minimum setback N/A
Side Minimum setback N/A (building may be placed up to the property line,
but is not required to be)
Rear Minimum setback 40 feet
Lot
Required open space 15 percent
Lot coverage by all buildings 30 percent
Access and circulation
If a garage or below-grade parking is integrated into
the building, it must be accessible from a side yard,
rear yard, an alley, or from a side street in the case of
a corner lot; access to surface parking for commercial
traffic may be accessible from any direction; pedestrian
pathways shall be provided from the right-of-way.
Parking location
Surface parking shall be located in a rear yard or side
yard; parking for residential tenants may be provided in
integrated garages or below-grade parking.
1 The Planning Commission may adjust the required building line to a maximum of 30 feet beyond the property line for projects
incorporating a permanent space for an outdoor caf, public space, or a cross access drive with an adjacent parcel.
Outdoor cafs or public spaces shall be developed as part of the primary building and shall incorporate a permanent wall or
landscaping area along the required building line.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
123
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Figure 5.03.B-4
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
124
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Building Form E
Building Form E: This category provides an opportunity for large-format retail or entertainment uses within the district under very
specific conditions. These buildings are over 20,000 square feet, but unlike classic large-format retail or entertainment uses, they
directly abut the right-of-way, provide parking in the rear or side yards, and contribute to the street atmosphere by providing a
consistent street front with other, more pedestrian-oriented projects. They may be set back from the right-of-way, but only when
they provide out-lots within the same project for category A, B, C, or D building forms on the same or on separate lots.
Height
Minimum
Stories 1 story
Feet 14 feet
Maximum
Stories N/A
Feet N/A
Ground story minimum Feet 14 feet
Placement
Front
Required building line1
10 feet. 75% of the building faade must meet the required
building line, while up to 25% of the faade can be
set back to allow for architectural consideration.
Minimum setback N/A
Side Minimum setback N/A (building may be placed up to the property line, but
is not required to be)
Rear Minimum setback 40 feet
Lot
Required open space 15 percent
Minimum ground floor area 20,000 square feet
Lot coverage by all buildings 30 percent
Access and circulation
Driveways may access the site from any side, pedestrian
pathways shall be provided from the right-of-way, and
cross access shall be provided between category building
forms and all lesser or equally classified building forms.
Parking location
Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard; when
located in a side yard and abutting the required building
line adjacent the primary building, parking shall be
screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry wall on the
required building line, or within 5 feet of the line with a
landscape transition; in instances where outlots line the
required building line, the required building line shall be
waived for the category 5 building or buildings.
1 The Planning Commission may eliminate the required building line for projects incorporating a permanent series of outlots or
smaller buildings in the A, B, C, or D building form categories, provided that those outlots and/or buildings make up the entire
frontage of the overall development along the required building line, with the exception of access drives. The required building
line frontage minimum for the outlots and/or other building forms along the required building line shall apply for each individual
outlot and/or other buildings forms along the required building line shall apply for each individual outlot and/or building.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
125
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Figure 5.03.B-5
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
126
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 5.03.B.6
Building Form F
Building Form F: This category is designed for large-scale buildings of unlimited height which serve as anchors within the district.
These buildings function much like category E building forms, but with a minimum 5-story height. They may incorporate a series
of mixed uses, typically are supported by lesser-classified building forms, and require complex solutions for parking and access.
Height
Minimum
Stories 5 stories
Feet 55 feet
Maximum
Stories N/A
Feet N/A
Ground story minimum Feet 14 feet
Placement
Front
Required building line1
10 feet. 75% of the building faade must meet the
required building line, while up to 25% of the faade can
be set back to allow for architectural consideration.
Minimum setback N/A
Side Minimum setback N/A (building may be placed up to the property line, but
is not required to be)
Rear Minimum setback 40 feet
Lot
Required open space N/A
Lot coverage by all buildings 30 percent
Access and circulation
If a garage or below-grade parking is integrated into the
building, it shall be accessible from a side yard, rear yard,
an alley, or from a side street in the case of a corner lot;
access to surface parking for commercial traffic may be
accessible from any direction; pedestrian pathways shall
be provided from the right-of-way.
Parking location
Surface parking shall be located in a rear yard or side
yard; parking for residential tenants may be provided in
integrated garages or below-grade parking.
1 The Planning Commission may eliminate the required building line for projects incorporating a permanent series of outlots or
smaller buildings in the A, B, C, or D building form categories, provided that those outlots and/or buildings make up the entire
frontage of the overall development along the required building line, with the exception of access drives. The required building
line frontage minimum for the outlots and/or other building forms along the required building line shall apply for each individual
outlot and/or building.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
127
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Figure 5.03.B-6
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
128
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
C. Landscaping in Form-Based Districts.
1. In addition to landscape requirements in Section 13.02, the following
landscaping requirements shall apply:
a. Supplemental to Section 13.02.E.1.a, a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of
the site area shall be comprised of landscape material.
b. Landscaping can consist of approved trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines,
grasses, or other approved plant material. Up to twenty-five percent (25%)
of the required landscape area may be brink, stone, pavers, or other public
plaza elements, but shall not include any parking area or required sidewalks.
c. Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the required landscape area may be
relieved through the Sustainable Design Option as outlined in Section 12.01.
SECTION 5.04 BIG BEAVER DISTRICT
A. Intent. The Big Beaver (BB) District is intended to implement the policies set forth in
the Big Beaver Corridor Study, Big Beaver Design Guidelines, and the Citys Master
Plan. These regulations are intended to promote a unified vision for transforming
Big Beaver Road into a world-class destination focused on mixed-use development
and increased land use intensity that is oriented as much to the needs of the
pedestrian as to those of the automobile. These regulations are also intended to:
1. Establish a development pattern in which new buildings and building
modifications enhance the character of the existing built environment.
2. Orient building entrances and storefronts to the street to add visual interest,
increase pedestrian traffic, and to reduce crime through increased surveillance.
3. Enhance a sense of place and contribute to the sustainability of the City.
4. Allow a pattern of development which will encourage transportation
alternatives (walking, biking, and transit) to reduce automobile dependence
and fuel consumption.
5. Add value to property along the Big Beaver Corridor.
B. Regulating Plan.
1. The Regulating Plan, as set forth in Figure 5.04.1, identifies allowable uses and
permissible development within the District based on location.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
129
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
2. The Regulating Plan is based on two (2) factors: Site Type and Street Type. Site
Types, as described in Section 5.04.B.3, are determined by lot size, location, and
relationship to neighboring sites. Street Types, as set forth in Section 5.04B.4,
recognize that street patterns within the City of Troy are established. Streets range
from primary corridors which carry a large volume of traffic to local streets which
carry lower volumes of neighborhood traffic.
3. Site Types. The Regulating Plan includes three (3) different site types, described as
follows:
a. Site Type BB:A (large scale regional sites)  These properties are predominantly
between ten (10) and twenty (20) acres in area, but they are more strongly
related to one another through their nature and large, campus-style properties
with multiple large buildings designed to function as one unit.
Walkability within and between sites and provision of supporting buildings and
uses are important to the success of the very large, Type BB:A developments.
They should be designed with a mix of uses in mind to allow for users to obtain
basic services on or immediately near the site. Especially within large office
centers, where hundreds of workers may populate the site during the day,
restaurants, postal facilities and other daily needs should be integrated within
existing buildings or permitted to exist in smaller out-lot developments or
nearby developments in Type B or C categories.
Parking for Type BB:A sites should be accommodated in structured parking
whenever possible to maximize the use of the site for the primary use and
to allow the site to be developed more densely than it could with surface
parking.
Site design should strongly focus on putting the densest components of the
project within close range of the primary right-of-way to combat the vast
open areas that frequently make such sites difficult or undesirable to cross on
foot. A busy arrangement of campus uses along the right of way in outlots will
help keep pedestrians engaged and will make these larger sites fit better with
surrounding smaller sites in the Type BB:B and BB:C categories.
b. Site Type BB:B (medium sites/classic retail sites/mixed use)  The sites in Site Type
B are mostly between 2.51 and ten (10) acres in area, and are located at the
edges of larger, Type BB:A sites. They are located on sites large enough to
warrant additional consideration to landscaping and surface parking in that
they can often accommodate large surface lots, which can compromise the
cohesiveness of the area if not designed with connectivity in mind.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
130
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This category also includes larger, single-use developments situated nearby
one another. Hotels, single office buildings, and other medium single building
developments often fall into this category. They often house employment
centers.
The Site Type BB:B category should be designed with integration in mind.
Integration with one another, with Type BB:A sites, and in support of much
larger destination retail and office complex sites in Type BB:A. This will allow
for better interaction between users, which could lead to a more readily
shared customer and tenant base and could help reduce Big Beaver traffic.
c. Site Type BB:C (small sites/outlot sites)  Made up mostly of lots in the two
and a half (2.5) acre and smaller range, the Site Type BB:C category is
reserved for the smallest, single-use sites developed for individually standing
businesses. Small coffee shops or fast food restaurants would often be found
in this category, as well as small multi-tenant office buildings or single-tenant
office buildings.
Site Type BB:C is primarily found along Big Beaver Road in areas between the
pulses of major intersections, where lot depths are constrained and where
older, smaller buildings predominate. These sites must be designed to better
integrate with their surroundings to contribute to a more cohesive district,
a more consistent building line, and more efficient access between sites.
Good access for pedestrians and cross access for vehicles will help sites in
this category reduce trips entering and existing from Big Beaver Road.
Groups of Site Type BB:C properties may make excellent candidates for
coordinated combination of properties to create more cohesive minidestinations.
4. Street Types. The Regulating Plan includes three (3) different street types,
described as follows:
a. Street Type BB:A (Primary Corridor)  Category BB:A refers to Big Beaver
Road. Big Beaver has the widest spacing between building fronts of all roads
within the form-based code area, and has many unique characteristics.
The category is meant to reflect the world class boulevard characteristics
established in the Big Beaver Corridor Study, and is used in the highest profile
areas of the City of Troy.
Category BB:A will integrate features designed to accommodate through
traffic and local traffic, will focus on gateways, and will enhance the Big
Beaver Corridor experience. This category will reflect all the strongest and
most prominent features proposed in the Big Beaver Corridor Study.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
131
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Strong landscaping regimens, pedestrian and traffic-scale lighting, effective
signage, wide non-motorized pathways, and a complementary relationship
with transit opportunities will make Category BB:A a distinguished area within
the region.
b. Street Type BB:B (Arterial)  Category BB:B is meant for the main north-south
roads that cross the form-based code district. These roads connect the area
with the rest of the City and the region. They are characterized by a narrower
building-to-building distance, safe and effective non-motorized pathways
designed to encourage users to reach Big Beaver Road by bike or on foot,
effective signage and lighting, and few individual residential curb cuts.
The crosswalks spanning arterial roads will make use of a series of features
intended to protect pedestrians by establishing equity between pedestrians
and motorists through effective design. Raised walks of high-quality materials,
signage, landscaping, and pedestrian respite islands are several options that
may be found within Category BB:B.
Arterial roads will also be characterized by strong landscaping designed to
mitigate the negative impacts of high traffic volumes from adjacent residential
areas which provide a unique and memorable visual character for the
roadway.
The intersections between Category BB:A and BB:B roads will be marquee
places with enhanced community and corridor landmarks. The spaces will be
defined by a stable and consistent building-to-building ratio complemented
by landmark structures, superior landscaping and community signage with
medians and memorable architecture.
c. Street Type BB:C (Local/Collector)  Category BB:C roads are those roads
tying together smaller areas within the District. They have a more varied
and localized character than Categories BB:A or BB:B, depending on their
context within predominantly office, retail, or residential areas. They act as
the backbone of smaller neighborhoods within the area and tie those areas to
Category BB:A and BB:B roads.
Category BB:C roads will be very welcoming of non-motorized users and will
have defined pedestrian rest areas and other amenities wherever possible.
Their scale will be similar to that of a main road within a conventional
subdivision or industrial park, and their width will be determined primarily on
their purpose. A Category BB:C road within an industrial area may be required
to be wider than one (1) in a residential area, although their purpose is similar.
Category BB:C roads will have a much higher frequency of curb cuts than
Category BB:A and BB:B roads, and will often provide direct access to retail
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
132
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
centers or office complexes. Sufficient width should be retained on either
side of the roadway whenever possible to allow for a rigorous landscaping
plan to ensure that the immediate uses served are adequately protected
from the moderate traffic volumes anticipated on a Category BB:C road.
C. Authorized Use Groups. Authorized use groups, as set forth in Section 5.03.A and in
Table 5.04.C-1, are applied to the site types and street types in Big Beaver District in
Table 5.04.C-1.
D. Authorized Building Forms.
1. Authorized building forms, as set forth in Section 5.03.B and Table 5.04.C-2,
are applied to the site types and street types in the Big Beaver District in Table
5.04.C-2.
2. Any Building Form A that is a one-story building or any Building Form A without a
functional second story requires a special use as set forth in Article 9.
E. Design Standards. In addition to standards set forth in this Ordinance, all proposed
development shall comply with the standards set forth herein.
1. Faade Variation. The maximum linear length of an uninterrupted building
faade facing public streets and/or parks shall be thirty (30) feet. Faade
articulation or architectural design variations for building walls facing the street
are required to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance.
Building wall offsets (projections and recesses); cornices, varying building
materials or pilasters shall be used to break up the mass of a single building.
2. Pedestrian Access / Entrance.
a. Primary Entrance for Non-Residential and/or Mixed-Use Building. The primary
building entrance shall be clearly identifiable and useable and located
facing the right-of-way.
b. Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear,
obvious, publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon
which the building fronts and the building. The pedestrian connection shall
comply with the following:
i. Fully paved and maintained surface not less than five (5) feet in width.
ii. Unit pavers or concrete distinct from the surrounding parking and drive
lane surface.
iii. Located either within a raised median or between wheel stops to protect
pedestrians from vehicle overhangs where parking is adjacent.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
133
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
c. Additional Entrances. In addition to the primary faade facing front faade
and/or the right-of-way, if a parking area is located in the rear or side yard,
must also have a direct pedestrian access to the parking area that is of a level
of materials quality and design emphasis at least equal to that of the primary
entrance.
3. Ground Story Activation.
a. Transparency.
i. The first floors of all buildings shall be designed to encourage and
complement pedestrian-scale activity and crime prevention techniques.
It is intended that this be accomplished principally by the use of windows
and doors arranged so that active uses within the building are visible from
or accessible to the street, and parking areas are visible to occupants of
the building. The first floor of any front faade facing a right-of-way shall
be no less than fifty (50) percent windows and doors, and the minimum
transparency for facades facing a side street, side yard, or parking
area shall be no less than thirty (30) percent of the faade. First-floor
transparency is measured between two and eight feet above the first-floor
elevation.
ii. For multiple tenant buildings, the minimum transparency requirement must
be met by each suite or tenant.
iii. The minimum transparency requirement shall apply to all sides of a building
that abut an open space, including a side yard, or public right-of-way.
Transparency requirements shall not apply to sides which abut an alley.
iv. Windows for building sides shall be concentrated toward the front edge of
the building, in locations most visible from an urban open space or public
right-of-way.
v. Visibility through the required transparency must portray the principal
use of the operation and shall not portray secondary or back of house
operation areas including, but not limited to, laundry, cleaning supply,
stock, or storage areas.
b. Transparency Alternatives. The following alternatives may be used singularly or
in combination. The wall design alternative may count toward fifty (50) percent
of the side yard or parking lot side transparency requirement, provided the
entirety of the length and height of the wall is considered.
i. Wall Design. Wall designs must provide a minimum of three (3) of the
following elements, occurring at intervals no greater than twenty-five (25)
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
134
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
feet horizontally and ten (10) feet vertically:
(a) Expression of structural system and infill panels through change in plane
not less than three (3) inches.
(b) System of horizontal and vertical scaling elements such as: belt course,
string courses, cornice, pilasters.
(c) System of horizontal and vertical reveals not less than one (1) inch in
width/depth.
(d) Variations in material module, pattern, and/or color.
(e) System of integrated architectural ornamentation.
(f) Green screen or planter walls.
(g) Translucent, fritted, patterned, or colored glazing.
ii. Permanent Art. Non-commercial art or graphic design of sufficient
scale and orientation to be perceived from the public right-of-way
and rendered in materials or media appropriate to an exterior, urban
environment and permanently integrated into the building wall may
count toward no more than forty (40) percent of the transparency
requirement.
4. Transitional Features.
a. Transitional features are architectural elements, site features, or alterations
to building massing that are used to provide a transition between higher
intensity uses and low- or moderate-density residential areas. These features
assist in mitigating potential conflicts between those uses. Transitional
features are intended to be used in combination with landscape buffers or
large setbacks.
b. Intensity. A continuum of use intensity, where moderate intensity uses are
sited between high-intensity uses and low-intensity uses, shall be developed
for multi-building developments. An example would be an office use
between commercial and residential uses.
c. Height and Mass. Building height and mass in the form of building stepbacks,
recess lines or other techniques shall be graduated so that structures
with higher intensity uses are comparable in scale with adjacent structures of
lower-intensity uses.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
135
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
d. Architectural Features. Similarly sized and patterned architectural features
such as windows, doors, arcades, pilasters, cornices, wall offsets, building
materials, and other building articulations included on the lower-intensity use
shall be incorporated in the transitional features.
5. Site Access, Parking, and Loading.
a. Required Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for a principal use,
erected, altered, or expanded after the effective date of this Ordinance in
accordance with the standards set forth in Article 13, Site Design Standards.
The form-based districts are intended to encourage pedestrian- and transitfriendly
design and compact mixed-use developments. Applicants are
encouraged to consider the provisions for shared parking set forth in Section
13.06.E. and flexibility in application set forth in Section 13.06.F.
b. Location.
i. When parking is located in a side yard (behind the front building line) but
fronts on the required building line, no more than twenty-five (25) percent
of the total sites linear feet along the required building line or sixty (60) feet,
whichever is less, shall be occupied by parking.
ii. For a corner lot, no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the sites
cumulative linear feet along the required building lines or sixty (60) feet,
whichever is less, shall be occupied by parking. The building shall be
located in the corner of the lot adjacent to the intersection.
iii. For a double frontage lot or a lot that has frontage on three (3) streets, the
cumulative total of all frontages occupied by parking shall be no more than
thirty-five (35) percent of the total sites linear feet along a required building
line or sixty (60) feet, whichever is less.
iv. Where off-street parking is visible from a street, it should be screened in
accordance with the standards set forth in Section 13.02.C.
c. Parking Structures. Parking structures shall be located behind buildings in
locations that minimize visibility from public streets. Parking structures may be
located along public street frontages, subject to the following standards:
i. Building height and placement requirements for principal building shall be
met.
ii. A lining of retail, office, or residential use with a useable depth of no less
than twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
136
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
iii. At least fifty (50) percent of the upper floors facing a public street shall
consist of exposed openings. The openings shall be designed with one or
more treatments:
(a) Planter boxes with living plants.
(b) A rail or fence to give the appearance of a balcony.
(c) Framing and mullions to give the appearance of large windows.
d. Drive-throughs. Drive-throughs are allowed in the Big Beaver District in
conjunction with the principal building of a Financial Institution under a
Special Use, subject to the following standards:
i. A drive-through and associated structure cannot be a primary use or
principal building.
ii. Ingress and egress to drive-through facilities shall be part of the internal
circulation of the site and integrated with the overall site design. Clear
identification and delineation between the drive-through facility and the
parking lot shall be provided. Drive-through facilities shall be designed in
a manner which promotes pedestrian and vehicular safety.
iii. Drive-throughs must be located behind faade opposite Big Beaver Road
or detached from principal structure and shall be located in a manner
that will be the least visible from a public thoroughfare.
(a) If detached, the point-to-point tube transport system (pneumatic
tubes) must be located underground to serve the drive-through kiosk or
canopy.
(b) Canopy design shall be compatible with the design of the principal
building and incorporate similar materials and architectural elements.
iv. Each drive-through facility shall provide stacking space meeting the
following standards:
(a) Each stacking lane shall be one-way, and each stacking lane space
shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in
length.
(b) If proposed, an escape lane shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in
width to allow other vehicles to pass those waiting to be served.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
137
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
(c) Four (4) stacking spaces per drive-through lane.
(d) All stacking lanes must be clearly delineated through the use of striping,
landscaping, curbs, or signage.
v. A drive-through asile shall not be directly accessed from or exit onto Big
Beaver Road.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
138
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Map 5.04.1: Big Beaver District Regulating Plan
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
139
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 5.04.C-1
Use Groups Permitted
Use Group
(Table 5.03-1)
Site Type BB:A: Major Sites Site Type BB:B: Medium Sites Site Type BB:C: Minor Sites
Street Type BB:A:
Big Beaver
Street Type BB:B:
Arterials
Street Type BB:C:
Collectors
Street Type BB:A:
Big Beaver
Street Type BB:B:
Arterials
Street Type BB:C:
Collectors
Street Type BB:A:
Big Beaver
Street Type BB:B:
Arterials
Street Type BB:C:
Collectors
1
Residential NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
2
Residential/Lodging UP UP P UP UP P UP UP P
3
Office/Institution P P P P P P P P P
4*
Auto/Transportation NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
5
Retail/Entertainment/
Service**
P P P P P P P P P
6
Misc. Commercial NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
7
Industrial NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP
P - Permitted Use Groups
UP - Permitted Use Groups in Upper Stories Only
S - Special Use Approval Groups
NP - Prohibited Use Groups
* Drive-through uses for Financial Institutions are allowed under Special Use in compliance with Section 5.04.5.d.
** Lodging uses are permitted subject to Special Use Approval.
Table 5.04.C-2
Building Forms Permitted
Building Forms
Site Type BB:A: Major Sites Site Type BB:B: Medium Sites Site Type BB:C: Minor Sites
Street Type BB:A:
Big Beaver
Street Type BB:B:
Arterials
Street Type BB:C:
Collectors
Street Type BB:A:
Big Beaver
Street Type BB:B:
Arterials
Street Type BB:C:
Collectors
Street Type BB:A:
Big Beaver
Street Type BB:B:
Arterials
Street Type BB:C:
Collectors
A: Small, single-purpose,
out buildings P1 P P P1 P P P P P
B: Small, multi-tenant
commercial with mixed
use
P1 P P S P P P P P
C: Attached residential
or live/work S S S P P P P P P
D: Multi-story mixed use,
medium density P P P P P P P P P
E: Large format commercial
P P S P P S NP NP NP
F: Large format mixeduse
P P S P P S NP NP NP
1 Permitted only when located in an outlot of a Building Form D, E, or F project in a separate parcel, or within a designated outlot that remains part of the primary parcel.
P - Permitted Building Form
S - Special Approval Building Form
NP - Prohibited Building Form
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
140
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 5.05 MAPLE ROAD DISTRICT
A. Intent. The Maple Road (MR) District is intended to implement the vision established
by the Citys Master Plan. The Maple Road Corridor is intended to allow for creative
redevelopment and a home for emerging land use types in the City. Development
of industrial-style buildings with housing, retail, office, service, and even light
industrial uses, developed in a transit-oriented setting, could all contribute in a
meaningful way to the Corridor. Uses designed to support the residents and local
workers are also encouraged, such as mixed-use developments with small scale
retail or restaurant uses incorporated with housing units. The redeveloped Corridor
will help diversify the Citys housing and commercial stock and provide a more
effective buffer between the Corridor and the traditional industrial uses located
in the immediate area while attracting the highest quality workforce for local
industrial uses.
B. Regulating Plan.
1. The Regulating Plan, as set forth in Map 5.05.1, identifies allowable uses and
permissible development within the District based on location.
2. The Regulating Plan is based on two (2) factors: Site Type and Street Type. Site
Types, as described in Section 5.05.B.3, are determined by lot size, location, and
relationship to neighboring sites. Street Types, as set forth in Section 5.05.B.4,
recognize that street patterns within the City of Troy are established. Streets
range from primary corridors which carry a large volume of traffic to local streets
which convey lower volumes of neighborhood traffic.
3. Site Types. The Regulating Plan includes two (2) different Site Types, described
as follows:
a. Site Type MR:A (larger, traditionally commercial sites)  Site Type MR:A
properties are predominantly commercial, large-scale properties with
significant acreage, single-story buildings, and large amounts of surface
parking.
Walkability within and between sites and the provision of supporting buildings
and uses are important to the success of the large, Type MR:A developments.
They can be developed with a wide variety of uses to allow for users to be
creative in developing and redeveloping these sites. When larger uses are
present, they should be supported by smaller, ancillary uses that provide
basic services. Especially within large residential, retail, industrial, or office
centers, where hundreds of workers or residents may populate the site,
restaurants, postal facilities and other daily needs should be integrated within
existing buildings or permitted to exist in smaller out-lot developments or
nearby developments.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
141
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
The site design should strongly focus on putting the densest components of
the project within close range of the primary right-of-way to combat the vast
open areas that frequently make such sites difficult or undesirable to cross on
foot. A busy arrangement of campus uses along the right of way in outlots will
help keep pedestrians engaged and will make these larger sites fit better with
surrounding smaller sites outside the MR District.
b. Site Type MR:B (former industrial sites and smaller commercial sites)  Made up
mostly of smaller sites with obsolete industrial or small commercial projects, the
Site Type B category is specifically singled out for innovative adaptive uses.
Educational, retail, residential, entertainment, commercial, or light industrial
uses will all be found in these adapted sites. The focus of this category is to find
useful, innovative ways to redevelop obsolete former industrial, commercial,
and office buildings in a way that they can connect with and support the
larger MR:A developments and the adjacent industrial and residential areas
not within the MR District.
4. Street Types. The Regulating Plan includes two (2) different Street Types,
described as follows:
a. Street Type MR:A (Maple Road and north-south arterials)  Category MR:A is
meant for Maple Road and the main north-south roads that cross the formbased
code district. These roads connect the area with the rest of the City
and the region. They will be characterized by high traffic volumes, effective
signage and lighting, few individual residential curb cuts, new pedestrian
amenities, and a vibrant revitalized streetscape.
The crosswalks spanning intersections at arterial roads will make use of a series
of features intended to protect pedestrians by establishing equity between
pedestrians and motorists through effective design. Raised walks of highquality
materials, signage, landscaping, and pedestrian respite islands are
several options that may be found within Category MR:A.
Arterial roads will also be characterized by strong landscaping designed to
mitigate the negative impacts of high traffic volumes from adjacent residential
areas which provide a unique and memorable visual character for the
roadway.
b. Street Type MR:B (Local/Collector)  Category MR:B roads are those roads
tying together smaller areas within the District. They have a more varied and
localized character than larger roads, depending on their context within
predominantly office, retail, or residential areas. They act as the connection
between the Corridor and adjacent smaller neighborhoods. They can also be
developed as part of a larger project in the MR District, which may require new
streets to be created to adequately and successfully implement the project. It
is likely that any new road in the MR District will be a Category MR:B road.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
142
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Category MR:B roads will be very welcoming of non-motorized users and will
have defined pedestrian rest areas and other amenities whenever possible.
Their scale will be similar to that of a main road within a conventional
subdivision or industrial park, and their width will be determined primarily
on their purpose. A Category MR:B road within an industrial area may be
required to be wider than one in a residential area, although their purpose is
similar.
Category MR:B roads will have a much higher frequency of curb cuts than
Category MR:A roads, and will often provide direct access to retail centers
or office complexes. Sufficient width should be retained on either side of
the roadway whenever possible to allow for a rigorous landscaping plan to
ensure that the immediate uses served are adequately protected from the
moderate traffic volumes anticipated on a Category MR:B road.
C. Authorized Use Groups. Authorized use groups, as set forth in Section 5.03.A and in
Table 5.05.C-1, are applied to the site types and street types in Maple Road (MR)
District in Table 5.05.C-1.
D. Authorized Building Forms. Authorized building form regulations, as set forth in
Section 5.03.B and Table 5.05.C-2, are applied to the site types and street types in
the Maple Road (MR) District in Table 5.05.C-2.
E. Design Standards. In addition to standards set forth in this Ordinance, all proposed
development shall comply with the standards set forth herein.
1. Faade Variation. The maximum linear length of an uninterrupted building
faade facing public streets and/or parks shall be thirty (30) feet. Faade
articulation or architectural design variations for building walls facing the street
are required to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance.
Building wall offsets (projections and recesses); cornices, varying building
materials or pilasters shall be used to break up the mass of a single building.
2. Pedestrian Access / Entrance.
a. Primary Entrance for Non-Residential and/or Mixed-Use Building. The primary
building entrance shall be clearly identifiable and useable and located
facing the right-of-way.
b. Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear,
obvious, publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon
which the building fronts and the building. The pedestrian connection shall
comply with the following:
i. Fully paved and maintained surface not less than five (5) feet in width.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
143
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ii. Unit pavers or concrete distinct from the surrounding parking and drive lane
surface.
iii. Located either within a raised median or between wheel stops to protect
pedestrians from vehicle overhangs where parking is adjacent.
c. Additional Entrances. In addition to the primary faade facing front faade
and/or the right-of-way, if a parking area is located in the rear or side yard,
must also have a direct pedestrian access to the parking area that is of a level
of materials quality and design emphasis at least equal to that of the primary
entrance.
3. Ground Story Activation.
a. Transparency.
i. The first floors of all buildings shall be designed to encourage and
complement pedestrian-scale activity and crime prevention techniques.
It is intended that this be accomplished principally by the use of windows
and doors arranged so that active uses within the building are visible from
or accessible to the street, and parking areas are visible to occupants of
the building. The first floor of any front faade facing a right-of-way shall
be no less than fifty (50) percent windows and doors, and the minimum
transparency for facades facing a side street, side yard, or parking area
shall be no less than thirty (30) percent of the faade.
ii. The minimum transparency requirement shall apply to all sides of a building
that abut an open space, including a side yard, or public right-of-way.
Transparency requirements shall not apply to sides which abut an alley.
iii. Windows for building sides shall be concentrated toward the front edge of
the building, in locations most visible from an urban open space or public
right-of-way.
b. Transparency Alternatives. The following alternatives may be used singularly or
in combination. If used in combination, they may count toward no more than
eighty (80) percent of the transparency requirement set forth in Section 5.04
E-4. The wall design alternative may count toward one hundred (100) percent
of the side street transparency requirement, provided the entirety of the length
and height of the wall is considered.
i. Wall Design. Wall designs that provide visual interest and pedestrian scale
may count toward no more than fifty (50) percent of primary street and
fifty (50) percent of side street transparency requirements. Wall designs
must provide a minimum of three (3) of the following elements, occurring at
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
144
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
intervals no greater than twenty-five (25) feet horizontally and ten (10) feet
vertically:
(a) Expression of structural system and infill panels through change in plane
not less than three (3) inches.
(b) System of horizontal and vertical scaling elements such as: belt course,
string courses, cornice, pilasters.
(c) System of horizontal and vertical reveals not less than one (1) inch in
width/depth.
(d) Variations in material module, pattern, and/or color.
(e) System of integrated architectural ornamentation.
(f) Green screen or planter walls.
(g) Translucent, fritted, patterned, or colored glazing.
ii. Outdoor Dining/Seating. Outdoor dining/seating located between the
building and the primary street zone lot line may count toward no more
than sixty (60) percent of the transparency requirement. Outdoor dining/
seating located between the building and side street zone lot line may
count toward no more than eighty (80) percent of the transparency
requirement.
iii. Permanent Art. Non-commercial art or graphic design of sufficient
scale and orientation to be perceived from the public right-of-way
and rendered in materials or media appropriate to an exterior, urban
environment and permanently integrated into the building wall may
count toward no more than forty (40) percent of the transparency
requirement.
4. Transitional Features.
a. Transitional features are architectural elements, site features, or alterations
to building massing that are used to provide a transition between higher
intensity uses and low- or moderate-density residential areas. These features
assist in mitigating potential conflicts between those uses. Transitional
features are intended to be used in combination with landscape buffers or
large setbacks.
b. Intensity. A continuum of use intensity, where moderate intensity uses are
sited between high-intensity uses and low-intensity uses, shall be developed
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
145
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
for multi-building developments. An example would be an office use between
commercial and residential uses.
c. Height and Mass. Building height and mass in the form of building step-backs,
recess lines or other techniques shall be graduated so that structures with
higher intensity uses are comparable in scale with adjacent structures of lowerintensity
uses.
d. Architectural Features. Similarly sized and patterned architectural features
such as windows, doors, arcades, pilasters, cornices, wall offsets, building
materials, and other building articulations included on the lower-intensity use
shall be incorporated in the transitional features.
5. Site Access, Parking, and Loading.
a. Required Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for a principal use
erected, altered, or expanded after the effective date of this Ordinance in
accordance with the standards set forth in Article 13, Site Design Standards.
The form-based districts are intended to encourage pedestrian- and transitfriendly
design and compact mixed-use developments. Applicants are
encouraged to consider the provisions for shared parking set forth in Section
13.06.E, and flexibility in application set forth in Section 13.06.F.
b. Location.
i. When parking is located in a side yard (behind the front building line) but
fronts on the required building line, no more than twenty-five (25) percent
of the total sites linear feet along the required building line or sixty (60) feet,
whichever is less, shall be occupied by parking.
ii. For a corner lot, no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the sites
cumulative linear feet along the required building lines or sixty (60) feet,
whichever is less, shall be occupied by parking. The building shall be
located in the corner of the lot adjacent to the intersection.
iii. For a double frontage lot or a lot that has frontage on three (3) streets, the
cumulative total of all frontages occupied by parking shall be no more than
thirty-five (35) percent of the total sites linear feet along a required building
line or sixty (60) feet, whichever is less.
iv. Where off-street parking is visible from a street, it should be screened in
accordance with the standards set forth in Section 13.02.C.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
146
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
c. Parking Structures. Parking structures shall be located behind buildings in
locations that minimize visibility from public streets. Parking structures may be
located along public street frontages, subject to the following standards:
i. Building height and placement requirements for principal building shall be
met.
ii. A lining of retail, office, or residential use with a useable depth of no less
than twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
iii. At least fifty (50) percent of the upper floors facing a public street shall
consist of exposed openings. The openings shall be designed with one or
more treatments:
(a) Planter boxes with living plants.
(b) A rail or fence to give the appearance of a balcony.
(c) Framing and mullions to give the appearance of large windows.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
147
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
148
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Map 5.05.1: Maple Road District Regulating Plan
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
149
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 5.05.C-1
Use Groups Permitted
Use Group
(Table 5.03-1)
Site Type MR:A Site Type MR:B
Street Type MR:A
Maple Road and
Arterials
Street Type MR:B
Local and Connectors
Street Type MR:A
Maple Road and
Arterials
Street Type MR:B
Local and Connectors
1
Residential NP NP NP NP
2*
Residential/Lodging P P P P
3
Office/Institution P P P P
4
Auto/Transportation S S S S
5
Retail/Entertainment/
Service
P P P P
6
Misc. Commercial S S S S
7
Industrial S S S S
P - Permitted Use Groups
S - Special Use Approval Groups
NP - Prohibited Use Groups
* Lodging uses are permitted subject to Special Use Approval
Table 5.05.C-2
Building Forms Permitted
Building Forms
Site Type MR:A Site Type MR:B
Street Type MR:A
Maple Road and
Arterials
Street Type MR:B
Local and Connectors
Street Type MR:A
Maple Road and
Arterials
Street Type MR:B
Local and Connectors
A: Small, single-purpose,
out buildings P (1) P (1) P P
B: Small, multi-tenant
commercial with mixed
use
P P P P
C: Attached residential
or live/work S P S P
D: Multi-story mixed use,
medium density P P P P
E: Large format commercial
P S P S
F: Large format mixeduse
P P P P
(1) Permitted only when located in an outlot of a Building Form D, E, or F project in a separate parcel, or within a
designated outlot that remains part of the primary parcel.
P - Permitted Building Form
S - Special Approval Building Form
NP - Prohibited Building Form
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
150
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 5.06 NEIGHBORHOOD NODES DISTRICT
A. Intent. The Neighborhood Nodes (NN) District is derived from the 2008 City of Troy
Master Plan, which specifically identifies 21 specific intersections that play a critical
role in the daily function, image, quality of life, and continued viability of the City.
These nodes vary widely in character, but share common characteristics.
Neighborhood Nodes are meant to serve as the core of the economic
neighborhoods of Troy identified in the Master Plan. Economic neighborhoods are
destinations created as go to places that take on a social role, serving both as a
place to meet basic needs of the community and as 21st century village centers,
which can include integrated residential development.
The Neighborhood Nodes should draw people, and should be visually distinguished
from the surrounding area because of their greater intensity, density and design.
Design techniques such as the variation of building height shall be encouraged
by these regulations to help separate the Node from the surrounding area. Such
variations, however, will respect the adjacent neighborhoods and will not be so
extreme as to visually overpower transitional or residential areas.
The success of the Neighborhood Nodes will play a critical role in the protection
and cultivation of a high quality of life in Troy.
B. Regulating Plan.
1. The regulating plan, as set forth in Figure 5.06.1, identifies allowable uses and
permissible development within the District based on location.
2. The regulating plan is based on two (2) factors: Site Type and Street Type. Site
Types, as described in Section 5.06.B.3, are determined by lot size, location, and
relationship to neighboring sites. Street Types, as set forth in Section 5.06.B.4,
recognize that street patterns within the City of Troy are established. Streets
range from primary corridors which carry a large volume of traffic to local streets
which convey lower volumes of neighborhood traffic.
3. Site Types. The regulating plan includes two (2) different site types, described as
follows:
a. Site Type NN:A (high intensity, predominantly commercial, regionally visible)
 These sites are predominantly located directly on major arterial roads, have
larger acreage than their Site Type NN:B counterparts, and have established
driveways, cross access, and larger square footage existing buildings with
commercial uses. The NN:A category is meant to accommodate the most
ambitious redevelopment within the Nodes, as they typically have the prime
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
151
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
location and the size to allow for the most creative solutions for mixed use and
node-specific development as outlined in the Master Plan.
While the established and intended character of each Node is distinct, the
NN:A sites remain more similar to one another than do the NN:B sites, which
are far more diverse in terms of use, acreage, and existing buildings. While
the NN:B sites are intended primarily to provide a transition between the Node
and the adjacent residential areas, the NN:A sites are intended to house
the destination retail, service, and employment uses that are central to the
economic neighborhoods outlined by the Master Plan. These NN:A sites may
also often incorporate higher-density residential development on upper floors
when possible, to incubate a compact, walkable environment at the Node
and to diversity the Citys housing base.
b. Site Type NN:B (transitional smaller scale, employment based, mixed use)
 Site Type NN:B consolidates the smaller, diverse sites at and around
Nodes throughout the City. They are located both in support of NN:A
sites as transitional areas between more intense Nodes and the adjacent
neighborhoods, and on their own, covering an entire Node, for those Nodes
identified in the Master Plan as less intense, smaller scale Nodes with a direct
connection to a residential area.
While not always present between NN:A sites and residential neighborhoods,
when possible or preferable based on the parcel arrangement and existing
circumstances, the NN:B category allows the Node to develop in a tiered
manner, with more intense developments and uses permitted within the core
of the Node, and less intense projects providing a buffer for the residential
area.
NN:B sites may contain a variety of uses, including residential at grade, in
a higher-density arrangement, but may also include small scale retail and
service or office uses. A strong focus on transitional landscaping and a suitable
connection to the neighboring residential areas is of critical concern for the
NN:B sites, as they will often serve as the primary zone through which residents
in a social neighborhood, as identified in the Master Plan, engage the Node,
which serves as the core of the economic neighborhood.
4. Street Types. The regulating plan includes two (2) different Street Types, described
as follows:
a. Street Type NN:A (Arterials)  Category NN:A is meant for the main northsouth
and east-west roads that intersect at each of the twenty-one (21)
neighborhood nodes. These roads are characterized by high traffic volumes
and few individual residential curb cuts. They accommodate the majority of
the regional traffic through Troy, connect Troy with its adjacent communities,
and serve as the primary framework for circulating throughout the City.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
152
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
The intersections of these arterial roads present opportunities to cultivate
highly visible, highly used areas that connect the various elements of the
City, and bridge the gap between the residential portions of Troy with the
major corridors, commercial areas, employment centers, and adjacent
communities of Troy.
These roads will evolve over time to form complete streets which
continue to accommodate regional traffic, but also cater to the emerging
neighborhood nodes at their intersections. These roads and intersections
will have well-defined crosswalks, and will make use of a series of features
intended to protect pedestrians by establishing equity between pedestrians
and motorists through effective design. Raised walks of high-quality
materials, signage, landscaping, and pedestrian respite islands are several
options that may be found within Category NN:A.
Arterial Roads will also be characterized by strong landscaping designed
to mitigate the negative impacts of high traffic volumes from adjacent
residential areas which provide a unique and memorable visual character for
the roadway.
b. Street Type NN:B (Local/Collector)  Category NN:B roads are those roads
tying together smaller areas and connecting various parts of individual
developments within the Nodes. Either as public or private streets, NN:B
streets will have a more varied and localized character than larger roads,
depending on their context within predominantly office, retail, or residential
areas.
They act as the connection between the Node and adjacent
neighborhoods. Very few examples of streets identified as NN:B streets exist
in Troy, but they can also be developed as part of a larger project in the NN
District, which may require new streets to be created to adequately and
successfully implement the project. It is likely that any new road in the NN
District will be a Category NN:B road.
Category NN:B roads will be very welcoming of non-motorized users and will
have defined pedestrian rest areas and other amenities whenever possible.
Their scale will be similar to that of a main road within a conventional
subdivision or industrial park, and their width will be determined primarily
on their purpose. A Category NN:B road within an industrial area may be
required to be wider than one in a residential area, although their purpose is
similar.
Category NN:B roads will have a much higher frequency of curb cuts than
Category NN:A roads, and will often provide direct rear or side yard access
to retail centers, office complexes, or high density residential projects.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
153
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Sufficient width should be retained on either side of the roadway whenever
possible to allow for on-street parking to ensure that a variety of local parking
options exist to directly serve the Nodes without requiring significant surface lots
on private property.
C. Authorized Use Groups. Authorized use groups, as set forth in Section 5.03.A and in
Table 5.06.C-1, are applied to the site types and street types in Neighborhood Nodes
District in Table 5.06.C-1.
D. Authorized Building Forms. Authorized building forms, as set forth in Section 5.03.B
and Table 5.06.C-2, is applied to the site types and street types in the Neighborhood
Nodes District in Table 5.06.C-2.
E. Design Standards. In addition to standards set forth in this Ordinance, all proposed
development shall comply with the standards set forth herein.
1. Building Orientation and Entrance.
a. Primary Entrance. The primary building entrance shall be clearly identifiable
and useable and located in the front faade parallel to the street.
b. Recessed Doorways. Where the building entrance is located on or within five
(5) feet of a lot line, doorways shall be recessed into the face of the building
to provide a sense of entrance and to add variety to the streetscape. The
entrance recess shall not be less than the width of the door(s) when opened
outward.
c. Residential Dwellings. Entrances for all residential dwellings shall be clearly
defined by at least one (1) of the following:
i. Projecting or recessed entrance. A recessed entrance is required if the
building entrance is located on or within five (5) feet of the lot line.
ii. Stoop or enclosed or covered porch.
iii. Transom and/or side light window panels framing the door opening.
iv. Architectural trim or unique color treatments framing the door opening.
2. Ground Story Activation.
a. Transparency.
i. The first floors of all buildings shall be designed to encourage and
complement pedestrian-scale activity and crime prevention techniques.
It is intended that this be accomplished principally by the use of windows
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
154
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
and doors arranged so that active uses within the building are visible from
or accessible to the street, and parking areas are visible to occupants of
the building. The first floor of any front faade facing a right-of-way shall
be no less than fifty (50) percent windows and doors, and the minimum
transparency for facades facing a side street, side yard, or parking area
shall be no less than 30 percent of the faade. The Planning Commission
may waive this requirement for projects requiring site plan approval when
an existing building with unique or historic attributes that help define the
character of the node, as determined by the Planning Commission, is
being reused.
ii. The minimum transparency requirement shall apply to all sides of a
building that abut an open space, including a side yard, or public rightof-
way. Transparency requirements shall not apply to sides which abut an
alley.
iii. Windows for building sides shall be concentrated toward the front edge of
the building, in locations most visible from an urban open space or public
right-of-way.
b. Transparency Alternatives. The following alternatives may be used singularly
or in combination. If used in combination, they may count toward no more
than eighty (80) percent of the transparency requirement set forth in Section
5.04 E-4. The wall design alternative may count toward one hundred (100)
percent of the side street transparency requirement, provided the entirety of
the length and height of the wall is considered.
i. Wall Design. Wall designs that provide visual interest and pedestrian scale
may count toward no more than fifty (50) percent of primary street and
fifty (50) percent of side street transparency requirements. Wall designs
must provide a minimum of three (3) of the following elements, occurring
at intervals no greater than twenty-five (25) feet horizontally and ten (10)
feet vertically:
(a) Expression of structural system and infill panels through change in plane
not less than three (3) inches.
(b) System of horizontal and vertical scaling elements such as: belt course,
string courses, cornice, pilasters.
(c) System of horizontal and vertical reveals not less than one (1) inch in
width/depth.
(d) Variations in material module, pattern, and/or color.
(e) System of integrated architectural ornamentation.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
155
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
(f) Green screen or planter walls.
(g) Translucent, fritted, patterned, or colored glazing.
ii. Outdoor Dining/Seating. Outdoor dining/seating located between the
building and the primary street zone lot line may count toward no more
than sixty (60) percent of the transparency requirement. Outdoor dining/
seating located between the building and side street zone lot line may
count toward no more than eighty (80) percent of the transparency
requirement.
iii. Permanent Art. Non-commercial art or graphic design of sufficient scale
and orientation to be perceived from the public right-of-way and rendered
in materials or media appropriate to an exterior, urban environment and
permanently integrated into the building wall may count toward no more
than forty (40) percent of the transparency requirement.
3. Transitional Features.
a. Transitional features are architectural elements, site features, or alterations to
building massing that are used to provide a transition between higher intensity
uses and low- or moderate-density residential areas. These features assist in
mitigating potential conflicts between those uses. Transitional features are
intended to be used in combination with landscape buffers or large setbacks.
b. Intensity. A continuum of use intensity, where moderate intensity uses are sited
between high-intensity uses and low-intensity uses, shall be developed for
multi-building developments. An example would be an office use between
commercial and residential uses.
c. Height and Mass. Building height and mass in the form of building step-backs,
recess lines or other techniques shall be graduated so that structures with
higher intensity uses are comparable in scale with adjacent structures of lowerintensity
uses.
d. Orientation. Primary building facades shall be placed away from the
residential use.
e. Architectural Features. Similarly sized and patterned architectural features
such as windows, doors, arcades, pilasters, cornices, wall offsets, building
materials, and other building articulations included on the lower-intensity use
shall be incorporated in the transitional features.
4. Site Access, Parking, and Loading.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
156
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. Required Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for a principal use,
erected, altered, or expanded after the effective date of this Ordinance in
accordance with the standards set forth in Article 13, Site Design Standards.
The form-based districts are intended to encourage pedestrian- and transitfriendly
design and compact mixed-use developments. Applicants are
encouraged to consider the provisions for shared parking set forth in Section
13.06.E, and flexibility in application set forth in Section 13.06.F.
b. Location.
i. When parking is located in a side yard (behind the front building line) but
fronts on the required building line, no more than fifty (50) percent of the
total sites linear feet along the required building line or one hundred (100)
feet, whichever is less, shall be occupied by parking.
ii. For a corner lot, shall be no more than fifty (50) percent of the sites
cumulative linear feet along the required building lines or one hundred
(100) feet, whichever is less, shall be occupied by parking. The building
shall be located in the corner of the lot adjacent to the intersection.
iii. For a double frontage lot or a lot that has frontage on three (3) streets, the
cumulative total of all frontages occupied by parking shall be no more
than sixty-five (65) percent of the total sites linear feet along a required
building line or one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet, whichever is less.
iv. Where off-street parking is visible from a street, it should be screened in
accordance with the standards set forth in Section 13.02.C.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
157
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
158
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Map 5.06.1: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan
Legend Node A
Node B Node C
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
159
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Map 5.06.1: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan (Continued)
Node D Node E
Node F Node G
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
160
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Map 5.06.1: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan (Continued)
Legend Node H
Node I Node J
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
161
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Map 5.06.1: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan (Continued)
Node K Node L
Node M Node N
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
162
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Map 5.06.1: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan (Continued)
Legend Node O
Node P Node Q
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
163
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Map 5.06.1: Neighborhood Node District Regulating Plan (Continued)
Node R Node S
Node T Node U
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
164
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 5
Form-Based Districts
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 5.06.C-1
Use Groups Permitted
Use Group
(Table 5.03-1)
Site Type NN:A Site Type NN:B
Street Type NN:A
Arterials
Street Type NN:B
Local and Connectors
Street Type NN:A
Arterials
Street Type NN:B
Local and Connectors
1
Residential NP NP NP NP
2*
Residential/Lodging P1 P1 P P
3
Office/Institution P P P P
4
Auto/Transportation S S NP NP
5
Retail/Entertainment/
Service
P P P P
6
Misc. Commercial S S NP NP
7
Industrial NP NP NP NP
1 Permitted on upper floors only.
P - Permitted Use Groups
S - Special Use Approval Groups
NP - Prohibited Use Groups
* Lodging uses are permitted subject to Special Use Approval
Table 5.06.C-2
Building Forms Permitted
Building Forms
Site Type NN:A Site Type NN:B
Street Type NN:A
Arterials
Street Type NN:B
Local and Connectors
Street Type NN:A
Arterials
Street Type NN:B
Local and Connectors
A: Small, single-purpose,
out buildings P P P P
B: Small, multi-tenant
commercial with mixed
use
P P P P
C: Attached residential
or live/work S S P P
D: Multi-story mixed use,
medium density P P S S
E: Large format commercial
P S NP NP
F: Large format mixeduse
P S NP NP
P - Permitted Building Form
S - Special Approval Building Form
NP - Prohibited Building Form
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
165
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 6
SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
SECTION 6.01 INTENT
The intent of this Article is to provide standards for specific uses, whether regulated as
a permitted or special land use.
SECTION 6.02 ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITIES
A. Adult foster care family homes serving six (6) persons or less. A state-licensed adult
foster care home, foster family home, or foster family group home serving six (6)
persons or less shall be considered a residential use of property and a permitted use
in all residential districts.
B. Adult foster care small group homes serving between seven (7) and twelve (12)
persons.
1. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article 8 shall be required to be
submitted.
2. The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the zoning
district in which it is located, provided there is a minimum site area of four
thousand (4,000) square feet per adult, excluding employees and/or caregivers.
3. The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the character of
the neighborhood.
4. One (1) off-street parking space per employee and/or caregiver shall be
provided.
5. Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained.
C. Adult foster care large group homes serving between thirteen (13) and twenty (20)
persons.
1. Frontage on either a major or minor arterial street shall be required.
2. A separate drop-off and pickup area shall be required adjacent to the main
building entrance, located off of a public street and the parking access lane,
and shall be of sufficient size so as to not create congestion on the site or within
a public roadway.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
166
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article 8 shall be required to be
submitted.
4. The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the zoning
district in which it is located, provided there is a minimum site area of four
thousand (4,000) square feet per adult, excluding employees and/or caregivers.
5. The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the character of
the neighborhood.
6. One (1) off-street parking space per employee and/or caregiver shall be
provided.
7. Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained.
D. Adult foster care congregate facilities serving more than twenty (20) persons. (See
Section 6.25)
SECTION 6.03 CONVALESCENT CENTER
A. All such facilities shall be developed on sites having a minimum area of one (1)
acre, or two thousand (2,000) square feet of site area for each one (1) bed in the
facility, or for each person cared for in the facility, whichever is greater. Within this
area, a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of contiguous open space shall
be provided, apart from areas required for vehicular uses, for each bed or for each
person cared for within the capacity of the building.
B. The proposed site shall have at least one (1) property line abutting a major arterial
of at least one hundred and twenty (120) feet of right-of-way width. All vehicular
ingress and egress shall be directly from a major thoroughfare.
C. All yards shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet in width shall be kept free of parking
and shall be landscaped.
D. Delivery loading and service areas and parking areas shall be screened from view
of residentially zoned or used property in accordance with the standards set forth in
Section 13.02.B.
E. Such facilities shall be so designed architecturally as to reflect the predominant
architectural character of adjacent residential areas. The maximum length of an
uninterrupted building faade facing public streets, residentially zoned or used
property, and/or parks shall be thirty (30) feet. Faade articulation or architectural
design variations for building walls facing the street are required to ensure that the
building is not monotonous in appearance. Building wall offsets (projections and
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
167
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
recesses); cornices, varying building materials or pilasters shall be used to break up
the mass of a single building.
F. Such facilities may include multi-purpose recreational rooms, kitchens, and meeting
rooms. Such facilities may also include medical examination rooms and limited
space for ancillary services for the residents of the facility, such as barber and beauty
facilities.
SECTION 6.04 ADULT USE BUSINESSES
A. The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate adult use businesses, to promote
the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location
and concentration of adult use businesses within the City, thereby reducing or
eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such adult use businesses. The
provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny
access by adults to adult materials protected by the Constitution of the United States
or the Michigan Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
adult entertainment or adult use businesses to their intended market. It is also not the
intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following additional definitions
shall apply:
1. ADULT USE BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty or retail
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude modeling studio and/or a sexual encounter
establishments and any business determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
an adult use, due to the activities of the business which involve characteristics of
adult uses, such as nudity, semi-nudity, exposure of specified anatomical areas
and/or specified sexual activities. The definition of adult use business shall not
include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist
or similar professional person licensed by the State engages in medically
approved and recognized sexual therapy.
2. ADULT ARCADE: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, compact discs or similar
machines, or other image producing machines, (whether coin-operated, slugoperated
or electronically, electrically, internet or mechanically controlled), for
viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
168
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
3. ADULT BOOK STORE, ADULT NOVELTY OR RETAIL STORE, OR ADULT VIDEO STORE:
a. An establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers any
one or more of the following for sale, rental, or viewing at the site, for any
form of consideration:
i. Books, computer diskettes, tapes or hard drives, magazines, periodicals
or other printed material, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video
reproduction, slides or other visual representations which depict or
describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
and/or
ii. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities; and/or
iii. Items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia depicting, displaying,
advertising or packaged as specified sexual activities or depicting or
describing specified anatomical areas.
b. For purposes of this section, principal business purpose means:
i. The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or
interior floor space; or
ii. The receipt of a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from; or
iii. The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its advertising
expenditures to the promotion of the sale, rental or viewing, of books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, film,
motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual
representations, items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia which
are characterized by the depiction, description display, advertising
or packaging of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
c. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,
and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty or retail store
or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt
such establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store, so long as the establishment falls within the
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
169
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
definition of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store as set
forth above.
4. ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, club, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which features one or more of the following:
a. Person(s) who appears nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
b. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities;
c. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
5. ADULT MOTEL: A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:
a. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which
advertises the availability of this adult type of material by means of a
sign, visible from the public right of way, or by means of any off-premises
advertising, including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio or television; and/or
b. Permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing sexually explicit
activities or displaying specified anatomical areas, including transmission
over the World Wide Web; and/or
c. Offers a sleeping room for rent for intervals of time less than ten (10) hours;
and/or
d. Allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent a sleeping room for intervals of less
than ten (10) hours.
6. ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides of specified sexual
activities or depictions or descriptions of specified anatomical areas are
regularly shown for any form of consideration.
7. ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form or consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
170
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
This definition does not include a theater which features occasional live nude
performances with serious literary, artistic, or political value and that have no
adverse secondary effects.
8. EMPLOYEE: A person who works or performs in and/or for an adult use business,
regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business.
9. ENTERTAINER: A person who performs some type of activity or pose with the
intent of allowing others to witness that activity or pose.
10. ENTERTAINMENT: A performance of some type of activity, including but not
limited to singing, dancing, acting, mime, comedy, recitations, demonstrations,
magic tricks, modeling, posing, exhibition, with or without inanimate objects
or animals, with the intent of allowing others to witness that activity in live or
reproduced format.
11. ESCORT: A person who, for consideration in any form, agrees or offers to act as
a companion, guide, or date for another person, (or who agrees to privately
perform as an entertainer), including but not limited to the modeling of lingerie,
the removal of clothing, and the performance of a dance or skit. Under this
definition, privately shall mean a performance for an individual and that
individuals guests.
12. ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business that furnishes, offers to furnish or
advertises the furnishing of escorts as one (1) of its primary business purposes, for
a fee, tip or any other form of consideration.
13. ESTABLISHMENT: In regard to an adult use business, means and includes any of
the following:
a. The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
b. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult use business,
to any adult use business;
c. The addition of any adult use business activities to any other existing adult use
business; or
d. The relocation of an adult use business.
14. LICENSEE: The individual listed as an applicant on the application for an adult
use business license, or a person in whose name a license to operate an adult
use business has been issued.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
171
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
15. MANAGER: An operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by an adult
use business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees, or is otherwise
responsible for the operation of the adult use business.
16. NUDE MODELING STUDIO: Any place where a person appears in a state of
nudity or displays specified anatomical areas, and is provided money or any
form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. This includes modeling
studios that provide for nude modeling on an occasional basis, but it does not
include modeling studio whose primary function is to provide art classes as part of
a college, university or educational institution and which is certified by the State of
Michigan.
17. NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY:
a. The exposure of human male or female genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or
the areola or nipple of the female breast; and/or
b. A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover human male or female
genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or the areola or nipple of the female
breast.
18. PEEP BOOTH: An adult motion picture theater with a viewing room or cubical of
less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space.
19. PREMISES OR LICENSED PREMISES: Any premise that requires an adult use license
and that is classified as an adult use business.
20. SEMI-NUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals,
pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body
covered by supporting straps or devices.
21. SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT: A business or commercial establishment
that as one of its primary business purposes, offers a place where two (2) or more
persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified
sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas or any activities
when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity and/or
permits patrons to display or be filmed or photographed performing sexually
explicit activities or displaying specified anatomical areas for recording
or transmission over the World Wide Web or any other media, for any form
of consideration. A hotel/motel will not be classified as a sexual encounter
establishment, by virtue of the fact that it offers private rooms for rent.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
172
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
22. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; and/or
b. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
23. SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTS: Sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, criminal
sexual conduct, rape, crimes classified as sexual crimes by the State of Michigan
or any other state, or crimes connected with another adult use business,
including but not limited to the distribution of obscenity, prostitution and/or
pandering.
24. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
a. The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts: and/or
b. Sex acts, actual or simulated, including but not limited to intercourse, oral
copulation or sodomy; and/or
c. Masturbation, actual or simulated; and/or
d. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; and/
or
e. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition.
25. TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF AN ADULT USE BUSINESS:
a. The sale, lease or sublease of the business; and/or
b. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business,
whether by sale, exchange or similar means; and/or
c. The establishment of a trust, management arrangement, gift or other similar
legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person
possessing the ownership or control.
C. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an adult use business in any
location in the City, except as provided for in this section.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
173
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an adult use business within
five hundred (500) feet (measured from the nearest lot line to the nearest lot line on a
straight-line basis) of any of the following:
1. A place of worship.
2. A school or childcare facility.
3. A public park (not including public trails).
4. Any residential zoning district or any parcel used for residential purposes.
E. It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the operation of an adult use business within
one thousand (1,000) feet of another adult use business. The distance between any
such businesses shall be measured from the nearest lot line to the nearest lot line on a
straight-line basis.
F. It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the operation or maintenance of more than
one (1) adult use business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof.
G. All off-street parking areas and entry door areas of adult use businesses shall be
illuminated from dusk until the closing time of the business with a lighting system
which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one (1) foot-candle
of light on all parking surfaces and/or walkways. This requirement level is to help
ensure the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence
of vandalism and other criminal conduct.
H. The premises of all adult use businesses, except adult motion picture theaters, shall
be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place where patrons are permitted, at an illumination level of not less than two (2)
foot-candles of light as measured at the floor level.
I. Adult motion picture theaters shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place where patrons are permitted at an
illumination level of not less than one (1) foot-candle of light as measured at the floor
level.
J. No person shall conduct an adult use business without first having obtained an
annual adult use business license from the City.
K. No person(s) shall reside on or permit any other persons to reside on the premises of
an adult use business.
L. All adult use businesses shall be subject to the same requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
174
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
M. An adult use business lawfully operating is not rendered a nonconforming use by
the subsequent location of a place of worship, school, childcare facility, public
park, residential district, or a residential lot within five hundred (500) feet of the adult
use business. However, if the adult use business ceases operation for a period of
one hundred and eighty (180) days or more, regardless of any intent to resume
operation, it may not recommence operation in that location unless it achieves
conformity with the City of Troy Ordinances.
SECTION 6.05 AGRICULTURE
Agriculture is permitted on a single parcel of land separately owned and outside the
boundaries of either a proprietary or supervisors plat, which has area of at least five
(5) acres. Compliance with the health and sanitation provisions of the Code of the
City of Troy and the Generally Accepted Agricultural and Management Practices
(GAAMPS) as established by the Michigan Commission of Agriculture in accordance
with the Michigan Right to Farm Act, MCL 286.471 et seq., is required for all agricultural
uses.
SECTION 6.06 BED AND BREAKFAST
A. A Bed and Breakfast establishment shall meet the requirements of the City of Troy
Rental Property Code and shall be subject to periodic inspections as provided in
said code.
B. A Bed and Breakfast establishment shall be located with frontage on a major
arterial.
C. The proprietor shall reside at the Bed and Breakfast establishment.
D. Guest stays shall not exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days nor more than thirty
(30) days in one (1) year.
E. The rooms utilized for sleeping shall be a part of the primary residential use and not
specifically constructed for rental purposes. Provided, however, that accessory
dwellings in existence as of the effective date of this section, and located on
the same parcel as a Bed and Breakfast may be utilized for sleeping rooms, in
accordance with this Section.
F. The rental sleeping rooms shall have a minimum area of one hundred (100) square
feet for one (1) or two (2) occupants with an additional thirty (30) square feet for
each occupant to a maximum of four (4) occupants per room.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
175
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
G. No separate cooking facilities shall be allowed in guestrooms. Food and beverages
maybe be served only to guests who stay on the premises.
H. Lavatories and bathing facilities shall be provided for guests at the Bed and Breakfast
operation at a ratio of not less than one (1) bathroom per two (2) guest bedrooms.
SECTION 6.07 CEMETERY
A. All cemeteries which lawfully occupy land prior to the adoption of this Ordinance
shall be considered a permitted use.
B. Any cemetery established after the adoption of this Ordinance shall be subject to
the following standards:
1. Landscape screening meeting the standards set forth in Section 13.02.B. shall be
provided where a cemetery abuts a residentially zoned or used parcel.
2. The use shall be so arranged that adequate assembly area is provided offstreet
for vehicles to be used in a funeral procession. This assembly area shall be
provided in addition to any required off-street parking area.
3. Points of ingress and egress for the site shall be designed so as to minimize
possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent major thoroughfares and funeral
processions or visitors entering or leaving the site.
4. No building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from a property line that
abuts any residentially used or zoned property.
SECTION 6.08 CONTRACTORS YARD / OUTDOOR STORAGE FACILITIES
A. The contractors office building shall be of permanent construction.
B. Outdoor storage shall be accessory to the contractors principal office use of the
property. Such outdoor storage shall not be located within the front yard and shall
be enclosed by an opaque fence up to eight (8) feet in height and/or landscape
screening meeting the standards set forth in Section 13.02.B.
C. All travel surfaces shall be paved as a condition of approval.
D. Cranes, booms or other extensions on equipment, trucks or other vehicles parked on
site shall be stored in the lowest possible configuration.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
176
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 6.09 DAY CARE FACILITIES
A. Family Day Care Home. A state-licensed family day care home shall be considered
a residential use of property and a permitted use in all residential districts. Family
day care homes shall be prohibited in all other districts.
B. Day Care Centers.
1. Frontage on either a major or minor arterial street shall be required.
2. A separate drop-off and pickup area shall be required adjacent to the main
building entrance, located off of a public street and the parking access lane,
and shall be of sufficient size so as to not create congestion on the site or within
a public roadway.
3. There shall be an outdoor play area of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet
provided on the premises. Said play area shall not be located within the front
setback. This requirement may be waived if a public play area is available five
hundred (500) feet from the subject parcel.
4. Appropriate licenses with the State shall be maintained.
SECTION 6.10 DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES
A. Ingress and egress to drive-through facilities shall be part of the internal circulation
of the site and integrated with the overall site design. Clear identification and
delineation between the drive-through facility and the parking lot shall be
provided. Drive-through facilities shall be designed in a manner which promotes
pedestrian and vehicular safety.
B. Single-lane drive-throughs may be located at the side of a building. Multiple-lane
drive-throughs shall be located in a manner that will be the least visible from a
public thoroughfare. Canopy design shall be compatible with the design of the
principal building and incorporate similar materials and architectural elements.
C. Each drive-through facility shall provide stacking space meeting the following
standards:
1. Each stacking lane shall be one-way, and each stacking lane space shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length.
2. If proposed, an escape lane shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width to
allow other vehicles to pass those waiting to be served.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
177
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. The number of stacking spaces per service lane shall be provided for the uses
listed below. When a use is not specifically mentioned, the requirements for
off-street stacking space for the use with similar needs, as determined at the
discretion of the Zoning Administration, shall apply.
Table 6.10
Use Stacking Spaces per
Service Lane
Banks, Pharmacy, Photo Service, and Dry Cleaning 4
Restaurants with Drive-Through 10
Auto Washes (Self-Service)
Entry 2
Exit 1
Auto Washes (Automatic)
Entry 8
Exit 2
SECTION 6.11 GOLF COURSE
A. Golf courses may also include accessory uses such as, but not limited to, clubhouses,
restaurants, driving ranges, pro shops, and maintenance buildings.
B. The design and layout of a golf course shall be configured to prevent stray golf shots
from traveling off the site and onto rights-of-way, neighboring properties or lands
within the golf course development designed for uses other than the playing of golf.
C. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with the standards set forth in Section
13.06 of this Ordinance to provide for adequate parking for golfers as well as for
banquets, weddings, golf tournaments, conferences, and other activities.
D. Any accessory uses and buildings associated with the Golf Course, and any buildings
on the site shall conform to setback and dimensional requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
E. All storage, service, and maintenance areas shall be screened from view of
residentially zoned or used property in accordance with the standards set forth in
Section 13.02.B.
SECTION 6.12 HOSPITAL
A. The proposed site shall have at least one (1) property line abutting a major arterial
of at least one hundred and twenty (120) feet of right-of-way width. All vehicular
ingress and egress shall be directly from a major thoroughfare.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
178
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
B. The minimum distance of any main or accessory building or structure from any
boundary property line or street shall be two hundred (200) feet. A minimum depth
of one hundred (100) feet of such required yards, adjacent to property lines, shall
be kept free of off-street parking.
C. Ambulance and delivery areas shall be screened from view of adjacent
residentially zoned or used property, in accordance with the standards set forth in
Section 13.02.B.
D. Accessory buildings and uses, may be permitted, provided the total floor area of
such uses does not exceed that of the main hospital complex.
Off-street parking shall be provided for such uses in accordance with the
requirements of Section 13.06. Such parking shall be in addition to that required for
the main hospital complex.
E. Any hazardous materials proposed to be stored, used or handled on site shall be
disclosed by the applicant to the City during the development review process,
and all such storage, use, and handling shall be conducted in accordance with
the standards set forth in Section 12.06.C and any applicable State or federal
requirements.
SECTION 6.13 COMMERCIAL KENNELS/ANIMAL DAY CARE
A. Animal wastes, biohazard materials or byproducts shall be disposed of as required
by the Oakland County Health Department, the Michigan Department of Public
Health, or other duly appointed authority. All other wastes shall be contained in
leak-proof and odor proof containers. No animal wastes, biohazard materials
or byproducts shall be buried or incinerated on-site, or allowed to enter to
groundwater.
B. Buildings where animals are kept, dog runs, and exercise areas shall not be located
nearer than one hundred (100) feet to any adjacent occupied dwelling.
C. Dog runs and exercise areas shall not be located in any front yard and shall be
screened with an opaque fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height.
D. All principal use activities, other than outdoor dog runs or exercise areas, shall be
conducted within a totally enclosed building.
E. All operations and the housing of animals are contained in one (1) or more
completely enclosed buildings.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
179
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 6.14 LARGE-SCALE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT
A. Building Design and Materials.
1. Faades and exterior walls. The maximum length of an uninterrupted building
faade facing public streets, residentially zoned or used property, and/or parks
shall be thirty (30) feet. Faade articulation or architectural design variations
for building walls facing the street are required to ensure that the building is not
monotonous in appearance. Building wall offsets (projections and recesses);
cornices, varying building materials or pilasters shall be used to break up the mass
of a single building.
2. Roofs. Roofs shall exhibit one (1) or more of the following features depending
upon the nature of the roof and building design:
a. Flat roof. Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment or screening
surrounding rooftop equipment such as HVAC units from public view are
required. Parapets shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the height of the
supporting wall at any point.
b. Pitched roof.
(1) Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three (3) feet past the
supporting walls;
(2) An average slope greater than or equal to one (1) foot of vertical rise for
every three (3) feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to one (1) foot
of vertical rise for every one (1) foot of horizontal run;
(3) Three (3) or more roof slope planes.
B. Site Design.
1. Parking Lot Location. No more than fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking
area devoted to the large-scale retail establishment shall be located within
the front yard and between the front faade of the principal building and the
abutting streets.
2. Primary Entrance. The primary building entrance shall be clearly identifiable and
useable and located facing the right-of-way.
3. Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear, obvious,
publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon which the
building fronts and the building. The pedestrian connection shall comply with the
following:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
180
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. Fully paved and maintained surface not less than five (5) feet in width.
b. Unit pavers or concrete distinct from the surrounding parking and drive lane
surface.
c. Located either within a raised median or between wheel stops to protect
pedestrians from vehicle overhangs where parking is adjacent.
4. Additional Entrances. In addition to the primary faade facing front faade
and/or the right-of-way, if a parking area is located in the rear or side yard, it
must also have a direct pedestrian access to the parking area that is of a level
of materials, quality, and design emphasis that is at least equal to that of the
primary entrance.
5. Delivery/Loading Operations. Loading docks, trash collection, outdoor storage
and similar facilities and functions shall be incorporated into the overall design
of the building and the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of
these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent properties
and public streets. Use of screening materials that are different from or inferior
to the principal materials of the building and landscape is prohibited.
SECTION 6.15 LIVE/WORK UNITS
A. Space devoted to nonresidential uses shall be accessible from the dwelling area.
B. Only residents of the dwelling shall use the nonresidential space for purposes of
employment.
C. The floor area of the dwelling unit shall be at least five hundred (500) square feet in
area.
SECTION 6.16 LODGING FACILITIES / EXTENDED STAY FACILITIES
Lodging / Extended Stay Facilities that includes a restaurant, bar/lounge, auditorium,
exhibition, or public meeting space shall provide parking to accommodate all uses on
the site, in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 13.06.
SECTION 6.17 MATERIALS RECOVERY FACILITY
A. All recyclable materials shall at all times be stored within a completely enclosed
building.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
181
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
B. The proposed use must be of such location, size, and character that it will be in
harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the surrounding area.
C. The location and size of the proposed use or uses, the nature and intensity of the
principal use and all accessory uses, the site layout and its relation to streets giving
access to it shall be such that traffic to and from the use and uses, and the assembly
of persons in connection therewith, will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the area
nor unduly conflict with the normal traffic of the area. Vehicles loading or unloading
shall be contained within the property. All driveways and parking areas on the site
shall be hard-surfaced to City specifications.
D. The location, size, intensity, site layout, and periods of operation of any such
proposed use must be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate
therefrom which might be noxious to the occupants of any other nearby permitted
uses, whether by reason of dust, noise, fumes, vibration, smoke, or lights, or the
presence of toxic materials.
E. The following activities shall be prohibited, except as noted:
1. Incineration or open burning in any building or on the site.
2. Overnight storage of any refuse material, other than recyclable materials, in any
building.
3. Dumping or storage of material on the site outside the buildings at any time.
F. All recyclable materials temporarily stored outside the buildings must be in transport
vehicles or transportable containers.
SECTION 6.18 OPEN AIR BUSINESS
A. No outdoor storage, display, and/or sales shall be permitted in any required yard.
B. The use of amplifiers, banners, and other attention gathering devices shall be
prohibited.
C. The open air business area shall be paved.
SECTION 6.19 OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION
A. Such facilities that include paint-ball, archery, and/or shooting ranges shall employ
effective physical barriers and isolation distances to assure that no projectile shall
carry, or be perceptible, beyond the property limit.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
182
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
B. The Planning Commission may require that any or all of the property of a club
facility be fenced to contain any debris or materials used or discarded on site and/
or to prevent unauthorized access to the grounds.
C. Loud speakers broadcasting voice or music outside of a building shall not be
permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any residentially zoned property.
SECTION 6.20 PARKING STRUCTURE
A. Parking structures should be located behind buildings in locations that minimize
visibility from public streets.
B. When parking structures are located along public street frontages, they are subject
to the following standards:
1. Building height and placement requirements for principal building shall be met.
2. A lining of retail, office, or residential use on the first floor with a useable depth of
no less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
3. At least fifty percent (50%) of the upper floors facing a public street shall consist
of exposed openings. The openings shall be designed with one (1) or more
treatments:
a. Planter boxes with living plants.
b. A rail or fence to give the appearance of a balcony.
c. Framing and mullions to give the appearance of large windows.
d. Architectural or artistic treatments.
SECTION 6.21 PLACES OF WORSHIP
A. All religious activities shall take place in a fully enclosed building except as may be
approved by the City.
B. Facilities incidental to the main religious sanctuary must be used for church,
worship, or religious education purposes, in a manner which is consistent with
residential zoning and compatible with adjacent residential property. Associated
uses on the site such as recreation centers, retreat facilities, conference centers,
schools convents, and others shall meet all requirements of this Ordinance for such
uses.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
183
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
C. The site shall have frontage on and primary access to a major or minor arterial.
D. Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in the District in which a
place of worship is located, may be allowed provided that the front, side and rear
yards are increased one (1) foot for each foot of building height which exceeds the
maximum height allowed.
E. Front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.
F. Parking shall not be permitted in the required yards adjacent to any public street
or adjacent to any land zoned for residential purposes, other than that which is
developed or committed for uses other than the construction of residential dwellings.
Such yards shall be maintained as landscaped open space.
G. Traffic from events, including church worship services and other large assemblies,
shall be controlled so as not to create congestion or unreasonable delays on the
public street.
SECTION 6.22 POST-SECONDARY SCHOOLS
A. All ingress and egress from said site shall be directly on to a major arterial.
B. No building shall be closer than eighty (80) feet to any property line that is
residentially zoned or used. In all other cases, front, side, and rear setbacks shall be a
minimum of forty (40) feet.
C. Off-street parking areas shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any residential
property line.
D. Those buildings to be used for servicing or maintenance, such as heating plants,
garages, and storage structures shall be screened from view of residentially zoned or
used property, in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 13.02.B.
SECTION 6.23 PRIMARY/SECONDARY SCHOOLS
A. All outdoor play areas shall be located in the rear or side yards only and shall be
enclosed with a durable fence six (6) feet in height, or four (4) feet in height if
adjoining a right-of-way.
B. All required state and local licenses, charters, permits and similar approvals shall be
issued prior to occupancy for any educational purposes and shall be maintained in
good standing.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
184
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
C. Off street parking shall be arranged so the area for bus loading and unloading of
students will not be in the path of vehicular traffic.
SECTION 6.24 SELF-STORAGE FACILITIES
A. Incidental accessory uses such as the sale of boxes, locks and other supplies, shall
be permitted.
B. The storage of any toxic, corrosive, flammable, or hazardous materials is prohibited.
C. Other than the storage of recreation vehicles, all storage and accessory uses
shall be contained within a building. All recreational vehicle storage shall be
screened from the view of residentially zoned or used property and public roads in
accordance with the standards set forth in Section 13.02.B.
D. Exterior walls of all storage units shall be of masonry construction.
SECTION 6.25 SENIOR ASSISTED/INDEPENDENT / LIVING / CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY
A. The maximum allowable density varies by housing type, but shall not exceed the
following:
1. Dwellings may be provided for as single-family detached, two-family or multiplefamily
units. When such dwellings contain kitchens, the minimum site area
requirements for purposes of calculating density shall be as follows:
Dwelling Unit Size Site Area/Unit (Square Feet)
Efficiency/one (1) bedroom 2,000
Two (2) bedroom 2,500
Each additional bedroom 500 additional
2. Where facilities do not contain kitchen facilities within individual dwelling units,
the site area per bed shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
B. Height, lot coverage and setback requirements of the MF Districts as set forth in
Section 4.08, Multiple Family Residential Requirements shall apply.
C. Parking is not allowed in any required front yard. Parking is permitted in side and
rear yards provided a minimum twenty (20) foot setback is observed.
D. The maximum linear length of an uninterrupted building faade facing public
streets, residentially zoned or used property, and/or parks shall be thirty (30) feet.
Faade articulation or architectural design variations for building walls facing the
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
185
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
street are required to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance.
Building wall offsets (projections and recesses); cornices, varying building materials or
pilasters shall be used to break up the mass of a single building.
E. The drop-off / pick-up of residents shall be provided at the front entrance of the
building with a covered canopy.
F. The minimum lot area shall be three (3) acres.
G. Frontage on a major arterial street shall be required. All site access shall be provided
on a major arterial street.
H. A 50-foot greenbelt buffer shall be provided adjacent to any land zoned or used for
residential purposes. Such greenbelt shall be maintained as landscaped open space
and shall not include any buildings, parking, or drive-aisles.
SECTION 6.26 VEHICLE REPAIR
A. Dismantled, wrecked, or inoperable vehicles or any vehicle parts or scrap of any
kind shall not be stored outdoors for a period exceeding sixty (60) days. Outdoor
storage shall be enclosed by an opaque fence up to eight (8) feet in height and/or
landscape screening meeting the standards set forth in Section 13.02.B.
B. The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
C. All equipment including hydraulic hoists, pits, lubrication, and repair facilities shall be
entirely enclosed within a building.
D. All repair and maintenance activities shall be performed entirely within an enclosed
building.
E. Retail sales shall be limited to those items necessary to carry out the vehicle repair
occurring on the subject site.
F. Any proposed vehicle repair use within three hundred (300) feet (measured form the
nearest lot line to the nearest lot line on a straight-line basis) to any residential zoning
district or any parcel used for residential purposes shall be reviewed as a special use
as set forth in Article 9.
SECTION 6.27 VEHICLE SALES  NEW, USED, AND VINTAGE
A. No vehicle shall be parked within twenty (20) feet of any street right-of-way.
B. Loud speakers broadcasting voice or music outside of a building shall not be
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
186
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any residential zoned or used property.
C. All repair and maintenance activities shall conform with the standards set forth in
Section 6.24.
SECTION 6.28 VEHICLE FUELING / MULTI-USE STATION
A. The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre.
The following minimum setbacks shall apply to canopies and pump facilities
constructed in conjunction with Fueling / Multi-Use:
Setback Canopy Support Pump Islands Canopy Edge
Front 35 ft. 30 ft. 25 ft.
Side 20 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft.
Rear 30 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
1. All fueling areas shall be arranged so that motor vehicles do not park on
or extend over abutting landscaped areas, sidewalks, streets, buildings, or
adjoining property while being served.
B. Canopy structures shall be designed and constructed in a manner which is
architecturally compatible with the principal building. The canopy structure shall
be attached to and made an integral part of the principal building unless can be
demonstrated that the design of the building and canopy in combination would
be more functional and aesthetically pleasing if the canopy was not physically
attached to the principal building.
Required fire protection devices under the canopy shall be architecturally
screened so that the tanks are not directly visible from the street. The screens shall
be compatible with the design and color of the canopy.
C. Pedestrian Circulation.
1. Vehicle Fueling / multi-use stations shall be designed in a manner which
promotes pedestrian and vehicular safety.
2. The parking and circulation system within each development shall
accommodate the safe movement of vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians and
refueling activities throughout the proposed development and to and from
surrounding areas in a safe and convenient manner.
D. Where repair and servicing of vehicles is performed, all repair and maintenance
shall be performed entirely within an enclosed building. Dismantled, wrecked, or
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
187
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
immobile vehicles shall not be permitted to be stored on site.
E. If a vehicle wash is proposed, it must comply with the standards set forth in Section
6.29.
SECTION 6.29 VEHICLE WASH
A. The minimum lot size required for automobile or carwash establishments shall be
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
B. All washing activities shall be carried on within a building. Vacuuming activities shall
be located at least fifty (50) feet from adjacent residentially zoned or used property.
C. Automatic carwash facilities shall have a mechanical dryer operation at the end of
the wash cycle.
D. All automatic carwash facilities must provide a demonstrated means at the exit
ramp for each wash bay to prevent pooling of water or freezing.
SECTION 6.30 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
A. Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide standards for the location, construction
and maintenance of wireless communication facilities in a way which will retain
the integrity, character, property values and aesthetic quality of neighborhoods
and the City, and minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication
facilities on neighborhoods, community landmarks, historic sites and buildings, natural
beauty areas and public rights-of-way. The priority of the City is to minimize the
overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication support
facilities within the community by encouraging the collocation of existing wireless
communication support facilities where possible. It is required that all new and
modified wireless communication support facilities (WCSFs) shall be designed and
constructed so as to accommodate collocation. This section also requires that
wireless communication antennas (WCAs), wireless communication facilities (WCFs)
and wireless communication support facilities (WCSFs) shall adhere to all applicable
Local, State, Federal laws and regulations, and the standards of this Section.
B. Authorization.
1. Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in this Section, wireless
communication facilities shall be permitted uses in the following circumstances,
and in any districts:
a. An existing structure which will serve as an attached wireless communications
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
188
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
facility where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the City,
proposed to be either materially altered or materially changed in
appearance.
b. A proposed collocation upon an attached wireless communication facility
which has been approved earlier by the City.
c. An existing structure which will serve as an attached wireless communication
facility consisting of a utility pole located within a right-of-way, where the
existing pole is not proposed to be modified in a manner which, would
materially alter the structure and/or result in an impairment of sight lines or
other safety interests.
d. An existing wireless communication support structure established within a
right-of-way having an existing width of more than two hundred and four
(204) feet.
2. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a wireless communication facility is
required to be established outside an area identified in Section 6.30.B.1, then,
wireless communication facilities may be applied for elsewhere in the City
and must follow the district specific criteria and is subject to the criteria and
standards set forth in this Ordinance.
C. General Regulations.
1. Standards and Conditions Applicable to All Facilities.
All applications for wireless communication facilities shall be reviewed in
accordance with the following standards and conditions, and, if approved,
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards and
conditions. In addition, if the facility is approved, it shall be constructed and
maintained with any additional conditions imposed by the City
a. Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to neighborhoods or otherwise
detrimental to the public safety and welfare.
b. Facilities shall be located and designed to be harmonious with the
surrounding areas.
c. Wireless communication facilities shall comply with applicable federal and
state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions.
d. The maximum height of the new or modified support structures and antenna
shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable
communication by the applicant and by other entities to collocate on the
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
189
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
structures. The accessory building contemplated to enclose such things as
switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory
structures within the respective district.
e. The setback of the support structure shall be equal to the height of the
structure.
f. There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure, for operation,
maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided
through or over an easement. This access shall have a width and location
determined by such factors as: the location of adjacent thoroughfares and
traffic and circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the tower
and any attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking facilities;
proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to the natural
landscape; and the type of equipment which will need to access the site.
g. The division of property for the purpose of locating a wireless communication
facility is prohibited unless all zoning requirements and conditions are met.
h. Where an attached wireless communication facility is proposed on the roof
of a building, if the equipment enclosure is proposed as a roof appliance or
penthouse on the building, it shall be designed, constructed and maintained
to be architecturally compatible with the principal building. The equipment
enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be an
accessory building. If proposed as an accessory building, it shall conform with
all district requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks.
i. The design and appearance of the support structure and all accessory
buildings, shall be reviewed and approved so as to minimize distraction,
reduce visibility, maximize aesthetic appearance, and ensure compatibility
with surroundings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the
wireless communication facility in a neat and orderly condition.
j. The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal
Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be
noted.
k. A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall
be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed facility.
Such plan shall be designed to ensure the long term, continuous maintenance
to a reasonably prudent standard.
2. Standards and Conditions.
Applications for wireless communication facilities, which may be approved as
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
190
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
special uses, shall be reviewed, and if approved, constructed and maintained,
in accordance with the standards and conditions set forth herein.
a. The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed facility to be
located as proposed based upon the presence of one or more of the
following factors:
i. Proximity to an interstate or major thoroughfare.
ii. Areas of population concentration.
iii. Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business centers.
iv. Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall buildings, masses
of trees, or other obstructions.
v. Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities
with which the proposed facility is to operate.
vi. Other specifically identified reason creating need for the facility.
b. The proposal shall be reviewed in conformity with the collocation
requirements of this Section.
D. Application Requirements.
1. A site plan prepared in accordance with Article 8, Site Plan Review shall be
submitted, showing the location, size, screening and design of all buildings and
structures, including fences, and the location and size of outdoor equipment,
and the location, number, and species of proposed landscaping.
2. The application shall include a signed certification by a State of Michigan
licensed professional engineer with regard to the manner in which the proposed
structure will fall, which certification will be utilized, along with other criteria
such as applicable regulations for the district in question, in determining the
appropriate setback to be required for the structure and other facilities.
3. The application shall include a description of surety to be posted at the time of
receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure removal of the facility when
it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in Section 6.29.F,
Removal. In this regard, the surety shall, be in a form approved by the City
Attorney.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
191
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
4. The applicant shall include a map showing existing and known proposed
wireless communication facilities within the City, and further showing existing and
known proposed wireless communication facilities within areas surrounding the
borders of the City in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in terms
of potential co-location or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility.
Any proprietary information may be submitted with a request for confidentiality in
connection with the development pursuant to MCL 15.243(1)(g). This ordinance
shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentiality to the extent permitted by
law. The request for confidentiality must be prominently stated in order to bring it
to the attention of the community.
E. Collocation.
1. Feasibility of collocation: Collocation shall be deemed to be feasible for
purposes of this section where all of the following are met:
a. The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for collocation
will undertake to pay market rent or other market compensation for
collocation.
b. The site on which collocation is being considered, taking into consideration
reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to provide
structural support.
c. The collocation being considered is technologically reasonable, e.g., the
collocation will not result in unreasonable interference, given appropriate
physical and other adjustment in relation to the structure, antennas, and the
like.
d. The height of the structure necessary for collocation will not be increased
beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the City, taking into
consideration the several standards set forth herein.
2. Requirements for Collocation:
a. An approval for the construction and use of a new wireless communication
facility shall not be granted unless and until the applicant demonstrates that
a feasible collocation is not available for the coverage area and capacity
needs.
b. All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall be designed and
constructed so as to accommodate collocation.
F. Removal.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
192
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
1. A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility shall be
adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners
when the facility has not been used for one hundred eighty (180) days or more.
For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from
the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of
radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of non-use.
The applicant shall notify the City upon cessation of operations or removal of
antenna.
2. The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in paragraph
F.1 above, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall
immediately apply or secure the application for any required demolition or
removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition/
removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as reasonably
determined by the City.
3. If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully
completed within sixty (60) days of the applicable deadline, and after written
notice, the City may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required
portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be
drawn or collected from the security posted at the time application was made
for establishing the facility.
SECTION 6.31 ANTIQUE VEHICLE SALE, AMBULANCE FACILITY, AND VEHICLE RENTAL
Any proposed antique vehicle sale, ambulance facility, and vehicle rental use within
three hundred (300) feet (measured from the nearest lot line to the nearest lot line on
a straight-line basis) to any residential zoning district or any parcel used for residential
purposes shall be reviewed as a special use as set forth in Article 9.
SECTION 6.32 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS IN THE IB DISTRICT
One-story multi-family dwelling buildings are a permitted use in the IB district only
through the conversion of an existing building.
SECTION 6.33 OIL AND GAS WELL/DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USE
APPROVAL
The purpose of this section is to provide for the reasonable development of land for oil and
gas drilling while providing adequate health, safety and general welfare protections of
the residents of Troy. It is necessary and appropriate to adopt reasonable requirements
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
193
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
for oil and gas resource development so that these resources can be obtained in a
manner that protects the environment, protects residential properties and residential
property values, and mitigates negative impacts.
The following requirements shall apply to the location, installation, drilling and operation
of any well for the commercial extraction of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons in the City:
A. Spacing and Well Setbacks. In addition to the spacing and setback requirements
of the State of Michigan and the regulations of its Supervisor of Wells, the drilling,
completion, or operation of oil or gas wells or well site shall not be located within 300
feet from any road right-of-way, 500 feet of a residentially zoned or used property
or any property used for a religious facility, public or private school, or hospital, and
100 feet from any other property line. The setbacks in this section also apply to the
area underground, and preclude any horizontal drilling within the setback unless
the applicant demonstrates to the Citys satisfaction a legal entitlement to drill on
adjacent properties through mineral rights acquisition or other means.
The measurement of the setback shall be made from the edge of the well site (in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects), to the closest exterior
point of the adjacent parcel.
B. Height. The completed wellhead structure shall not exceed twenty-two (22) feet in
height. The temporary drilling derrick/rig shall not exceed one-hundred and ten (110)
feet in height.
C. Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size shall be 5 acres.
D. Fencing, Landscaping, and Lighting.
1. An oil or gas well site shall be completely enclosed within a 6-foot high fence.
2. Staggered ten (10) foot tall evergreen trees shall be placed around the perimeter
of the fence with a minimum landscape greenbelt buffer of twenty-five (25) feet
in depth. This landscaping buffer shall be in place within thirty (30) days of the
removal of the temporary drilling derrick/rig. The landscape buffer and trees shall
be regularly irrigated and maintained.
3. Exterior lighting shall comply with Section 13.05 of the Zoning Ordinance.
E. Nuisance Mitigation. The drilling, completion, or operation of oil or gas wells or
other wells drilled for oil or gas exploration purposes shall comply with Section 12.06,
Environmental Performance Standards. Those standards address potential nuisances
such as noise, smoke, dust, open storage, fire and explosive hazards, odors, wastes,
and vibration. Due to the unique nature of this type of operation, additional
information and standards may be required.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
194
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
F. Dust, Noise, Vibration, and Odors. All operations shall be conducted in such a
manner as to minimize, so far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration, or noxious odors,
and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices defined by the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) for the production of oil,
gas and other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. All equipment used shall be
constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying
substances or effects will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or
production site or from anything incidental thereto, and to minimize the annoyance
of persons living or working in the vicinity. Additionally, the site or structures on the
property shall not be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly, or unsafe. The
City may impose additional reasonable restrictions upon such operations to reduce
adverse impacts upon adjacent properties.
G. Oil and Gas Processing Facilities. Associated processing facilities that separate oil,
gas, and brine and hold said products for transport off-site for further refinement and
processing are not permitted.
H. Compliance with Laws and Permit Issuance. The drilling, completion, or operation of
oil or gas wells or other wells drilled for the purpose of oil or gas exploration shall be
done in conformity with all State and Federal laws, statutes, rules, and regulations
pertaining thereto and particularly with the State of Michigan and the regulations
of its Supervisor of Wells. This shall include obtaining the required permit from the
Supervisor of Wells, which permit shall be provided to the City before the City can
grant special use approval under this section. This requirement also applies to,
but is not limited to the plugging of wells, the exploring for, producing, marketing,
and transporting of petroleum products, and the disposition and removal of any
byproducts utilized and associated with said activities.
I. Associated Permits and Approvals. Special use approval for the drilling, completion,
or operation of oil or gas wells or other wells drilled for oil or gas exploration purposes
is in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit or plan which may be required by
any other provision of the City of Troy Zoning Ordinance, Building and Fire Codes, or
by any other governmental agency, unless expressly outlined.
J. Operations
1. Permitted Construction Activity Hours. Site preparation and construction of well
sites are limited to the hours of 7 am to 8 pm. Construction activities associated
with establishing of the well sites may be eligible for an exception by the Building
Department in accordance with the Citys Special Hours Work Permit if such
activities are in compliance with applicable laws and permits.
2. The movement of drilling rigs, tanker trucks or heavy equipment used in
connection with the drilling or operation of oil or gas wells over public roads and
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
195
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
streets, shall be consistent with the Citys Traffic Engineers approval, which shall
be obtained in advance. The Citys Traffic Engineer shall identify the streets which
may be used and any conditions that may apply.
3. All brine, mud, slush, saltwater, chemicals, wastewater, chemical, fluids or waste
produced or used in the drilling or production of oil or gas shall be safely, lawfully
and properly disposed of to prevent infiltration of or damage to any fresh water
well, groundwater, watercourse, pond, lake or wetland.
4. The oil or gas well site shall be kept in a clean and orderly condition, free of trash
and debris, with weeds cut. Machinery and equipment not being used in the
operation of the well shall not be stored or kept at the well site.
5. An oil or gas well shall include measures or controls satisfactory to the City
Engineer to prevent migration, run-off or discharge of any hazardous materials,
including but not limited to any chemicals, oil or gas produced or used in the
drilling or production of oil or gas, to adjoining property or to the City of Troy
sanitary sewer system, stormwater system or any natural or artificial watercourse,
pond, lake or wetland. There shall be no off-site discharge of storm water except
to an approved drainage system in accordance with the Citys engineering
requirements.
K. Inspection. The Building Official, and any other designee of the City Manager, shall
have the right and privilege at any time during the construction phase and any
drilling operation to enter upon the premises covered by the special use approval for
the purpose of making inspections to determine if the requirements of this section are
complied with or the requirements of any other code or ordinance of the City are
met.
L. Injection wells. Injection wells used for brine disposal or other chemicals from
production wells or from other sources shall be expressly prohibited within the City.
M. Pipelines. No operator shall excavate or construct any lines for the conveyance of
fuel, water, oil, gas or petroleum liquids on, under, or through the streets, alleys or
other properties owned by the City without an easement or right-of-way license from
the City.
N. Submittal Requirements. In addition to submittal requirements for a Site Plan as set
forth in Article 8 and Special Use as set forth in Article 9, the following information shall
be submitted as part of the application:
1. Environmental Impact Statement. Applicant shall submit an Environmental
Impact Statement filed with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
in connection with a well permit under Part 615 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, MCL 524.61501, et seq, and the administrative rules
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
196
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
promulgated under Part 615, as amended.
2. Hydrogeological analysis.
3. Emergency Response Plan. Pursuant to State and Federal law, the operator
shall provide any information necessary to assist the City Emergency Services
Department with an emergency response plan and hazardous materials survey
establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from the
operation. The Emergency Response Plan should include emergency contact
information.
4. Reclamation Plan. A written statement that describes how the land will be
returned to a stable and productive condition post drilling operations.
5. Operations Plan to include:
i. Site ingress/egress
ii. Haul Route Map. Vehicle Routes for Truck Traffic. Construction vehicles and
commercial trucks, associated with drilling and/or production operations
shall be restricted to roads designated by the City Engineer.
iii. Hours of Operation. State listed hours of operation.
iv. Soil Erosion, Mud and Dust Control Plan.
v. Noise Control Plan. Prior to the granting of special use approval and
the commencement of operations, the petitioner shall submit a noise
management plan, detailing how the equipment used in the drilling,
completion, transportation, or production of a well complies with the
maximum permissible noise levels of the Zoning Ordinance. If Special
Use Approval is granted, the Petitioner shall be responsible for verifying
compliance with this section and the noise management plan after the
installation of the equipment. The noise management plan shall:
a. Identify operational noise impacts
b. Provide documentation establishing the ambient noise level prior to
construction.
c. Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining noise mitigation,
specific site characteristics shall be considered, including but not limited
to the following:
(1) Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location, and type
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
197
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
(2) Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions
(3) Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site
(4) Topography
vi. Odor and Fume Control Plan
vii. Pollution Prevention Plan
viii. Impact Mitigation Plan
ix. Monitoring controls.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
198
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 6
Specific Use Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
199
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 7
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 7.01 INTENT
The intent of this Article is to provide regulations that generally apply to all users
regardless of the particular zoning district.
SECTION 7.02 LOT USE AND AREA ALLOCATION
A. General Lot Requirement. No portion of a lot used to comply with the yard, lot
area per unit, residential density, percentage of lot occupancy, or other site
requirement of this Ordinance shall be counted toward the yard, lot area per unit,
residential density, percentage of occupancy, or other site requirement for any
other existing building or structure.
B. Number of Buildings per Lot.
1. There shall be only one (1) single-family dwelling or one (1) two-family dwelling
permitted per lot, provided all other requirements of this Ordinance are met.
2. For all development subject to site plan review, more than one (1) principal
building per lot may be permitted, as long as all other requirements of this
Ordinance are met.
SECTION 7.03 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
A. General Requirements.
1. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall be supplemental or subordinate
to the principal building on a parcel of land; and shall be on the same parcel of
land as the principal building, structure, or use they serve.
2. Construction, erection, installation, or placement of accessory buildings or
structures shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable
Building Code. Permits shall be required for buildings greater than thirty-six (36)
square feet in area and/or greater than four (4) feet in height. Electrical service
for ground-mounted antennas shall be provided only through underground lines.
3. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall not be located within a dedicated
easement or right-of-way.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
200
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
4. Permits shall be required for all ground-mounted and building-mounted
antennas exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in diameter.
B. Accessory Buildings in Residential Zoning Districts
1. Attached Accessory Buildings
a. Where the accessory building or structure is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this
Ordinance applicable to a main building in addition to the requirements of
this Section.
b. The area of attached accessory buildings shall not exceed seventy-five (75)
percent of the ground floor footprint of the living area of the dwelling. This
requirement shall apply only to attached accessory buildings that have
not been granted a valid building permit from the City of Troy Building
Department prior to July 21, 2005.
c. The size of any door to an attached accessory building shall not exceed ten
(10) feet in height. This requirement shall apply only to attached accessory
buildings that were not granted a valid building permit from the City of Troy
Building Department prior to July 21, 2005.
2. Detached Accessory Buildings
a. Detached accessory buildings shall not be erected in any yard, except a
rear yard.
b. Detached accessory buildings and detached accessory supplemental
buildings shall occupy not more than twenty-five (25) percent of a required
rear yard.
c. The combined ground floor area of all detached accessory buildings shall
not exceed four hundred and fifty (450) square feet plus two (2) percent of
the total lot area. However, in no instance shall the combined floor area of
all detached accessory buildings and detached accessory supplemental
buildings exceed the ground floor footprint of the living area of the dwelling,
or six hundred (600) square feet, whichever is greater.
d. No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet
to any main building, nor closer than six (6) feet to any side or rear lot line. A
detached accessory building shall not exceed one (1) story or fourteen (14)
feet in height.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
201
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. Accessory Supplemental Buildings
a. The total floor area of all detached accessory supplemental buildings on a
parcel of land shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
b. An accessory supplemental building shall not be located in any front yard.
c. No detached accessory supplemental building shall be located closer than six
(6) feet to any side or rear lot line.
d. A detached accessory supplemental building shall not exceed one (1) story or
fourteen (14) feet in height, except as noted below in subsections C. and D.
4. Private Swimming Pools. Except as otherwise permitted in this Zoning Ordinance,
all private swimming pools (above or below ground) shall be subject to the
following:
a. Swimming pools shall be permitted only in the rear or side yard, behind the
front of the principal building.
b. No outdoor swimming pool shall be located within five (5) feet of any building.
c. There shall be a distance of not less than six (6) feet between the adjoining
property line and the outside of the pool wall.
C. Accessory Buildings in Non-Residential Zoning Districts. All accessory buildings shall
be subject to the same placement and height requirements applicable to principal
structures in the district in which they are located.
D. Agricultural Buildings.
1. The provisions of Section 7.03.A.2-4 shall be applicable to all agricultural buildings
or uses, regardless of whether such buildings are classified as principal or
accessory buildings.
2. Where an agricultural building is structurally attached to a residence or any other
non-agricultural building, the provisions of Section 7.03.B.1 shall be applicable to
all such buildings.
E. Amateur Radio and Satellite Dish Antennas.
1. Amateur radio antennas are permitted up to a height of seventy-five (75) feet
if used in accordance with the terms of a valid Amateur Radio Service License
issued by the Federal Communications Commission or permitted under Federal
Regulation by a reciprocal agreement with a foreign country. Other pole, mast
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
202
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
type antennas may, however, be permitted to be constructed to a height equal
to the permitted maximum height of structures in the District. Other pole, mast,
whip, or panel type antennas that are roof-mounted or attached to a building
shall not extend more than twelve (12) feet above the highest point of a roof.
a. In residential districts, no more than two (2) antenna structures, which shall
include no more than one (1) which may be ground-mounted, and thus
detached from the main building, shall be permitted for each lot or parcel,
with the following exception:
b. In non-residential districts, two (2) antenna structures shall be permitted for
the first twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross building area, with one
(1) antenna structure permitted for each additional twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet of gross building area, or major portion thereof.
c. The numerical limits of this Section shall not apply in the following situations:
i. Panel-type antennas which are visually integrated with the building
surface on which they are mounted (similar color, not extending above
wall, equipment penthouse, or enclosure surface).
ii. Pole, mast, whip, or panel-type antennas mounted on or adjacent to
the roof of residential or non-residential buildings sixty (60) feet or more in
height.
2. Satellite dish antennas in Residential Districts, which extend more than fourteen
(14) feet in height or fourteen (14) feet above grade, shall not exceed twentyfour
(24) inches in diameter.
3. Satellite dish and amateur radio antennas shall be located in a side or rear yard
and shall be placed so that rotation can occur without encroachment into the
required setback.
SECTION 7.04 CORNER CLEARANCE
No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, or other obstruction to vision above a height of thirty
(30) inches from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular
area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn
between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of twenty-five (25) feet
from their point of intersection.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
203
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 7.05 FENCES
A. Approval Required. The construction of fences in all Districts shall meet the
requirements set forth in Chapter 83  Fences.
B. Visibility at Intersections. All fences in the front yards must comply with the
requirements of Section 7.04, Corner Clearance.
SECTION 7.06 VOTING PLACE
The provisions of this Ordinance shall not interfere with or prevent the temporary use of
any property as a voting place in connection with a public election.
SECTION 7.07 ESSENTIAL SERVICES AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY
It is the intent of the Ordinance to regulate essential services and property owned,
leased, or operated by public agencies, including local, state, federal, or any other
public or governmental body or agency, as follows:
A. Essential services shall be permitted in any district.
B. Buildings constructed in conjunction with an essential service shall require site plan
approval in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article 8, Site Plan Review.
C. Property owned, leased, or operated by the state or the United States shall be
exempted from the provisions of this chapter, only to the extent that said property
may not be constitutionally regulated by the City.
SECTION 7.08 GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
A. Height Exceptions. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit below established for
the district in which the building is located, except as set forth below.
1. Roof structures and screening devices for the housing of elevators, stairways,
tanks, roof-mounted mechanical equipment, solar panels, or similar equipment
required to operate and maintain the building shall not exceed by more than ten
(10) feet the height limit of the district in which the use is located.
2. Fire walls and skylights shall not exceed by more than five (5) feet the height limit
of the district in which the use is located.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
204
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. Steeples, chimneys, smokestacks, or similar structures shall not exceed by more
than fifteen (15) feet the height limit of the district in which the use is located.
4. A structure which is permitted by this Section to exceed height limits shall
account for no more than ten percent (10%) of the roof area of the building; nor
shall such structure be used for any residential, commercial, or industrial purpose
whatsoever other than a service use incidental to the main use of the building.
5. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to wireless communication facilities
regulated by Section 6.30, Wireless Communication Facilities.
B. Decks, Porches, and Patio Structures. An open, unenclosed, and uncovered porch,
raised deck, or patio structure, or paved terrace may project into a required front
yard for a distance not to exceed ten (10) feet. Such facilities may project into
a required rear yard for a distance not to exceed fifteen (15) feet, subject further
to the requirement that the distance remaining between the encroaching facility
and the rear lot line shall in no instance be less than twenty-five (25) feet. Porch,
deck, patio, or terrace facilities encroaching into required front or rear yards shall
not include fixed canopies, gazebos or permanent enclosures, and shall be at a
grade no higher than that of the first or main floor of the building to which they are
attached.
C. Projections Into Yards. Architectural features, not including vertical projections not
exceeding thirty-six (36) inches in width, may extend or project into a required side
yard not more than two (2) inches for each one (1) foot of width of such side yard;
and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than
three (3) feet.
SECTION 7.09 HEIGHT CONTROLS ADJACENT TO AIRPORTS
A. The height of buildings and structures in the vicinity of publicly owned airport and
heliport facilities shall be controlled by the Airport Approach Plan approved by the
Michigan Aeronautics Commission and the underlying zoning district, whichever is
more restrictive.
B. Unless the Federal Aviation Administration has issued a Determination of No Hazard
and a Michigan Tall Structure Permit has been issued by the Michigan Aeronautics
Commission, no building or structure shall be constructed, relocated, or expanded
in a manner that does not conform to the height restrictions of the Airport
Approach Plan.
C. Appeals from this Section shall be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Prior
to making any decision, the Board shall notify the Federal Aviation Administration
and the Michigan Aeronautics Commission of the appeal and shall receive a report
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
205
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
from one or both of these agencies. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant an
appeal that is inconsistent with the Airport Approach Plan.
SECTION 7.10 HOME OCCUPATIONS
A. A home occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use of
a dwelling purpose.
B. A home occupation shall not change the character or appearance of the structure
or the premises, or have any other visible evidence of the conduct of a home
occupation. There shall be no external or internal alterations that are not customary
in residential areas or structures.
C. A home occupation use shall not create a nuisance or endanger the health, safety,
welfare, or enjoyment of any other person in the area, by reason of noise, vibrations,
glare, fumes, odor, electrical interferences, unsanitary or unsightly conditions, fire
hazards, or the like that are involved in or resulting from such home occupation.
D. A home occupation shall not generate sewage or water use in excess of what is
normally generated from a single-family dwelling in a residential area.
E. No employees shall be permitted other than members of the immediate family
residing in the dwelling unit.
F. A home occupation shall be conducted within the dwelling unit or within an
accessory building. There shall be no outside display of any kind, or any other
external or visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation.
G. There shall be no vehicular traffic permitted for the home occupation, other than
what is normally generated for a single-family dwelling unit in a residential area, both
as to volume and type of vehicles.
H. No signs shall be used to advertise the home occupation business.
I. No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises except as is prepared
within the dwelling or accessory building or is provided as incidental to the service or
profession conducted therein.
J. The exterior storage of material, equipment, or refuse associated with or resulting
from a home occupation, shall be prohibited.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
206
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 7.11 STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT
A. Single-Family Residential Districts. The outdoor storage or parking of any
recreational vehicle or vehicles of a similar nature shall be prohibited for a period
greater than forty-eight (48) hours in all single-family residential districts, except
where expressly permitted by other provisions of this Ordinance, unless the following
minimum conditions are met:
1. All such vehicles or equipment shall be placed within a completely enclosed
building or located behind the front face of the principal building, but no closer
than three (3) feet to any side or rear lot line.
2. Storage or parking shall be limited to a lot or parcel of land upon which is
located an inhabited dwelling unit and the vehicle or equipment is owned or
leased by the occupant.
3. Trailer coaches and other vehicles or equipment intended or adaptable for
sleeping purposes shall remain unoccupied and shall not be connected to
sanitary sewer facilities, or have a fixed connection to electricity, water, or gas.
4. Recreational vehicles and equipment may not be stored or parked in residential
districts for the purpose of making major repairs (i.e. engine rebuilding,
reconditioning of motor vehicles, body work, etc.), refurbishing, or reconstruction
of the recreational vehicle or equipment.
B. Multiple-Family Districts. The outdoor storage or parking of any recreational vehicle
or vehicles of a similar nature shall be prohibited for a period greater than fortyeight
(48) hours in all multiple-family residential districts, except where expressly
permitted by other provisions of this Ordinance, unless the following minimum
conditions are met:
1. All such vehicles or equipment shall be placed within a completely enclosed
building. If located outdoors, vehicles or equipment cannot be located
between any building and a public right-of-way, and no closer than three (3)
feet to any side or rear lot line.
2. Storage or parking shall be limited to a lot or parcel of land upon which is
located an inhabited dwelling unit and the vehicle or equipment is owned by
the occupant.
3. Trailer coaches and other vehicles or equipment intended or adaptable for
sleeping purposes shall remain unoccupied and shall not be connected to
sanitary sewer facilities, or have a fixed connection to electricity, water or gas.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
207
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
4. Recreation vehicles and equipment may not be stored or parked in residential
districts for the purpose of making major repairs (i.e. engine rebuilding,
reconditioning of motor vehicles, body work, etc.), refurbishing, or reconstruction
of the recreation vehicle or equipment.
C. Non-Residential Districts. The storage of recreational vehicles and equipment in nonresidential
districts when it is not associated with the business of the property shall be
prohibited.
SECTION 7.12 OUTDOOR PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Outdoor parking of commercial vehicles is prohibited in residential districts, with the
following exception:
A. The outdoor parking of one (1) commercial vehicle of one (1) of the following two (2)
types is permitted for each dwelling unit on a residential lot or parcel:
1. A Commercial Vehicle: Pick-up Truck, as defined in Article 2.0; or
2. A Commercial Vehicle: Passenger/Cargo-Style Van, as defined in Article 2.0.
SECTION 7.13 TEMPORARY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
A. Intent. Certain temporary buildings, structures, or uses of limited duration shall be
permitted, subject to the standards set forth in this Section. Temporary buildings,
structures, uses, shall not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent
building or structure, and are discontinued and removed upon expiration of an
approved time period. The Zoning Administrator may issue a permit for temporary
structures and uses based upon receipt of an application, plot plan, compliance
with permit requirements of this Section, and a permit fee as applicable.
B. Exception. This Section shall not apply to any uses regulated by Chapter 61 
Temporary Merchant Businesses.
C. Application Requirements and Standards for Review.
1. Application. An application for approval of any temporary use, building, or
structure shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The request shall include, at
a minimum, the following information:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
208
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
b. The location of the property.
c. A complete explanation of the proposed temporary use, building, or
structure.
d. A plot plan in sufficient detail to determine the applicable standards of this
Section are met.
e. Any other information requested by the Zoning Administrator and deemed
necessary to make the necessary findings for approval.
2. Application Approval.
a. The Zoning Administrator may refer the application to any City Department
for review and comment.
b. The Zoning Administrator may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a
temporary building, structure, or use based upon review of the items required
pursuant to the requirements of this Section.
c. Conditions for approval of the temporary building, structure, or use may
include a time limit for the expiration of the temporary use, building, or
structure permit, and may require the posting of a performance bond or
insurance to ensure prompt termination and removal of the use, building, or
structure, and clean-up.
3. General Standards. In the review of temporary buildings, structures, or uses, the
Zoning Administrator shall find the following requirements satisfied:
a. The proposed temporary activity shall be compatible with and shall not
adversely effect nearby residential neighborhoods;
b. There shall be no permanent alterations to a structure or the site;
c. There shall be no temporary signs associated with the use or structure after
the activity ends;
d. The proposed temporary activity shall be compatible with and shall not
interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use located on the
property; and
e. There shall be sufficient area to allow the temporary use, structure, or special
event to occur as well as area to accommodate the parking and traffic
movement associated with the temporary use.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
209
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Temporary Construction Buildings, Structures, and Uses. Temporary buildings,
structures, and uses related to construction, including construction trailers, trash
containers, storage containers, and portable toilets are permitted, subject to the
following requirements:
1. Temporary construction buildings, structures, and uses shall be clearly incidental
to and necessary for construction which has received all necessary building and/
or applicable permits.
2. Temporary construction buildings, structures, and uses shall be removed within
fifteen (15) days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the primary
building.
E. Temporary Sales Offices or Model Homes. Temporary sales offices are permitted,
subject to the following requirements:
1. Maximum Duration. A temporary sales office or model home shall be incidental
to and necessary for the sale or rental of real property in a new subdivision or
housing project.
2. The temporary office or model home shall be removed when ninety (90) percent
of the lots or units have been sold or leased.
F. Temporary Dwellings. Temporary dwellings are permitted, subject to the following
requirements:
1. A temporary dwelling shall be permitted only when a principal dwelling has been
destroyed or rendered uninhabitable by fire, flood, wind, or other natural disaster,
and the dwelling is being either reconstructed or a new structure built.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a permit for a temporary dwelling until a
building permit has been issued for the reconstruction or new construction of a
permanent replacement dwelling on the subject property.
3. The type and condition of the temporary dwelling is permitted under applicable
building or housing code requirements.
4. The Zoning Administrator shall approve the location of a temporary dwelling
which shall meet setback requirements for the district.
5. A temporary dwelling shall be for one (1) year or less. An extension of up to three
(3) months may be granted by the Zoning Administrator, provided the extension is
needed due to circumstances beyond the immediate control of the applicant.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
210
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
G. Temporary Storage in a Portable Commercial Shipping Container. Temporary
storage in a portable commercial shipping container shall be permitted to serve an
existing use, subject to the following requirements:
1. The container shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet from any lot line or
structure.
2. The container will not impede ingress, egress, or emergency access.
3. Such temporary storage shall not exceed four (4), seven (7) day periods within a
twelve (12) month period.
H. Temporary Portable Residential Storage Containers. Temporary portable residential
storage containers shall be permitted to serve an existing single-family dwelling,
subject to the following requirements:
1. The maximum allowable size is one hundred fifty (150) square feet with an overall
length not to exceed sixteen (16) feet.
2. Clear vision areas shall be maintained at all times, and portable storage
containers shall not obstruct the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
3. Portable storage containers shall be placed on a concrete or asphalt surface
that is no closer than ten (10) feet from the front lot line or three (3) feet from the
side or rear lot line.
4. All portable storage containers in use on a lot shall be in a condition free from
rust, peeling paint, and other visible forms of deterioration.
5. The maximum duration of use shall be a total of fourteen (14) days over a period
of twelve (12) consecutive months.
I. Outdoor Special Events. Outdoor special events, such as grand openings and
corporate, institutional, and community celebrations and fundraising activities that
benefit a community service group or non-profit organization are permitted in any
district, subject to the following requirements:
1. The outdoor special event must be short-term in nature and clearly incidental to
the principal use of the property.
2. Adequate parking and emergency vehicle access shall exist, and a designated
off-street parking area shall be provided that does not interrupt the flow of
traffic on public streets, or impede access to the primary use or pedestrian
movements.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
211
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. Hours of operation shall start no earlier than 8:00am and end no later than 8:00pm
in all residential districts, except on Fridays and Saturdays the hours may extend
to 10:00pm. All other districts shall operate within the hours of 8:00am to 11:00pm
unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator.
4. The maximum duration of use shall be seven (7) consecutive days for any one
(1) event, including setup and takedown, not to exceed four (4) events within a
period of twelve (12) calendar months.
5. Outdoor special events shall also be subject to other applicable Ordinances and
requirements, including, but not limited to, noise, signs, health, and sanitation.
SECTION 7.14 TEMPORARY COVERING OF STRUCTURES AND USES
A. Permanent Structures/Uses. The covering or enclosure of permanent structures or
uses by means of air-supported, tent-type or other temporary or readily removable
covering shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Covering or enclosure of permanent structures or uses by means of air-supported,
tent-type, or other temporary or readily removable covering shall be prohibited in
all non-residential Districts.
2. Covering or enclosure of permanent structures or uses by means of air-supported,
tent-type or other temporary or readily removable covering may be permitted in
relation to the following uses:
a. Recreation uses.
b. Porch, patio, terrace, or entranceway areas.
3. The area covered or enclosed, together with principal and accessory buildings
shall meet the setback and lot area coverage provisions set forth in the district
in which located as set forth in Article 4, Schedule of Regulations. Porch, patio,
terrace, or entranceway covers may be permitted to encroach into such yards in
accordance with Section 7.08.
B. Temporary Structures/Uses. The covering or enclosure of a temporary structure for
short-term use or activity by means of an air-supported, tent-type or other temporary
or readily removable covering may be permitted in any District, subject to the
following requirements:
1. The short-term events eligible for the use of such temporary covering are intended
to be activities including, but not limited to, special events such as grand
openings, corporate, institutional, or community celebrations.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
212
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 7
General Provisions
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
2. The short-term events must be clearly accessory or secondary to the principal
uses or activities occurring within a permanent building on the same site. These
provisions are not intended for the purpose of providing additional space for the
principal uses on the site.
3. The use of such temporary covering shall be limited to a maximum of five (5)
consecutive days, and shall not occur more than four (4) times per year on any
individual site.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
213
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 8
SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION 8.01 INTENT
The site plan review requirements in this Article are intended to provide a consistent
and uniform method of review of proposed development plans, to ensure full
compliance with the regulations in this Ordinance, other applicable ordinances,
and state and federal laws, to achieve efficient use of the land, to encourage
innovative design solutions, to protect natural resources, to ensure safety for both
internal and external vehicular and pedestrian users, to achieve innovative storm
water management solutions, and to prevent adverse impact on adjoining or
nearby properties. It is the intent of these provisions to encourage cooperation
and consultation between the City and the applicant to facilitate development in
accordance with the Citys land use objectives.
SECTION 8.02 SITE PLAN REQUIRED
A. Where Required. Site plan review shall be required for any of the following activities:
1. A use or development for which submission of a site plan is required by the
provisions of this Ordinance.
2. A building or structure which is proposed to be constructed, moved, relocated
or structurally altered.
3. A non-residential use permitted in a residential district.
4. A change in use that could affect compliance with the standards set forth in this
Ordinance.
5. Expansion or paving of off-street parking and/or a change in vehicular or
pedestrian circulation or access.
6. A substantial revision to a development that has received Preliminary or Final
Site Plan Approval, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
7. The development or construction of any accessory uses or structures at least
1,000 square feet in area or greater, except for uses or structures that are
accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling.
B. Site Plan Review Exemptions. Erection, moving, relocation, conversion, or structural
alterations to a one- or two-family dwelling on an individual lot, and its accessory
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
214
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
use(s) or structure(s), are exempt from the full site plan review process. However,
other applicable approvals are still required such as a zoning compliance permit and
building permits.
SECTION 8.03 SITE PLAN PROCEDURES
A. Sketch Plan. Except as otherwise required by this Ordinance, an applicant has the
option of submitting a sketch plan to the Zoning Administrator for informal review. All
applications for special land uses shall be accompanied by a sketch plan.
A sketch plan drawn to a reasonable scale shall have the following information:
1. Applicants name, address, and telephone number.
2. Common description of the property and complete legal description.
3. Dimensions of land, including width, length, acreage, and frontage.
4. Existing zoning and current land use of the property under consideration and
zoning and current land use of all adjacent properties.
5. General location of all existing structures, roadways, and natural features.
6. The general location and size of all proposed buildings, roadways, parking areas,
and any other changes proposed to be made on the subject property.
B. Preliminary Site Plan Procedures.
1. A petitioner seeking Site Plan Approval as required under Section 8.02 shall submit
an application to the Zoning Administrator for preliminary site plan approval,
together with the appropriate fee, not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date
of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission, at which the application for a
preliminary site plan will be considered.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application and preliminary site plan to
the Planning Department for review. Any application which fails to provide the
information and materials regulated by this Article shall be held in abeyance until
the petitioner rectifies all deficiencies.
3. Complete applications shall be reviewed inter-departmentally and any necessary
revisions and/or corrections shall be made by the applicant prior to submission to
the Planning Commission for Preliminary Site Plan Approval consideration.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
215
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
The request for Preliminary Site Plan Approval shall be presented to the Planning
Commission and after approval by the Planning Commission, the petitioner
shall obtain a copy of the Approved Preliminary Site Plan (upon which shall be
noted any requirements for modifications, additional information, or executed
documents and/or agreements). Preliminary Site Plan Approval shall be effective
for a period of three (3) year. Within that three (3) year period, the petitioner
shall submit a complete application for Final Site Plan Approval to the Planning
Department in accordance with Section 8.05.B. If the petitioner does not receive
Final Site Plan Approval within one (1) year, Preliminary Site Plan Approval shall
expire. Extensions may be granted in one (1) year increments by administrative
approval, provided no changes have been made to the approved plan.
C. Administrative Plan Review. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to
waive the requirement for a site plan if it is determined that a project does not affect
compliance with the standards of this Ordinance or other regulations.
The Zoning Administrator is also authorized to conduct an administrative review
of a site plan, provided all other standards of this Ordinance are met. The Zoning
Administrator may conduct an administrative review of a site plan for the following
projects or under the following circumstances:
1. Minor changes during construction required by outside governmental agencies.
2. Increase in parking or loading area of up to twenty-five (25) percent or 6,000
square feet of pavement area without any building changes.
3. Changes to the building height that do not add additional floor area nor exceed
the maximum height requirements of the district.
4. For non-residential uses, an increase in floor area of up to twenty-five (25) percent
of the existing floor area in the event of no impact to other site requirements or
improvements.
5. A change in use to a similar or less intense use provided the site shall not require
any significant changes in the existing site facilities such as parking, landscaping,
lighting, signs, or sidewalks.
6. A change from a nonconforming use to a conforming use.
7. Accessory buildings associated with a non-residential use.
8. Aesthetic and architectural changes to a non-residential structure.
9. Construction of an entrance feature associated with a residential development.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
216
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
10. Home occupations.
11. Sign installation, relocation, or replacement meeting the dimensional and
locational standards of this Ordinance.
12. Site improvements such as installation of walls, fences, lighting, or landscaping
consistent with the Ordinance standards.
13. Temporary uses, sales, and seasonal events.
14. Reuse of existing buildings with no additional hard surfacing or exterior
improvements.
15. In the IB District, any use surrounded on all sides by other properties zoned IB
District.
D. Final Site Plan Procedures.
1. Prior to requesting any building permits, the petitioner shall seek Final Site Plan
approval. This final site plan submittal shall include those items specified under
Section 8.05.B of this Article. Applications for Final Condominium Approval shall
also include four (4) copies of the recorded Condominium Master Deed and
Condominium Bylaws. It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to secure
all necessary approvals and authorizations related to the items required under
Section 8.05.B.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall review the submittal for Final Site Plan Approval
to ascertain that all the requirements of Section 8.05.B have been satisfied. Any
submittal which fails to include the required modifications, information, and/
or documents shall be deemed incomplete and held in abeyance until the
petitioner rectifies all deficiencies.
3. In the event that the Final Site Plan has been substantially revised from the
Preliminary Site Plan Approval, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, the
applicant shall be directed to reapply for a new Preliminary Site Plan approval
or to revise the Final Site Plan to bring it into conformance with the approved
Preliminary Site Plan.
4. The Planning Department shall review the Final Site Plan to ensure that it is
consistent with Preliminary Site Plan Approval. The Planning Department
shall confirm that all necessary City Department approvals, authorizations or
certifications have been received from Departments including, but not limited
to, the Engineering, Assessing, and Fire Departments. Upon verification of all
required City approvals, the Planning Department shall then grant Final Site
Plan Approval and shall notify the Chief Building Inspector that building permit
applications may be received and/or reviewed for the project.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
217
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
5. In those instances where Planning Commission review and approval of a revised
Preliminary Site Plan is necessary, and where modifications to the site plan are
required by the Planning Commission, no building permits shall be issued until five
(5) copies of the modified Preliminary Site Plan have been submitted and have
been approved by the Building and Engineering Departments.
6. Final Site Plan approval shall be effective for a period of three (3) years, during
which the petitioner shall complete construction of the approved project.
Extensions may be granted in one (1) year increments by administrative approval,
provided no changes have been made to the approved plan.
SECTION 8.04 ADMINISTRATIVE PLAN PROCEDURES
All applications and submittal requirements as set forth in Section 8.05 shall be required
for site plans that are received by the Zoning Administrator.
SECTION 8.05 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Preliminary Site Plan. A petition or request for Preliminary Site Plan Approval shall
be submitted on forms prepared by the Zoning Administrator and shall contain
the information set forth below. The Zoning Administrator may waive information
requirements that do not effect compliance with the Ordinance.
1. The name, address and telephone of the person applying for Preliminary Site Plan
Approval.
2. The name, address and telephone of the owner of the property.
3. The relationship between the applicant and the property owner.
4. The present zoning classification of the subject property.
5. The proposed use of the property.
6. A certified topographic survey and a certified boundary survey of the property,
prepared and sealed by a Licensed Land Surveyor. The Topographic Survey shall
provide one (1) foot contour intervals and shall be printed on a 24 x 36 inch sheet.
7. Attached to the application shall be two (2) copies of the proposed site plan,
dimensioned and drawn to a scale of not less than 1 = 20 for property less than
three (3) acres, and 1 = 50 for parcels of three (3) acres or more, wherein the
following items shall be clearly labeled and dimensioned:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
218
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. All drawings are to have a title block, which shall have the name of the
project and date of plans including revision dates.
b. All drawings are to have a northpoint and the scale of the drawing is to be
indicated.
c. All lot and property lines.
d. Location of all proposed structures.
e. Existing and future right-of-way of adjacent streets, including centerlines and
section lines where applicable.
f. Location of all sidewalks, on and adjacent to the site.
g. Deceleration and passing lanes as required by the City of Troy Traffic
Engineer.
h. The means by which stormwater detention will be provided.
i. Setbacks and required yards.
j. Parking areas, access drives, loading and unloading areas, and trash
receptacles.
k. Greenbelts, landscape areas, other open space areas and screening walls.
l. The location of any existing driveways and streets within one hundred (100)
feet of the subject property, including those across frontage streets.
m. The location of existing cross access easements on abutting properties and
the location of proposed cross access or joint drive easements on the subject
property.
n. Calculations for the following shall be included on the site plan:
i. Gross and net (after rights-of-way) site area.
ii. Gross and net (usable) building area.
iii. Required parking and statement of parking provided.
iv. Required landscape and open space area, and statement of intent for
each.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
219
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
o. Site Plans for residential developments shall include the following additional
information:
i. Calculation of the dwelling unit density allowable and a statement of the
number of dwelling units, by type, to be provided.
ii. Topography on site and fifty (50) feet beyond, drawn at two (2) foot
contour intervals, with existing drainage courses, flood plains, wetlands, and
tree stands indicated.
iii. The typical floor plans and elevations of the proposed buildings, with
building height(s).
p. Number of employees on the largest working shift (if applicable).
8. A wetlands determination shall be required for all applications for subdivisions
and site condominiums. A wetlands determination shall be required for all other
applications for Preliminary Site Plan approval, when the Natural Features Map
indicates there may be wetlands on site. A wetlands determination may be
waived by the Zoning Administrator based on the Natural Features Map and other
applicable site information.
9. A tree inventory in accordance with Article 13 shall be attached to all
applications for Site Plan Approval. This requirement may be waived by the
Zoning Administrator, in those instances where the Topographic Survey and/or
other written information provided by the applicant demonstrate that the nature
of the site is such that a tree inventory would not be applicable, or would serve no
practical purpose.
10. A landscape plan prepared in conformance with Article 13.
11. Preliminary, dimensioned floor plans.
12. Preliminary, dimensioned building elevations.
13. Preliminary grading plans, in accordance with the City of Troy Engineering Design
Standards.
14. Lighting plan indicating proposed photometrics, height of light fixtures, proposed
light fixtures, and proposed methods of shielding.
15. Color rendering(s) and 3D computer generated building model(s). Building
model(s) shall be oriented to demonstrate proposed improvements in context of
site and surrounding properties.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
220
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
16. Samples, swatches, or manufacturers specification sheets of the predominant
proposed exterior materials and colors of all buildings and permanent structures,
including walls and fences.
17. All drawings shall be sealed and signed by a State of Michigan Professional
Engineer, Licensed Architect, Registered Landscape Architect, or Professional
Community Planner. All elevation and floor plan drawings for principal buildings
shall be designed and sealed by a Michigan licensed Architect.
18. Included with the hard copies shall be a CD containing an electronic version
of the Preliminary Site Plan Application. The format of the documents shall be
Tagged Image Format (tif) files at a resolution of two hundred (200) dots per
inch (dpi) and PDF format as specified by the Zoning Administrator. The CD
shall be clearly marked with the applicants name, contact information, project
name, and date. Documents shall be in a multipage TIF or individual TIFs in the
following order:
a. Application.
b. Topography.
c. Preliminary Site Plan.
d. Landscape Plan.
e. Preliminary Floor Plans.
f. Preliminary Building Elevations.
g. Preliminary Grading Plan.
h. Tree Preservation Plan.
i. Other information, as requested.
B. Final Site Plan. A petition or request for Final Site Plan Approval shall be submitted
on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall contain the following:
1. The modifications and/or additional information required by the Planning
Commission at the time of Preliminary Site Plan Approval.
2. Any and all executed Easements, Agreements, or other documents required
in conjunction with Preliminary Site Plan Approval, or required in conjunction
with Building and Engineering Plan Reviews, including, but not limited to, the
following:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
221
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. The dedication of rights-of-way.
b. The conveyance of easements for public utilities, private access drives, cross
access easements, joint driveway easements and pedestrian easements.
c. Private Agreements to detail the installation of Public Improvements by the
petitioner.
d. Irrevocable Petition Agreements for petitioners participation in potential
Special Assessment Projects involving road, pedestrian and/or public utility
improvements.
3. A current Title Commitment, indicating all parties of interest in the subject
property.
4. A statement from the Planning Department indicating that the Landscape Plans
have been submitted and approved, and the related fees have been paid.
5. Approved Engineering Site Plans, developed in accordance with the Citys
Engineering Design Standards, indicating the location of the major elements of:
a. The water distribution system.
b. The sanitary sewer system.
c. The storm drainage system, including the location size and shape of required
storm water detention basins or other detention facilities.
6. Site area and building area information and calculations to confirm that Zoning
Ordinance requirements such as parking and landscape area are met. Final
building floor area information shall include all floor levels including basement and
mezzanine areas.
7. The location of fire lanes and fire hydrants as required by the Fire Department.
SECTION 8.06 SITE PLAN REVIEW DESIGN STANDARDS
These design standards are intended to enhance the overall character of Troy by
building upon patterns of development that create or enhance sense of place and
have well-defined and vibrant design context.
The following general standards and any standards established for a specific use shall
be applied when considering a site plan application:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
222
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
A. Development shall ensure compatibility to existing commercial districts and provide
a transition between land uses through application of the following requirements:
1. Building design shall enhance the character of the surrounding area in relation
to building and parking placement, landscape and streetscape features, and
architectural design.
2. Street fronts shall provide a variety of architectural expression that is appropriate
in its context and prevents monotony.
3. Building design shall achieve a compatible transition between areas with
different height, massing, scale, and architectural style.
B. Development shall incorporate the following recognized best architectural building
design practices:
1. Foster a lasting impact on the community through the provision of high quality
design, construction, and detailing.
2. Provide high quality, durable materials, such as but not limited to stone, brick,
glass, and metal. E.I.F.S. or material equivalent shall only be used as an accent
material.
3. Develop buildings with creativity that includes balanced compositions and
forms.
4. Design roofs that are appropriate to the architectural style of the building and
create an appropriate visual exterior mass of the building given the context of
the site.
5. For commercial buildings, incorporate clearly defined, highly visible customer
entrances using features such as canopies, porticos, arcades, arches, wing
walls, ground plane elements, and/or landscape planters.
6. Include community amenities that add value to the development such as patio/
seating areas, water features, art work or sculpture, clock towers, pedestrian
plazas with park benches or other features located in areas accessible to the
public.
C. Enhance the character, environment and safety for pedestrians and motorists
through the following requirements:
1. Provide elements that define the street and the pedestrian realm.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
223
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
2. Create a connection between the public right of way and ground floor activities.
3. Create a safe environment by employing design features to reduce vehicular
and pedestrian conflict, while not sacrificing design excellence.
4. Enhance the pedestrian realm by framing the sidewalk area with trees, awnings,
and other features.
5. Improve safety for pedestrians through site design measures.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
224
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 8
Site Plan Review
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
225
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 9
Special Use Approval
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 9
SPECIAL USE APPROVAL
SECTION 9.01 INTENT
This Article provides a set of procedures and standards for special uses, which,
because of their unique characteristics, require specific consideration in relation to the
welfare of adjacent properties and the community as a whole.
These provisions are designed to allow practical latitude for the applicant and at
the same time, maintain adequate provision for the protection of the health, safety,
convenience and general welfare of the community.
SECTION 9.02 PROCEDURE
A. Application. A petitioner seeking Special Use approval shall file an application
with the Zoning Administrator, together with the appropriate fee and required
information, not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the regular meeting of
the Planning Commission at which the special use application will be considered.
The following information shall also be submitted:
1. A site plan with the required information, as set forth in Article 8.
2. A statement with regard to compliance with the criteria required for approval
in Section 9.03, Standards for Special Use approval and any specific standards
required by the Ordinance for the requested use.
3. Failure to provide the required information and materials as a part of the
application for Special Use approval shall render the application deficient
and said application shall be held in abeyance until the petitioner submits all
required items.
B. Planning Department Review. The application for Special Use approval shall be
forwarded by the Zoning Administrator to the Planning Department for review and
report on the request for Special Use approval.
C. Public Notice and Signage.
1. All applications for Special Use approval require public notice and a public
hearing. Section 3.04, Public Notice Requirements, sets forth notification
requirements for all public hearings.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
226
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 9
Special Use Approval
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
2. A sign shall be placed on the subject property to inform the public that an
application for Special Use approval has been filed, and to indicate where
information regarding the request can be obtained.
D. Planning Commission Action. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall review the application for Special Use approval, and shall either approve
the application, approve the application with conditions, deny the application or
postpone action. The Planning Commissions decision shall be made a part of the
public record, and incorporated into a resolution. Any conditions required by the
Planning Commission for approval shall also be made a part of the public record,
and incorporated into the resolution.
SECTION 9.03 SPECIAL USE STANDARDS
A. The Planning Commission shall consider the following general standards and any
standards established for a specific use when reviewing a special use request.
1. Compatibility with Adjacent Uses. The Special Use shall be designed and
constructed in a manner harmonious with the character of adjacent property
and the surrounding area. In determining whether a Special Use will be
harmonious and not create a significant detrimental impact, as compared to the
impacts of permitted uses.
2. Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed Special Use shall be compatible
and in accordance with the goals and objectives of the City of Troy Master Plan
and any associated sub-area and corridor plans.
3. Traffic Impact. The proposed Special Use shall be located and designed in
a manner which will minimize the impact of traffic, taking into consideration:
pedestrian access and safety; vehicle trip generation (i.e. volumes); types of
traffic, access location, and design, circulation and parking design; street and
bridge capacity and, traffic operations at nearby intersections and access points.
Efforts shall be made to ensure that multiple transportation modes are safely and
effectively accommodated in an effort to provide alternate modes of access
and alleviate vehicular traffic congestion.
4. Impact on Public Services. The proposed Special Use shall be adequately
served by essential public facilities and services, such as: streets, pedestrian or
bicycle facilities, police and fire protection, drainage systems, refuse disposal,
water and sewage facilities, and schools. Such services shall be provided and
accommodated without an unreasonable public burden.
5. Compliance with Zoning Ordinance Standards. The proposed Special Use shall
be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to meet the stated intent of
the zoning districts and shall comply with all applicable ordinance standards.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
227
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 9
Special Use Approval
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
6. Impact on the Overall Environment. The proposed Special Use shall not
unreasonably impact the quality of natural features and the environment in
comparison to the impacts associated with typical permitted uses.
7. Special Use Approval Specific Requirements. The general standards and
requirements of this Section are basic to all uses authorized by Special Use
Approval. The specific and detailed requirements relating to particular uses and
area requirements must be also satisfied for those uses.
B. The Planning Commission shall also consider the following factors when reviewing a
special land use request:
1. The nature and character of the activities, processes, materials, equipment, or
conditions of operation; either specifically or typically associated with the use.
2. Vehicular circulation and parking areas.
3. Outdoor activity, storage and work areas.
4. Hours of operation.
5. Production of traffic, noise vibration, smoke, fumes odors, dust, glare and light.
SECTION 9.04 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
A. Authority. The Planning Commission, in its review of a request for Special Use
approval, may at its discretion impose additional conditions when it is determined
that such increases in standards or additional conditions are required to achieve or
assure compatibility with adjacent uses and/or structures or to implement the Master
Plan.
B. Scope. Conditions that are imposed by the Planning Commission shall:
1. Be related to and ensure that the review considerations of Section 9.03.E, and the
applicable specific regulations are met.
2. Run with the property described as part of the approval of a Special Use,
including conditions made as part of the approval, and not to the owner of such
property.
3. Remain unchanged unless an amendment to the Special Use approval is
approved.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
228
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 9
Special Use Approval
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 9.05 EFFECTIVENESS
Any Special Use approval granted by the Planning Commission shall expire unless a
preliminary site plan effectuating the Special Use is submitted within two (2) years of
the date of approval. Upon receipt of final site plan approval, Special Use approval
shall continue in force so long as the particular use or activity continues to operate as
approved on the approved site, unless otherwise specified in the Planning Commission
resolution of approval. When a use approved under the Special Use approval
procedure ceases to function or is abandoned for a period of (12) twelve months, the
Special Use approval shall lapse and shall no longer be in effect.
SECTION 9.06 AMENDMENTS, EXPANSIONS, OR CHANGE IN USE
The following provisions apply when there is an amendment or a proposed expansion
to approved Special Uses or when there is a proposed change from one Special Use
to another.
A. Amendments. Any applicant who has been granted Special Use approval shall
notify the Zoning Administrator of any proposed amendment to the approved site
plan. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether a proposed amendment
requires new Special Use approval.
B. Expansions. An expansion of any use requiring a Special Use approval that results
in an increase of ten (10) percent or more of the building, parking, paved areas, or
site area shall require resubmittal in the manner described in this Article. A separate
Special Use approval shall be required for each use requiring Special Use Approval
on a lot, or for any expansions of a Special Use approval.
C. Change in Use. The applicant shall be responsible for informing the Zoning
Administrator of any significant change in an approved use, operations or activities
prior to any such change. The Zoning Administrator shall determine if a new Special
Use approval is required. A significant change shall mean any departure from
the operation or use described in the approved application or any change that
may cause external impacts such as additional traffic, hours of operation, noise,
additional outdoor storage, or display.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
229
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 10
DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS
SECTION 10.01 AVERAGE LOT SIZES
A. Intent. The intent of this Section is to permit lot sizes and lot widths to be adjusted
to average the minimum lot size as required in the district in which the property is
located. This option is permissible in all One-Family Residential Districts.
B. Standards.
1. In meeting the average minimum lot size, no lot area or width shall be reduced
by more than ten (10) percent of that area or width required in the district in
which the property is located.
2. The number of residential lots shall be no greater than if the land area to be
developed complies with the minimum lot area and width requirements in the
district in which the property is located. In this regard, the following maximum
gross densities (including roads) shall not be exceeded:
R-1A = 1.6 dwelling units per acre
R-1B = 2.2 dwelling units per acre
R-1C = 3.1 dwelling units per acre
R-1D = 3.8 dwelling units per acre
R-1E = 4.2 dwelling units per acre
SECTION 10.02 SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECT REGULATIONS
A. Intent. The intent of this Section is to regulate site condominium projects to ensure
compliance with this Ordinance and other applicable standards of the City, to
provide procedures and standards for review and approval or disapproval of such
developments, and to insure that each project will be consistent and compatible
with other developments in the community.
B. General Standards.
1. All site condominium projects shall comply with the use, area, setback, and
other applicable requirements of the zoning district in which the project is
located.
2. In a site condominium project, each condominium lot shall be considered
equivalent to a single lot as defined by this Ordinance, and shall meet all the
minimum use, area, setback, and other applicable requirements of the zoning
district in which the project is located.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
230
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
C. Site Plan Review and Approval Procedure. The review and approval of plans for a
condominium project shall comply with the standards and procedures set forth in
Article 8, Site Plan Review and the following additional requirements:
1. The Preliminary Site Plan shall include the street pattern and fully dimensioned
residential parcel layout, including proposed building configurations. A
preliminary sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water main layout shall also be
submitted.
2. Final Site Plans shall indicate the corners of all proposed residential parcels,
and such other points as may be necessary to determine that the potential
parcel and building configurations will conform with applicable Ordinance
requirements. Final Plans shall be accompanied by the following materials or
information:
a. Construction plans for all utilities and street improvements, prepared in
accordance with City Engineering Design Standards.
b. Floor Plans and Elevations of the proposed residential units.
c. Proposed condominium documents shall be reviewed and approved by the
City Attorney prior to approval of the final site plan.
d. Warranty Deeds and Easement documents, in recordable form, for all rightsof-
way and easements which are to be conveyed to the City in conjunction
with implementation of the proposed Final Plan.
D. Construction.
1. Prior to the issuance of permits for construction, the City Engineer shall prepare
and submit a detailed summary of required financial guarantees to insure the
construction of required improvements, and the placement of proper property
and parcel monuments and markers. Such financial guarantees shall then be
furnished by the petitioner, in a form acceptable to the City Manager. The
City Engineers certification of construction plan approval and evidence of
the required financial guarantees shall then be submitted to the Planning
Department for their review, approval, conditional approval, or disapproval.
2. Construction of utilities, streets, and other site improvements can begin only after
Planning Department approval of the Final Plan for a site condominium, as set
forth above.
3. No building permits for residential structures may be granted until the petitioner
has placed permanent residential parcel monuments or markers which are
acceptable to the City Engineer and Building Official.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
231
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
4. Occupancy permits for residential structures may not be granted until all utility
and street improvements and related rights-of-way or easements have been
accepted by the City, in accordance with Engineering Division procedures.
E. Improvements.
1. Principal access and circulation through a site condominium shall be provided
by public streets constructed to City standards, within sixty (60) foot wide rights-ofway.
Secondary access and circulation through such developments, on which
some of the residential parcels may have their sole frontage, may be provided
by twenty-eight (28) foot wide streets constructed to City public street standards,
within forty (40) foot private easements for public access.
2. Principal access to site condominium of five (5) acres or less in area may be
provided by way of twenty-eight (28) foot wide streets constructed to City public
street standards, within forty(40) foot private easements for public access, when
in the opinion of the City Council the property configuration is such that the
provision of conforming dwelling unit parcels is impractical.
3. All entrances to major or secondary thoroughfares shall include deceleration,
acceleration and passing lanes as required by Engineering Standards of the City
of Troy.
4. Sidewalks shall be constructed, in accordance with City Standards, across the
frontage of all dwelling unit parcels. Utilities shall be placed within street rights-ofway,
or within easements approved as to size and location by the City Engineer.
5. All shall be served by public water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and detention/
retention systems constructed to City standards, at the expense of the developer.
Easements over these systems shall be conveyed and recorded before
occupancy permits are issued for dwelling units.
SECTION 10.03 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION OPTION
A. Intent. An applicant may elect to apply for an Open Space Preservation option in
the R-1A and R-1B One-Family Residential zoning districts, provided the standards set
forth in this Section are met. The Open Space Preservation Option is intended to:
1. Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character
of the property, such as mature trees, wetlands, floodplains, topography,
and open space for enjoyment by residents of the Open Space Preservation
development.
2. Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of
residential areas.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
232
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of the land while
recognizing a reduction in development costs and by allowing the developer to
bypass natural obstacles.
4. Encourage the provision of open space so benefits may accrue directly to
residents of the Open Space Preservation development and to further encourage
the development of recreational facilities.
5. Ensure an Open Space Preservation development shall result in a recognizable
and substantial benefit to residents of the property and to the overall quality of life
in the City.
B. Eligibility Criteria. To be eligible for the Open Space Preservation Option, property
must be zoned R-1A or R-1B, and meet each of the following standards:
1. The area preserved as open space shall remain in a perpetually undeveloped
state.
2. The site shall be under the control of one owner or group of owners acting jointly
and shall be capable of being planned and developed as one integral unit.
3. The option has not previously been exercised on the parcel.
C. Application Requirements. The Open Space Preservation Plan shall contain the
following, in addition to the information required on a complete site plan:
1. A complete description of the land proposed to be dedicated to the City or to
the common use of lot owners (herein called dedicated open space) shall be
provided, including the following:
a. Legal description of dedicated open space, including dedicated easements.
b. Topographical survey of dedicated open space.
c. Types of soil in dedicated open space.
d. Description of natural features on dedicated open space.
e. Other relevant information necessary to show that the proposed development
qualifies for approval as an Open Space Preservation development.
2. The proposed plan of development of the dedicated open space shall be
submitted with the application and shall include the following:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
233
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. The proposed manner in which the title to land and facilities is to be held by
the owners of land in the Open Space Preservation development.
b. The proposed manner of regulating the use of the common facilities and areas
so as to eliminate possible nuisances to other property owners and cause for
enforcement by the City.
c. The proposed uses of dedicated open space and the proposed improvements
to be constructed by the proprietor.
D. Dwelling Unit Density. The number of dwelling units allowable within the Open Space
Development shall be determined through the preparation of a parallel plan.
1. The applicant shall prepare a parallel plan for the project that is consistent with
State, County and City requirements and design criteria for a tentative preliminary
plat or unplatted site condominium. The parallel plan shall meet all standards for
lot/unit size, lot/unit width and setbacks as normally required for the applicable
One-Family zoning district.
2. The City shall review the design and determine the number of lots that could be
developed following the parallel plan. This number shall be the maximum number
of dwelling units allowable in the Open Space Preservation development.
E. Regulatory Flexibility. To comply with the open space preservation provisions of the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, the City may permit specific departures from the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for yards and lots as a part of the approval
process. The applicant may cluster the dwellings on smaller lots, provided the
following:
1. Overall density shall not exceed the number of lots determined in the parallel
plan.
2. Setback provisions shall be as follows:
a. Setback requirements for main buildings at the perimeter of the development
shall be equal to the existing underlying zoning.
b. Setback requirements for main buildings on the interior of the development
shall be provided to newly created streets, an interior property line, or from the
open space preservation area. If property lines do not exist between buildings,
the setbacks shall be measured to an imaginary line between the buildings.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
234
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
The minimum setbacks shall be as follows:
Front 25
Rear 35
Sides 10
3. All regulations applicable to parking and loading, general provisions, and other
requirements shall be met.
4. The permitted uses shall be restricted to single family detached residential
development, residential accessory structures, and non-commercial recreation
uses.
F. Open Space Requirements.
1. Minimum Requirements. An Open Space Preservation development shall
maintain a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross area of the site as
dedicated open space, which shall remain perpetually in an undeveloped
state by means of one of the tools included in subsection 5 below. Land in an
undeveloped state may be, but is not required to be, dedicated to the use
of the public. Except as noted in Section 10.04.F.3, any land area maintained
in an undeveloped state within the boundaries of the site meeting the open
space standards herein may be included as required open space. The required
open space shall be accessible to all residents of the Open Space Preservation
development or the City of Troy.
2. Common Open Space. Common open space, other common properties
and facilities, individual properties, and all other elements of an Open Space
Preservation development shall be so planned that they will achieve a unified
open space, community green or plaza and recreation area system, with open
space and all other elements in appropriate locations, suitably related to each
other, the site and surrounding lands. All land within a development that is not
devoted to a residential unit, an accessory use, vehicle access, vehicle parking,
a roadway, or an approved land improvement, shall be permanently set aside as
common land for community use, recreation or conservation.
3. Areas Not Considered Open Space. The following land areas are not included as
dedicated open space for the purposes of this Section:
a. Area proposed as single-family residential lots/units.
b. Area proposed as limited common elements of condominium developments,
or land within a condominium development, which is convertible to general
common elements that will not remain in a perpetually undeveloped state or
land convertible to limited common elements.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
235
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
c. The area of any street right-of-way or equivalent private road easement.
4. Location of Open Space. Common open space shall be planned in locations
accessible to all residing within the Open Space Development. The common
open space may be centrally located along the road frontage of the
development, located to preserve significant natural features, or located to
connect open spaces.
5. Protection of Open Space.
a. The dedicated open space shall be set aside by the developer through
an irrevocable conveyance that is found acceptable to the City, such as:
recorded deed restrictions, restrictive covenants, or conservation easements,
plat dedication, or other legal means that run with the land. As used in this
section, the phrase conservation easement means an interest in land that
provides limitation on the use of land or a body of water or requires or prohibits
certain acts on or with respect to the land or body of water, whether or not the
interest is stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant, or condition
in a deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of
the land or body of water or in an order of taking, which interest is appropriate
to retaining or maintaining the land or body of water, including improvements
on the land or body of water, predominantly in its natural, scenic, or open
condition, or in an agricultural, farming, open space, or forest use, or similar use
or condition.
b. Such conveyance shall assure that the open space will be protected from all
forms of development, except as shown on an approved site plan, and shall
never be changed to another use. Such conveyance shall:
(i) Indicate the proposed allowable use(s) of the dedicated open space.
(ii) The dedicated open space shall forever remain open space, subject only
to uses authorized by state law and approved by the City on the approved
site plan or subdivision plat. Open space may include a recreational trail,
childrens play area, greenway or linear park.
SECTION 10.04 ONE-FAMILY CLUSTER OPTION
A. Intent. The Cluster Option is offered as an alternative to traditional residential
development. The Cluster Option is intended to:
1. Encourage the use of property in accordance with its natural character.
2. Assure the permanent preservation of open space and other natural features.
3. Provide recreational facilities and/or open space within a reasonable distance of
all residents of the Cluster development.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
236
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
4. Allow innovation and greater flexibility in the design of residential developments.
5. Facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities, and public
services in a more economical and efficient manner.
6. Ensure compatibility of design and use between neighboring property.
7. Encourage a less sprawling form of development, thus preserving open space as
undeveloped land.
8. Allow for design innovation to provide flexibility for land development where the
normal development approach would otherwise be unnecessarily restrictive or
contrary to other City goals.
B. Uses.
1. To be eligible for Cluster consideration, property must be zoned R-1A, R-1B, R-1C,
R-1D, or R-1E.
2. The permitted uses shall be limited to single-family detached residential
development, residential accessory structures, non-commercial recreation uses
and open space.
3. Two--family dwellings are permitted as a Special Use in the R1A, R1B, R1C, R1D,
and R1E Zoning Districts with the following regulations:
a. The site shall have frontage on and primary access to a major or minor arterial.
b. Perimeter Setback: Perimeter setback for principal structures from all of
the borders of the development shall be equal to the rear-yard setback
requirement for the underlying zoning district of the property directly adjacent
to each border. The required open space areas may be located partially or
completely within the required perimeter setback..
c. Comply with the Special Use standards as set forth in Section 9.03.
C. Base Number of Units.
1. The number of dwelling units permitted shall not exceed the number of dwelling
units customarily developable in the zoning district in which the proposed
development is located, developed with a conventional layout and all
applicable ordinances and laws observed. In order to calculate density with a
conventional subdivision or site condominium layout, the applicant shall submit
a concept site plan of the property with a conventional layout. The plan shall
indicate the topography of the site at two (2) foot contour intervals and the limits
of all floodplains, water bodies, wetlands, easements, and other areas which
would be set aside and preserved due to impracticality, economic unfeasibility,
contractual prohibition, or based upon applicable law or ordinance. In addition,
the concept plan with the conventional layout shall include the general street
pattern and lot configurations. In general, the plan shall be drawn with sufficient
detail to permit the Planning Commission to determine the density that would be
achieved by conventional development.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
237
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
2. If all requirements 10.04.D are met, the underlying density established by 10.04.C.1
may be increased by twenty percent (20%).
D. Open Space Requirements.
1. The following land areas are not included as dedicated open space for the
purposes of the Cluster development option:
a. The area of any street right-of-way.
b. The submerged area of any lakes, rivers, ponds or streams.
c. The required front and side setbacks surrounding a residential structure.
d. Required building separations.
e. Storm water detention or retention facilities, with the exception of bio-retention
areas that provide an active or passive recreation function, which can be
considered open space.
f. Non-functional open space due to limited width or depth as determined by
the City Council.
2. All land within a development that is not devoted to a residential unit, limited
common elements, accessory structures, vehicle access, vehicle parking, a
roadway, or an approved improvement, shall be set aside as common land for
recreation, conservation, or preserved in an undeveloped state.
3. A Cluster development shall maintain a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the
gross area of the site as dedicated open space held in common ownership.
4. Benefit. The proposed open space shall provide at least one (1) of the following
open space benefits:
a. Significant Natural Features. Preservation of significant natural features
contained on the site, as long as it is in the best interest of the City to preserve
the natural features that might be negatively impacted by conventional
residential development. The determination of whether the site has significant
natural features shall be made by the City Council, after review of a Natural
Features Analysis, prepared by the applicant, that inventories these features;
or
b. Recreation Facilities. If the site lacks significant natural features, it can qualify
with the provision of usable recreation facilities to which all residents of
the development shall have reasonable access. Such recreation facilities
include areas such as a neighborhood park, passive recreational facilities,
soccer fields, ball fields, bike paths, or similar facilities that provide a feature
of community-wide significance and enhance residential development.
Recreational facilities that are less pervious than natural landscape shall not
comprise more than fifty (50) percent of the open space. The determination
of whether the site has significant natural features shall be made by the City
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
238
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Council after review of a Site Analysis Plan, prepared by the applicant, that
inventories these features; or
c. Preservation of Common Open Space or Creation of Natural Features. If
the site lacks significant natural features, a proposed development may
also qualify if the development will preserve common open space or create
significant natural features such as wetlands. The determination of whether
the site has significant natural features shall be made by the City Council after
review of a Site Analysis Plan, prepared by the applicant, which inventories
these features.
5. The common open space may be centrally located along the road frontage of
the development, located to preserve significant natural features, or located to
connect open spaces throughout the development.
6. Connections between the dedicated open space of the development and
adjacent open space, public land or existing or planned safety paths is preferred
and may be required by the City Council.
7. The dedicated open space shall be set aside by the developer through
an irrevocable conveyance, such as deed restriction, restrictive covenant,
conservation easement, plat dedication, or other legal document that is subject
to review and approval by the City Council, after review and recommendation
by the City Attorney. The irrevocable conveyance document shall be approved
before there can be final approval of the development (final site plan approval),
and the developer shall record such documents with the Oakland County
Register of Deeds. The City of Troy (or the common owners) shall be specifically
identified as the beneficiary of its provisions.
a. The dedicated open space shall be perpetually maintained by parties that
have an ownership interest in the open space.
b. Standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space.
c. If the owners of the dedicated open space have failed to maintain it so
that it becomes a public nuisance, then the City shall undertake all future
maintenance, and shall annually assess the costs for such maintenance upon
the property owners in the association, based on the benefit allocation for
each property as determined by the City assessor.
d. The irrevocable conveyance shall assure that the open space will be
protected from all forms of development, except as shown on the approved
Final Site Plan. Such conveyance shall indicate the proposed allowable use(s)
of the dedicated open space. The open space restrictions shall prohibit uses
or activities that negatively affect the dedicated open space, including the
following:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
239
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
(i) Dumping or storing of any material or refuse.
(ii) Activity that may cause risk of soil erosion or threaten any living plant
material.
(iii) Cutting or removal of live plant material except for removal of dying or
diseased vegetation.
(iv) Use of motorized off-road vehicles.
(v) Cutting, filling or removal of vegetation from wetland areas.
(vi) Use of pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers within any wetlands area.
e. The irrevocable conveyance shall provide the following:
(i) The dedicated open space shall be perpetually maintained by parties that
have an ownership interest in the open space.
(ii) Standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space.
(iii) If the owners of the dedicated open space have failed to maintain it so
that it becomes a public nuisance, then the City shall undertake all future
maintenance, and shall annually assess the costs for such maintenance
upon the property owners in the association, based on the benefit
allocation for each property.
(iv) The dedicated open space shall forever remain open space, subject only
to uses approved by the City on the approved Final Site Plan.
(v) Any structures or buildings accessory to a recreation or conservation use
may be erected within the dedicated open space. These accessory
structures or buildings shall not exceed one (1) percent of the required
open space area.
8. Maintenance of Open Space. The applicant shall provide documentation to
guarantee to the satisfaction of the City Council that all open space portions of
the development will be maintained as approved and that all commitments for
such maintenance are binding on successors and future owners of the subject
property. All such documents shall be subject to approval by the City Attorney.
This provision shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership or control, provided notice
of such transfer is provided to the City, and that the continued maintenance
guarantees remain satisfactory to the City, and the land uses continue as
approved in the Cluster development.
9. Cohesive Neighborhood. The proposed development shall be designed to create
a cohesive community neighborhood through common open space areas for
passive or active recreation and resident interaction. All open space areas shall
be reasonably accessible to all residents of the development.
10. Unified Control. The proposed development site shall be under single ownership or
control, such that there is a single person or entity having proprietary responsibility
for the full completion of the project. The applicant shall provide sufficient
documentation of ownership or control in the form of agreements, contracts,
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
240
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
covenants, and/or deed restrictions that indicate that the development will
be completed in its entirety as proposed. All documents shall be subject to the
review and approval by the City Attorney.
11. Density Impact. The proposed type and density of use shall not place an
unreasonable impact on the subject and/or surrounding land and/or property
owners and occupants and/or the natural environment. An unreasonable impact
shall be considered an unacceptable significant adverse effect on the quality
of the surrounding community and the natural environment in comparison to the
impacts associated with conventional development.
E. Bulk Regulations and Regulatory Flexibility: The City shall permit specific departures
from the dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for yards and units as a
part of the approval process. The applicant may cluster the dwellings, as long as the
following requirements are satisfied:
1. Overall density shall not exceed the number of residential cluster units determined
in Section 10.04.C unless a density bonus as set forth in Section 10.04.H has been
granted by the City Council.
2. Setback provisions shall be as follows:
a. Perimeter Setback: The perimeter setback for principal structures from all
of the borders of the development shall be equal to the rear yard setback
requirement for the underlying zoning district of the property directly adjacent
to each border. The required open space areas may be located partially or
completely within the perimeter setback.
b. Setback requirements for principal structures on the interior of the
development shall be as follows. If property lines do not exist between houses,
the setbacks shall be measured to an imaginary line of equal distance
between the houses. A duplex shall be treated as a single-detached residence
for the purpose of determining required setbacks. The minimum setbacks shall
be as follows.
(i) Front: Twenty (20) feet. There shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet between
the garage door and the closest edge of the sidewalk to allow for an
automobile to be parked in the driveway without obstructing the sidewalk.
(ii) Rear: Twenty-five (25) feet.
(iii) Side: Seven and one-half (7.5) feet. For detached units with rear-to-side
relationships, the required setback shall be fifteen (15) feet for each unit, for
a total of thirty (30) feet.
3. Required street frontage. The extent of street frontage shall be determined by
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
241
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
the Planning Commission, in its discretion, with greater deviations from minimum
frontage requirements applicable in the district to be permitted in proportion
to the extent and importance of natural resources,topographical conditions,
floodplains and wetlands to be preserved on the property, and taking into
consideration the size and shape of the development site, public safety factors,
aesthetics and impact upon the surrounding developments.
4. All applicable zoning district regulations to height, parking, loading, general
provisions, and other requirements shall be met.
5. Regulatory Flexibility. The City Council, based upon a recommendation from the
Planning Commission, may waive the front, side, rear, and perimeter setback
provisions as set forth in 10.4.E.2 provided that the applicant has demonstrated
innovative and creative site and building designs and solutions, which would
otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved absent this provision.
F. Landscaping. Required landscaping shall be in accordance with section 13.02.F
Subdivision and Site Condominium Landscaping.
G. Access. Principal access to the development shall be provided by twenty-eight (28)
foot wide public streets constructed to City standards that are located within sixty
(60) foot wide rights-of-way or by twenty-eight (28) foot wide streets constructed to
City public street standards that are located, within forty (40) foot private easements
for public access. Sidewalks shall be constructed across the frontage of all dwelling
unit parcels in accordance with City standards. Public utilities shall be placed within
street rights-of-way, or within easements approved as to size and location by the City
Engineer.
H. Density Bonus. To encourage the use of the cluster development as set forth in
the objectives in Section 10.04.A, a variable density bonus may be allowed at the
discretion of City Council, based on a recommendation from Planning Commission.
Density bonuses may be based upon a demonstration by the applicant of the
following elements:
1. Open Space. For every ten percent (10%) additional open space above the
minimum required amount that is not encumbered by rights-of-way or utility
easements, a ten percent (10%) bonus density may be applied, or fraction
thereof above the base yield number of units as established in 10.04.C.1.
2. Housing Diversity and Options. A bonus above the base yield number of units
established in 10.04.C.1 may be provided for a development that provides a
diverse variety of housing types or provides a type of housing that is desired, but
not currently offered in the city. The following requirements shall be met for the all
bonus unit in excess of the base yield number of units:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
242
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. Maximum home square footage shall not exceed 1,500 sq/ft; and
b. Master first floor bedroom and bathroom shall be provided; and
3. Sustainable Design. A 10% unit bonus above the base yield number of
units established in 10.04.C.1 may be provided for a development that
utilizes sustainable design best practices including, but not limited to green
infrastructure, stormwater best management practices, and green buildings. A
sustainable design bonus shall be discretionary from the City Council, based on
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
4. Such density bonuses are in addition to the bonus established in 10.04.C.2
I. Standards for Review.
1. Review. In reviewing any application for a Cluster Development, the Planning
Commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the application, and
shall report its findings in full, along with its recommendations for disposition of the
application, to the City Council.
2. Findings. The applicant shall demonstrate that through the use of the Cluster
option, the development will accomplish a sufficient number of the following
objectives, as are reasonably applicable to the site, providing:
a. Long-term protection and preservation of natural resources, natural features,
and open space of a significant quantity and/or quality in need of protection
or preservation, and which would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be
achieved absent these regulations.
b. Innovative and creative site design through flexibility in the siting of dwellings
and other development features that would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely
to be achieved absent these regulations.
c. Appropriate buffer and/or land use transitions between the Cluster
development and surrounding properties.
d. A compatible mixture of open space, landscaped areas, and/or pedestrian
amenities.
e. Sustainable design features and techniques, such as green building,
stormwater management best practices, and low impact design, which will
promote and encourage energy conservation and sustainable development.
f. A means for owning common open space and for protecting it from
development in perpetuity.
g. Any density bonus is commensurate with the benefit offered to achieve such
bonus.
h. The cluster development shall be adequately served by essential public
facilities and services, such as: streets, pedestrian or bicycle facilities, police
and fire protection, drainage systems, refuse disposal, water and sewage
facilities, and schools. Such services shall be provided and accommodated
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
243
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
without an unreasonable public burden.
i. The architectural form, scale, and massing shall ensure buildings are in
proportion and complementary to those of adjacent properties and the
selected building materials are of high, durable quality. The garage shall not
be the dominant feature of a residential building.
J. Application Requirements. In addition to the information required by the City of Troy
for all other site plans, any development proposing to utilize the Cluster Plan shall
contain the following:
1. A complete description of the land proposed to be dedicated for the common
use of lot owners in the association or to the City, including the following:
a. A legal description of dedicated open space.
b. A topographical and boundary survey of dedicated open space.
c. A Natural Features Analysis that inventories all significant natural features on
the property and on abutting properties, if applicable.
2. Information regarding current and proposed ownership and use of the dedicated
open space, including the following:
a. The proposed ownership and control of the open space.
b. The proposed methods of regulating the use of the common facilities and
areas so as to eliminate possible nuisances to other property owners and/or
nuisances that require enforcement by the City of Troy.
c. The proposed and/or potential uses of dedicated open space and the
proposed improvements to be constructed by the developer.
3. A detailed narrative and graphic plan that indicates a specific method(s) for
protecting significant natural features including Protected Trees, wetlands, water
courses, and open space during construction. The plan shall be consistent with
the Citys Woodland Protection requirements as set forth in Section 13.07, and
shall be agreeable to the developer, who shall so indicate with his/her signature
on the detailed narrative and graphic plan.
4. Other relevant information necessary to show that the proposed development
qualifies for approval as a Cluster development.
5. Public Hearing and Notice Requirement. All applications for a Cluster Plan
approval require public notice and a public hearing. Section 3.04, Public Notice
Requirements, sets forth notification.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
244
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 10
Development Options
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
245
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 11
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION 11.01 INTENT
A. The intent of the Planned Unit Development option is to permit flexibility in
the design and use of residential and non-residential land which, through the
implementation of an overall development plan, when applicable to the site, will:
1. Encourage developments that will result in a long-term contribution to social,
environmental and economic sustainability in the City of Troy.
2. Permit development patterns that respond to changing public and private
needs.
3. Encourage flexibility in design and use that will result in a higher quality of
development and a better overall project than would be accomplished under
conventional zoning, and which can be accommodated without sacrificing
established community values.
4. Provide for the long-term protection and/or preservation of natural resources,
natural features, and/or historic and cultural resources.
5. Promote the efficient use and conservation of energy.
6. Encourage the use, redevelopment and improvement of existing sites where
current ordinances do not provide adequate protection and safeguards for
the site or its surrounding areas, or where current ordinances do not provide the
flexibility to consider redevelopment, replacement, or adaptive re-use of existing
structures and sites.
7. Provide for enhanced housing, employment, recreation, and shopping
opportunities for the citizens of Troy.
8. Ensure the compatibility of design and use between various components within
the PUD and with neighboring properties and uses.
9. Ensure development that is consistent with the intent of the Master Plan.
B. A Planned Unit Development project is viewed as an integrated development
concept. To that end, the provisions of this Article are not intended to be used as a
device for avoiding the zoning requirements that would otherwise apply, but rather
to allow flexibility and mixture of uses, and to improve the design, character and
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
246
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
quality of new development. The use of a Planned Unit Development to permit
variations from other requirements of this Ordinance shall only be approved when
such approval results in improvements to the public health, safety and welfare in
the area affected, and in accordance with the intent of this Article.
SECTION 11.02 USES PERMITTED
The uses permitted within a Planned Unit Development shall be consistent with the
intent of the Master Plan or the intent of any applicable corridor or sub-area plans.
If conditions have changed since the Plan, or any applicable corridor or sub-area
plans were adopted, the uses shall be consistent with recent development trends in
the area. Other land uses may be authorized when such uses are determined to be
consistent with the intent of this Article. Physical standards relating to matters such as
building height, bulk, density, parking and setbacks will be determined based upon
the specific Planned Unit Development PUD plan presented, and its design quality
and compatibility with adjacent uses, rather than being based upon the specific
standards contained in the underlying zoning districts or in those districts within which
the proposed uses otherwise occur. A Planned Unit Development PUD, approved in
accordance with the provisions of this Article, replaces the underlying zoning districts
as the basis upon which the subject property is developed and its uses are controlled.
SECTION 11.03 STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL
A Planned Unit Development project may be applied for in any zoning district. In order
to be considered for the Planned Unit Development option, it should be demonstrated
that the following standards will be met, as reasonably applicable to the site:
A. The proposed development shall be applied for by a person or entity who has the
legal right to execute a binding agreement covering all parcels in the PUD.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that through the use of the PUD option, the
development will accomplish a sufficient number of the following objectives, as are
reasonably applicable to the site, providing:
1. A mixture of land uses that would otherwise not be permitted without the use of
the PUD provided that other objectives of this Article are also met.
2. A public improvement or public facility (e.g. recreational, transportation, safety
and security) which will enhance, add to or replace those provided by public
entities, thereby furthering the public health, safety and welfare.
3. A recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to
the community, where such benefit would otherwise be infeasible or unlikely to
be achieved absent these regulations.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
247
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
4. Long-term protection and preservation of natural resources, natural features, and
historic and cultural resources, of a significant quantity and/or quality in need of
protection or preservation, and which would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to
be achieved absent these regulations.
5. A compatible mixture of open space, landscaped areas, and/or pedestrian
amenities.
6. Appropriate land use transitions between the PUD and surrounding properties.
7. Design features and techniques, such as green building and low impact design,
which will promote and encourage energy conservation and sustainable
development.
8. Innovative and creative site and building designs, solutions and materials.
9. The desirable qualities of a dynamic urban environment that is compact,
designed to human scale, and exhibits contextual integration of buildings and
city spaces.
10. The PUD will reasonably mitigate impacts to the transportation system and
enhance non-motorized facilities and amenities.
11. For the appropriate assembly, use, redevelopment, replacement and/
or improvement of existing sites that are occupied by obsolete uses and/or
structures.
12. A complementary variety of housing types that is in harmony with adjacent uses.
13. A reduction of the impact of a non-conformity or removal of an obsolete building
or structure.
14. A development consistent with and meeting the intent of this Article, which will
promote the intent of the Master Plan or the intent of any applicable corridor or
sub-area plans. If conditions have changed since the Plan, or any applicable
corridor or sub-area plans were adopted, the uses shall be consistent with recent
development trends in the area.
15. Includes all necessary information and specifications with respect to structures,
heights, setbacks, density, parking, circulation, landscaping, amenities and
other design and layout features, exhibiting a due regard for the relationship
of the development to the surrounding properties and uses thereon, as well as
to the relationship between the various elements within the proposed Planned
Unit Development. In determining whether these relationships have been
appropriately addressed, consideration shall be given to the following:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
248
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. The bulk, placement, and materials of construction of the proposed
structures and other site improvements.
b. The location and screening of vehicular circulation and parking areas
in relation to surrounding properties and the other elements of the
development.
c. The location and screening of outdoor storage, loading areas, outdoor
activity or work areas, and mechanical equipment.
d. The hours of operation of the proposed uses.
e. The location, amount, type and intensity of landscaping, and other site
amenities.
16. Parking shall be provided in order to properly serve the total range of uses within
the Planned Unit Development. The sharing of parking among the various
uses within a Planned Unit Development may be permitted. The applicant
shall provide justification to the satisfaction of the City that the shared parking
proposed is sufficient for the development and will not impair the functioning of
the development, and will not have a negative effect on traffic flow within the
development and/or on properties adjacent to the development.
17. Innovative methods of stormwater management that enhance water quality
shall be considered in the design of the stormwater system.
18. The proposed Planned Unit Development shall be in compliance with all
applicable Federal, State and local laws and ordinances, and shall coordinate
with existing public facilities.
SECTION 11.04 CONSISTENCY WITH MASTER PLAN
In the event that an applicant proposes a Planned Unit Development wherein the predominant
use or uses would not be consistent with the intent of the Master Plan, applicable
corridor or sub-area plans, recent development trends in the area, or this Article,
the City may consider initiating an amendment to the Master Plan or applicable corridor
or sub-area plans. If an applicant proposes any such uses, the applicant shall
provide supporting documentation in advance of or simultaneous with the request for
Concept Development Plan Approval.
SECTION 11.05 SUMMARY OF THE APPROVAL PROCESS
A. Step One: Conceptual Development Plan Approval. The procedure for review and
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
249
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
approval of a PUD shall be a three-step process. The first step shall be application
for and approval of a Concept Development Plan, which requires a legislative
enactment amending the zoning district map so as to reclassify the property as
a Planned Unit Development. A proposed Development Agreement shall be
included and incorporated with the Concept Development Plan, to be agreed
upon and approved coincident with said Plan. The Concept Development Plan
and Development Agreement shall be approved by the City Council following the
recommendation of the Planning Commission. Such action, if and when approved,
shall confer upon the applicant approval of the Concept Development Plan and
shall rezone the property to PUD in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
Concept Development Plan approval.
B. Step Two: Preliminary Development Plan Approval. The second step of the review
and approval process shall be the application for and approval of a Preliminary
Development Plan (preliminary site plan) for the entire project, or for any one or more
phases of the project. City Council shall have the final authority to approve and
grant Preliminary Development Plan approvals, following a recommendation by the
Planning Commission.
C. Step Three: Final Development Plan Approval. The third step of the review and
approval process shall be the review and approval of a Final Development Plan
(final site plan) for the entire project, or for any one or more phases of the project,
and the issuance of building permits. Final Development Plans for Planned Unit
Developments shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for administrative
review, and the Zoning Administrator, with the recommendation of other appropriate
City Departments, shall have final authority for approval of such Final Development
Plans.
SECTION 11.06 STEP ONE: CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL
A. Preapplication Meeting. Prior to the submission of an application for approval of
a Planned Unit Development, the applicant shall meet informally with the Zoning
Administrator of the City, together with such staff and outside consultants as
deemed appropriate by the City. The applicant shall present at such conference,
or conferences, a sketch plan of the proposed Planned Unit Development, as well as
the following information:
1. A legal description of the property and the total number of acres in the project;
2. A topographical map of the site;
3. A statement as to all proposed uses;
4. The known deviations sought from the ordinance regulations otherwise
applicable;
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
250
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
5. The number of acres to be preserved as open or recreational space and the
intended uses of such space;
6. All known natural resources, natural features, historic resources and historic
features; which of these are to be preserved; and
7. A listing and specification of all site development constraints.
B. Concept Development Plan. Thereafter, a Concept Development Plan conforming
to the application provisions set forth herein shall be submitted. A proposed
Development Agreement shall be incorporated with the Concept Development
Plan submittal and shall be reviewed and approved coincident with the Plan. Such
submissions shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, who shall present the same
to the Planning Commission for consideration at a regular or special meeting. The
Concept Development Plan shall constitute an application to amend the zoning
district map. Before making a recommendation to the City Council, the Planning
Commission shall hold a Public Hearing on the proposal. Prior to the Planning
Commission scheduling a Public Hearing, the applicant shall arrange for one (1)
or more informal meetings with representatives of the adjoining neighborhoods,
soliciting their comments and providing them to the Planning Commission. The City
shall be advised in advance as to the scheduling and location of all such meetings.
Thereafter, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City
Council with regard to the Concept Development Plan. A Public Hearing shall be
scheduled before the City Council, at which time Council will consider the proposal
along with the recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City staff, and
comments of all interested parties. The City Council shall then take action to
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the Concept Development Plan.
The City Council shall set forth in their resolution the reasons for such action, including
any reasons for denial.
C. Application. The application for approval of a Concept Development Plan shall
include the information and materials set forth herein, which shall be in a plan
format together with a narrative explanation. The Zoning Administrator shall have
the authority to waive certain information and materials if it is determined that such
information and materials do not affect compliance with this Ordinance.
1. Development Concept. A summary explanation of the development concept
shall describe the project and explain how the project will meet the intent of the
PUD option as set forth in Section 11.01 and the criteria for consideration as a PUD
as set forth in Section 11.03 hereof, as those sections reasonably apply to the site.
2. Density. The maximum density of the overall project and the maximum density for
each proposed use and phase.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
251
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. Road System. A general description of the road system and circulation
pattern; the location of roads, entrances, exits and pedestrian walkways; a
statement whether roads are intended to be public or private. Efforts shall be
made to ensure that multiple transportation modes are safely and effectively
accommodated in an effort to provide alternate modes of access and alleviate
vehicle traffic congestion particularly as it pertains to the improvements along
major roads.
4. Utilities. A general description and location of both on-site and off-site utilities
including proposed water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer systems and utility lines; a
general indication of the size and location of stormwater detention and retention
ponds, and a map and text showing off-site utilities, existing and proposed, which
will provide services to the project.
5. Open Space/Common Areas. A general description of proposed open space
and common areas; the total area of open space; the total area of open space
in each proposed phase; and the proposed uses of open space and common
areas.
6. Uses. A list of all proposed uses; the location, type and land area to be devoted
to each use, both overall and in each phase; and a demonstration that all of the
proposed uses are permitted under this Article.
7. Development Guidelines. A plan of the site organization, including typical
setback and lot dimensions; the minimum lot sizes for each use; typical minimum
and maximum building height and size; massing models; conceptual building
design; and the general character and arrangement of parking; fencing; lighting;
berming; and building materials.
8. Parking and Traffic. A study of the parking requirements and needs; and a traffic
impact study and analysis.
9. Landscaping. A general landscaping plan; a landscape plan for entrances; a
landscape plan for overall property perimeters; any theme/streetscape design;
and any proposed irrigation.
10. Natural Resources and Features. Floodway/floodplain locations and elevations;
wetlands and watercourses; woodlands; and location and description of other
natural resources and natural features.
11. Phasing Information. The approximate location, area and boundaries of each
phase; the proposed sequence of development, including phasing areas and
improvements; and the projected timing for commencement and completion of
each phase.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
252
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
12. Public Services and Facilities. A description of the anticipated demand to be
generated by the development for public sewer, water, off-site roads, schools,
solid waste disposal, off-site drainage, police and fire; a description of the
sufficiency of each service and facility to accommodate such demands; and
the anticipated means by which any insufficient services and facilities will be
addressed and provided.
13. Historical Resources and Structures. Their location, description and proposed
preservation plan.
14. Site Topography.
15. Signage. General character and location of entrance and internal road system
signage; project identification signage; and temporary or permanent signage
proposed for any other locations.
16. Amenities.
17. Zoning Classification. Existing zoning classifications on and surrounding the site.
18. Specification Of Deviations. A specification of all deviations proposed from
the regulations which would otherwise be applicable to the underlying zoning
and to the proposed uses, which are proposed and sought for any phase or
component of the Planned Unit Development; the safeguards, features and/
or planning mechanisms proposed to achieve the objectives intended to be
accomplished by any regulation from which a deviation is being sought.
19. Community Impact Statement. A community impact statement, which shall
provide an assessment of the developmental, ecological, social, economic
and physical impacts of the project on the natural environmental and physical
improvements on and surrounding the development site. Information required
for compliance with other ordinance provisions need not be duplicated in the
community impact statement.
D. Standards for Approval. In making a determination as to whether to approve a
proposed Planned Unit Development proposal, the Planning Commission and the
City Council shall be guided by the intent and criteria as set forth in Sections 11.01
through 11.04, as reasonably applicable to the site.
E. Planned Unit Development Agreement. In conjunction with a request for
Concept Development Plan approval, the applicant shall submit one or more
proposed documents which, when agreed upon by all parties, shall serve as the
PUD Agreement. As a part of the Concept Development Plan approval process,
the applicant and the City Council shall each authorize execution of a PUD
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
253
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Development Agreement. The PUD Development Agreement shall include, but shall
not be limited to, items such as the following:
1. A summary description of the nature and character of the proposed
development, including uses, densities and site improvements as approved in the
Concept Development Plan.
2. A statement of the conditions upon which Conceptual Development Plan
Approval by the City Council is based, with particular attention given to those
conditions, which are unique to this particular PUD Plan. These conditions may
include matters such as, but not limited to, architectural standards, building
elevations and materials, site lighting, pedestrian facilities, and landscaping.
3. A summary of the public improvements (streets, utilities, etc.) and any other
material benefits offered by the applicant, which are to be carried out in
conjunction with the proposed PUD development, along with a summary of
the financial guarantees which will be required and provided in order to ensure
completion of those improvements, as well as the form of such guarantees which
will be acceptable to the City.
4. A document specifying and ensuring the maintenance of any open space or
common areas contained within the PUD development (e.g. through a property
owners association, or through conveyance to the City with maintenance
deposit, etc.)
5. A statement that if there is a conflict between the Zoning Ordinance, the
Conceptual Development Plan and the Planned Unit Development Agreement,
the Planned Unit Development Agreement shall control.
6. Upon the granting of Concept Development Plan approval, the Planned Unit
Development Agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Oakland County
Register of Deeds by the City of Troy, referencing the legal description of the
subject property.
F. Effect of Concept Development Plan Approval. If the City Council approves the
Concept Development Plan and the Development Agreement, the zoning map
shall be amended to designate the property as a Planned Unit Development. Such
action, if and when approved, shall confer Concept Development Plan approval
for five (5) years (herein to be referred to as CDP Period). The five year CDP Period
commences upon the effective date of adoption of the ordinance that rezones the
parcel to PUD by City Council.
During the CDP Period, the applicant shall be permitted to submit at least one
(or more, at the option of the applicant, if the project is proposed in phases)
Preliminary Development Plan application(s), seeking Preliminary Development
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
254
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Plan approval in the manner hereinafter provided. Upon the submittal of the first
Preliminary Development Plan for one (1) or more phases of the PUD project, the
five (5) year expiration period shall no longer apply to the CDP and the CDP shall
remain in full force and effect for the development of the entire PUD project,
including without limitation, the development of all future phases of the entire PUD
Property. Any submittals of Preliminary Development Plans shall comply with all the
requirements of Article 8, Site Plan Review for Preliminary Site Plan submittals and
any additional requirements of the Zoning Administrator reasonably needed to
demonstrate consistency with the CDP and compliance with Section 11.07. Any
Preliminary Development Plans that do not comply with these requirements shall
not be considered submittals for purposes of this Paragraph. After submittal of
the first Preliminary Development Plan, the timing for the issuance of permits and
construction of the PUD project and/or all future phases, shall, be determined as set
forth in Section 11.08.F.
Upon the request of the applicant, prior to the expiration of the Concept
Development Plan, the City Council may extend the expiration date of the Concept
Development Plan. In determining whether to extend the expiration date of the
Concept Development Plan, approval of an extension may be granted if the
ordinances and laws applicable to the project have not changed in a manner
which would substantially affect the project as previously approved.
In the event of the expiration of the Concept Development Plan, the applicant may
either make application for a new Concept Development Plan or make application
for some other zoning classification. Following Final Development Plan Approval
for one or more phases or for the entire PUD, no use or development of the subject
property may occur which is inconsistent with the approved Final Development Plan
and Development Agreement. There shall be no use or development of the subject
property until a new Concept Development Plan or rezoning is approved.
SECTION 11.07 STEP TWO: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL
A. Development of property classified as a PUD shall require Preliminary Development
Plan approval, which shall be granted by City Council following a recommendation
by the Planning Commission. Application(s) shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission and City Council for review and approval consistent with the approved
Concept Development Plan.
B. Preliminary Development Plan approval may be applied for and granted with
respect to the entire PUD development or as to one (1) or more phases. However, if
the project is developed in phases, the design shall be such that upon completion,
each phase or cumulative result of approved phases shall be capable of standing
on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open space, and shall
contain the necessary components to ensure protection of natural resources and
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
255
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the Planned Unit Development and
properties in the surrounding area.
The Preliminary Development Plan shall specify the public improvements required to
be constructed in addition to and outside of the proposed phase or phases for which
approval is sought, which are determined to be necessary in order to support and
service such phase or phases.
Further, the Preliminary Development Plan may require the recordation of permanent
or temporary easements, open space agreements, and other instruments in order
to ensure the use and development of the public improvements on the property as
proposed and/or to promote and/or protect the public health, safety and welfare in
a manner consistent with the intent and spirit of this Article.
C. Except as herein otherwise modified, Preliminary Development Plan approval shall
be based upon the requirements, standards and procedures set forth in Article 8, Site
Plan Review. In addition to the information required in Article 8, the applicant shall
also submit the following:
1. A demonstration, including map and text, that the requirements of Section 11.07.B
hereof have been met.
2. To the extent not provided by the information submitted in accordance
with Article 8, Site Plan Review, the following additional information and
documentation shall be submitted:
a. Sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with any applicable project
design standards as approved during Concept Development Plan review.
b. A site plan showing the type, location and density of all structures and uses.
c. A plan showing all open spaces, including preserves, recreational areas, and
historic resources, including but not limited to all similar such uses and spaces,
and the purpose proposed for each area.
d. Expert opinion of an independent consultant with regard to a market need for
the use or uses proposed and the economic feasibility of the project.
e. A specification of all deviations proposed from the regulations, which would
otherwise be applicable to the underlying zoning and to the proposed uses.
This specification shall state the reasons and mechanisms to be utilized for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare in lieu of the regulations,
which would otherwise apply to a traditional development.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
256
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
f. Additional landscaping details as required by the Planning Commission and/or
the City Council in order to achieve a specific purpose consistent with the spirit
of this Article.
g. The general improvements which will constitute a part of each phase or
phases proposed, including, without limitation, lighting, signage, visual and
noise screening mechanisms, utilities, and further including the aesthetic
qualities of the general improvements.
D. The Planning Commission shall proceed with the review of a Preliminary
Development Plan for either the entire PUD development or for any one or more
phases thereof in the manner herein specified and in accordance with the provisions
of Article 8, Site Plan Review. The Planning Commission shall determine that:
1. The Preliminary Development Plan continues to meet and conform to the
criteria for, the intent of and the objectives contained in the approved Concept
Development Plan. In the event that the Planning Commission determines that
the Preliminary Development Plan does not continue to meet or conform to
the criteria for, the intent of and/or the objectives contained in the approved
Concept Development Plan, the Planning Commission shall make this
determination a part of their recommendation.
2. The Preliminary Development Plan meets the requirements, standards and
procedures set forth in Article 8, Site Plan Review and any other applicable
requirements as set forth in this Article.
E. At the conclusion of the Planning Commissions review, the Planning Commission
shall either recommend approval of the Preliminary Development Plan, with or
without conditions, or recommend denial. If the Planning Commission recommends
denial, the minutes of the meeting shall include the reasons for recommending
denial. If approval is recommended with conditions, the minutes shall include a
statement of the conditions.
Following receipt of the Planning Commissions recommendation of a Preliminary
Development Plan, the City Council shall either approve the Preliminary
Development Plan, with or without conditions, or deny the Preliminary Development
Plan. If City Council determines the Preliminary Development Plan does not conform
to the Concept Development Plan, the applicant shall either revise the Preliminary
Development Plan to so conform, or, shall seek an amendment to the Concept
Development Plan in accordance with Section 11.09.
F. City Councils approval of the Preliminary Development Plan shall be effective for
a period of three (3) years, during which period of time the applicant is authorized
to submit a Final Development Plan (final site plan, engineering and construction
plans) for site improvements, together with all other documents necessary for Final
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
257
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Development Plan approval and the issuance of Building Permits. The applicant
may apply to the City for extension of the three (3) year period for approval of the
Preliminary Development Plan.
SECTION 11.08 STEP THREE: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL
Upon receipt of Preliminary Development Plan approval, the applicant shall be entitled
to submit a Final Development Plan for the entire development (or one or more phases)
to the Zoning Administrator for its review and approval, and the Zoning Administrator
shall have final authority for the review and requested approval of Final Development
Plans. In conjunction with the application for approval of a Final Development Plan,
the applicant shall submit evidence of completion of the Preliminary Development
Plan Approval process in accordance with this Article. Following its review of the Final
Development Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the Final Development Plan. In the event of denial, the Zoning Administrator
shall set forth in writing the reasons for such action. Construction shall commence in
accordance with the Final Development Plan within two (2) years from the date of
approval. The applicant may apply to the Planning Commission for an extension of the
one (1) year period within which to commence construction upon good cause shown.
SECTION 11.09 AMENDMENT
Any proposed amendment of the Planned Unit Development which seeks to alter the
intent, the conditions or terms of the Concept Development Plan as approved and/
or the terms or conditions of Final Development Plan approval, shall be presented to
and considered by the Planning Commission and the City Council at Public Hearings,
following the procedures set forth for Concept Development Plan approval.
SECTION 11.10 PUBLIC NOTICE FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PUBLIC HEARINGS
A. All applications for a Planned Unit Development shall require public notice and
a public hearing. Section 3.04, Public Notice Requirements sets forth notification
requirements for all public hearings.
B. A sign shall be placed on the subject property to inform the public that an
application for a Planned Unit Development has been filed, and to indicate the
location of information regarding the request.
SECTION 11.11 ABANDONMENT
A. Abandonment of Concept Development Plan. Following any action evidencing
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
258
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 11
Planned Unit Development
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
abandonment of the Concept Development Plan, whether through failure to
proceed during the Concept Development Plan period as required under this Article,
or through notice of abandonment given by the property owners, applicants or their
successors. The City Council shall be entitled to take any necessary and appropriate
action to rescind the Concept Development Plan approvals, to invalidate any
related Development Agreements, and to rezone the subject property from PUD to
an appropriate classification. Abandonment shall be deemed to rescind any and all
rights and approvals granted under and as part of the Concept Development Plan,
and the same shall be deemed null and void. Evidence of such actions shall be
recorded in the office of the Oakland County Register of Deeds, and referenced to
the subject property.
B. Abandonment of Preliminary Development Plan. Approved Preliminary
Development Plans for which a Final Development Plan has not been submitted as
required under Section 11.08 shall be considered abandoned for the purposes of
this Article. The applicant may request a twelve (12) month extension of Preliminary
Development Plan approval, which will be considered and acted upon by the City
Council following a Public Hearing. A written request for extension must be received
by the City before the expiration of the three (3) year Preliminary Plan Approval
period.
C. Abandonment of Final Development Plan. Approved Final Development Plans,
upon which construction does not commence within a two (2) year period from the
date of a Final Development Plan approval, shall be considered abandoned for the
purposes of this Article. The applicant may request a twelve (12) month extension
of Final Development Plan approval, which will be considered and acted upon by
the City Council following a Public Hearing. A written request for extension must be
received by the City before the expiration of the two (2) year Final Plan Approval
period.
SECTION 11.12 APPEALS
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have no authority in matters covered by this Article.
Modifications to plans or proposals submitted under this Article shall be processed in
accordance with the amendment procedures covered under Section 11.09 hereof.
SECTION 11.13 VIOLATIONS
Any violation of the approved PUD Final Plan or the PUD Agreement shall be considered
a violation of the Zoning Ordinance, which shall be subject to the enforcement actions
and penalties described in Section 3.08.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
259
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 12
SUSTAINABLE DESIGN AND ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS
SECTION 12.01 SUSTAINABLE DESIGN OPTION
A. Intent. It is the intent of this Section to promote environmentally sustainable and
energy efficient design and development practices for the construction of new
and the rehabilitation of existing buildings and sites within the City. Pursuant to the
sustainability initiatives set forth in the City of Troy Master Plan, the purpose of these
regulations are to provide various incentives that will achieve the following:
1. Encourage the reuse of existing buildings and redevelopment of existing sites.
2. Conserve natural resources.
3. Reduce the use of energy in both construction and daily operations.
4. Foster a mix of uses and pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit use.
B. Eligibility. Any project for which site plan review is required, including subdivisions
and site condominiums, may apply for qualifications as a Sustainable Design
Project (SDP).
C. Effect of Qualifications as a Sustainable Design Project. There are provisions
identified throughout the Zoning Ordinance where the use of sustainable design
measures may be used to satisfy, modify, or replace a specific requirement. Once
prequalified as a SDP, the use of a sustainable design measure to satisfy a specific
Ordinance requirement is authorized. Approval of a site plan with a modification
permitted under this Section shall be considered the formal approval of the SDP
status of the project.
D. Procedure.
1. An application for a SDP may be obtained from the Zoning Administrator.
An applicant seeking qualification as a SDP shall submit a complete SDP
application, accompanied by a complete SDP checklist and supportive
narrative which verifies how specific measures will be achieved, to the Zoning
Administrator.
2. Qualification as a SDP is based upon the use of specific measures to offset
the potential impact of modifying specific areas of the Ordinance. The SDP
checklist identifies potential sustainable design measures eligible to modify
specific provisions of the Ordinance.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
260
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. Applications for a SDP shall be reviewed by the Sustainable Design Review
Committee, which shall consist of the Planning Director, City Engineer, Building
Official, and two (2) members of the Planning Commission designated by the City
Manager. The Sustainable Design Review Committee may request the review of
a SDP application by consultants with specific expertise in sustainable design.
4. Upon completion of the review, the Sustainable Design Review Committee shall
make a determination whether a project meets the qualifications as a SDP. If
the committee makes a positive determination, the project will have Prequalified
SDP status, which will make the project automatically eligible for the requested
modification during site plan review and approval. Approval of a site plan with a
modification permitted under this Section shall be considered the formal approval
of the SDP status of the project.
SECTION 12.02 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
A. Intent. The intent of this Section is to encourage the use of structural, vegetative
or managerial practices, commonly referred to as best management practices
(BMPs), designed to treat, prevent, or reduce degradation of water quality due to
storm water runoff. All development projects subject to site plan review shall use best
management practices (BMPs) to prevent flooding, protect water quality, reduce
soil erosion, maintain and improve wildlife habitat, and contribute to the aesthetic
values of the project. The particular facilities and measures required on-site shall
reflect and incorporate existing grade, natural features, wetlands and watercourses
on the site to the maximum extent feasible.
B. Sustainable Design. While stormwater management is required to meet the City
Engineering Design Standards, certain BMPs may be used to satisfy qualification as a
Sustainable Design Project, as set forth in Section 12.01.
C. Stormwater Management. All stormwater management plans shall meet the
Engineering Design Standards adopted by the City as determined by the City
Engineer, and shall utilize nonstructural control techniques to the maximum extent
feasible, including, but not limited to:
1. Limitation of land disturbance and grading.
2. Maintenance of vegetated buffers and natural vegetation.
3. Minimization of impervious surfaces.
4. Use of terraces, contoured landscapes, runoff spreaders, grass or rock-lined
swales.
5. Use of infiltration devices.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
261
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. General Standards.
1. Sites shall be designed and managed utilizing Low Impact Development
techniques to emulate the natural water cycle, and maintain local and regional
hydrologic patterns. The Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan,
published by the Southeast Michigan Council of Governments (SEMCOG)
provides guidance for the designer and developer.
2. Stormwater management systems shall be designed to prevent flooding and the
degradation of water quality related to stormwater runoff and soil erosion from
proposed development.
3. All new development and redevelopment of properties shall include on-site
storage of stormwater. Facilities shall be designed to provide a volume of storage
and discharge rate which meets the standards of the City.
4. Priority shall be placed on site design which maintains natural drainage patterns
and watercourses. Alterations to natural drainage patterns shall not create
flooding or degradation of water quality for adjacent or downstream property
owners.
5. The use of swales and buffer strips vegetated with desirable native materials is
encouraged as a method of stormwater conveyance so as to decrease runoff
velocity, allow for bio-filtration, allow suspended sediment particles to settle and
to remove pollutants. Tolerance for water saturation, sunlight, pesticides, metals,
and salts shall be required in determining appropriate plantings in these areas.
6. Where large amounts of grease and oil may accumulate, as in the case of
commercial/industrial developments and large areas of impervious surfaces for
parking, oil separators shall be required.
7. For sites that store or use chemicals, a spill response plan shall be submitted and
approved by the City.
E. Use of Wetlands. Wetlands may be used for stormwater management, provided
applicable permits are obtained from the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources and Environment and/or the appropriate federal agency.
SECTION 12.03 CONSTRUCTION WITHIN DESIGNATED FLOOD PLAIN AREAS
A. Intent. It is the intent and purpose of this Section to establish those standards
necessary to significantly reduce hazards to persons and damage to property as a
result of flood conditions in the City of Troy; and, further, to comply with the provisions
and requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
262
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
B. Delineation of the Flood Hazard Area. The boundaries of Flood Hazard Areas shall
initially be determined by reference to the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Maps, and any amendments thereto, as provided by the
National Flood Insurance Program.
C. Development Requirements. In cases of conflict, the Flood Hazard area
development requirements shall take precedence over the standards and
requirements of the existing Zoning District. Compliance with the requirements of this
article shall be necessary for all development occurring within Flood Hazard Areas.
D. Uses Permitted.
1. Within Flood Hazard Areas, no land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
a. Grazing, agriculture, and pastureland.
b. Parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, playfields, athletic fields, golf courses, nature
paths and trails, and wildlife preserves.
c. Required open space or lot area for uses in compliance with the Zoning District
requirements of contiguous property not within the Flood Hazard Area.
d. Off-street parking, streets, drives, roads, and outdoor play equipment or
structures, provided that such equipment and/or structures would not cause
an increase in water surface elevation, obstruct flow, or reduce impoundment
capacity. Such equipment and/or structures shall be anchored to prevent
flotation and lateral movement.
2. New and/or substantially improved residential structures shall be permitted,
provided that such residential structures comply with the standards and
requirements of Sections 612.2.1, 612.2.2, or 612.2.3 of the Army Corps of Engineers
Flood Proofing Regulations. Such structures shall be prohibited in Flood Hazard
Areas in the EP Environmental Protection Zoning District.
3. New and/or substantially improved non-residential structures permitted by the
applicable Zoning District shall be permitted, provided that such non-residential
structures comply with the standards and requirements of Sections 612.2.1,
612.2.2, or 612.2.3 of the Army Corps of Engineers Flood Proofing Regulations.
Such structures shall be prohibited in Flood Hazard Areas in the EP Environmental
Protection Zoning District.
E. Permits. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, or substantially
improved or placed, and no land filled or used in a Flood Hazard Area without
the granting of an applicable permit by the City of Troy Building Department and
Engineering Department.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
263
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 12.04 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
A. Intent. It is the intent of the City to permit the effective and efficient use of Wind
Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) by regulating the siting, design, and installation
of such systems to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to ensure
compatibility of land uses in the vicinity of WECS. This Ordinance does not establish
or guarantee air or light or wind rights or establish access to the air, light, or wind.
B. Applicability. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter, or locate any WECS
or Temporary Meteorological Tower (TMT) within the City except in compliance with
this section. A building permit is required for any WECS or TMT pursuant to this Section.
C. On-Site WECS Permitted. On-site WECS or TMT shall be considered a permitted use in
all zoning districts, subject to the provisions of this Section. Applications for an on-site
WECS shall include the following:
1. Applicant Information. Name, address and contact information.
2. Project Description. A general description of the proposed project as well as a
legal description (property identification number) of the property on which the
project would be located.
3. Plot Plan and Documentation. The Plot Plan shall include maps showing the
physical features and land uses of the project area, both before and after
construction of the proposed project. The plot plan shall include:
a. The project area boundaries.
b. The location, height and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures and
fencing.
c. Distance of proposed structure from all property lines and permanent
structures.
d. The location, grades and dimensions of all temporary and permanent on-site
access roads.
e. Existing topography.
f. Water bodies, waterways, wetlands, and drainage ditches (county drains).
g. All new above ground infrastructure related to the project.
h. The location of all overhead utility wires.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
264
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
4. Additional Documentation.
a. Insurance. Proof of the applicants appropriate liability insurance.
b. Sound Pressure Level. Documentation of the manufacturers designed sound
pressure levels (decibels) for unit to be installed.
c. Certifications. Certification that applicant has complied or will comply with all
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
d. Grant of Authority. The applicant shall provide evidence of ownership of the
land which the WECS or TMT is to be located and the written consent of the
land owner if different from the applicant. If the applicant is leasing land the
applicant shall provide a copy of the lease agreement and the land owners
written authorization for the applicant to construct the structure.
e. Compliance with Laws and Regulations. The applicant, operator of the WECS
or TMT, and owner of the land on which the WECS or TMT is located are each
responsible for ensuring that the installation, operation, use and removal of
the WECS or TMT complies with all applicable state, federal and local laws,
ordinances and regulations, and shall submit proof of such compliance to the
City upon request. Further, such applicant, operator and owner shall each
defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City from and against any and all
loss, liability, cost or expense incurred by the City as a result of any failure of the
WECS or TMT to comply with applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
D. Commercial WECS Permitted. Commercial WECS and TMT shall be considered a
special land use in all zoning districts and shall subject to the provisions of this Section
and Article 9. Applications for a commercial WECS or TMT shall require a complete
special land use permit application in accordance with Article 9, including a
complete site plan in accordance with Article 8.
E. Planned Unit Development. A proposed WECS or TMT as part of an initial application
for a Planned Unit Development shall be subject to approval as part of the PUD
petition, and the standards and requirements of Article 11 and this Section, except
that no special land use permit application shall be required for any commercial
WECS or TMT. For a proposed WECS or TMT in an existing PUD, compliance with this
Section including submitting a special land use application shall be required in lieu of
a petition for amendment to the approved PUD.
F. Standards and Requirements. All On-site WECS, Commercial WECS and Temporary
Meteorological Towers shall meet the following additional standards and
requirements:
1. Setbacks.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
265
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. The distance between a WECS or TMT and the nearest property line shall be at
least the one and a half (1.5) times the height of the WECS or TMT for all zoning
districts except R1-A, R1-B, R1-C, R1-D, R-1E, CR-1 and RT Districts. For R1-A,
R1-B, R1-C, R1-D, R-1E, CR-1 and RT Districts, the distance between a WECS or
TMT and the nearest property line shall be at least the two (2) times the height
of the WECS or TMT. This shall include property lines that abut a public right-ofway.
b. No part of the WECS or TMT structure, including guy wire anchors, may extend
closer than ten (10) feet to the owners property line.
c. The distance between a WECS and any other On-site or Commercial WECS
shall be at least three (3) times the height of the taller of the two (2) WECS.
2. Height.
a. The height of on-site WECS and TMTs shall be as follows:
i. In R1-C, R1-D, R-1E, CR-1 and RT Districts, on-site WECS and TMTs shall not
exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
ii. In R1-A, R1-B and MR Districts, on-site WECS and TMTs shall not exceed thirtyfive
(35) feet in height.
iii. In all other districts not otherwise mentioned above, On-site WECS and TMTs
shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height.
b. Commercial WECS and TMT shall be less than two hundred (200) feet in height.
c. Height shall be measured from the existing grade to the tip of the turbine
blade at its highest point for a horizontal axis turbine, and to the highest point
of a vertical axis turbine.
d. Height for on-site WECS mounted to a structure shall be measured from grade
to the tip of the turbine blade at its highest point for a horizontal axis turbine,
and to the highest point of a vertical axis turbine.
e. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all FAA regulations and the
Michigan Tall Structures Act as part of the approval process, if applicable.
3. Noise; Sound Pressure Level.
a. Audible noise or the sound pressure level of an On-site WECS or Commercial
WECS shall not exceed fifty (50) dB(A) (A-weighted Decibels) at the property
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
266
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
line closest to the WECS. For Commercial WECS, modeling and analysis of
sound pressure shall be required in accordance with Section 11.04.H.8 below.
b. This sound pressure level shall not be exceeded by more than five (5) dB(A) for
more than three minutes in any hour of the day.
4. Lighting.
a. No WECS or TMT shall be artificially lighted.
5. Construction codes, towers, and interconnection standards.
a. Every WECS and TMT shall comply with all applicable State construction codes
and local building permit requirements.
b. Every WECS and TMT shall comply with Federal Aviation Administration
requirements, the Michigan Airport Zoning Act (PA 23 of 1950), The Michigan
Tall Structures Act (PA 259 of 1959), and any other applicable State or Federal
laws or regulations.
c. An On-site WECS or Commercial WECS that is tied to the electrical grid shall
comply with Michigan Public Service Commission and utility interconnection
requirements. Off-grid WECS are exempt from this requirement.
6. Safety.
a. Design Safety Certification. The safety of the design of every WECS or TMT shall
be certified by the applicants professional engineer registered in the State
of Michigan and reviewed by the City. The standard for certification shall be
included with the permit application. If WECS or TMT construction is approved,
the professional engineer shall certify that the construction and installation
of the WECS or TMT meets or exceeds the manufacturers construction and
installation standards, and any applicable State and Federal laws and
regulations prior to operation.
b. Controls and Brakes. Every WECS or TMT shall be equipped with manual and
automatic controls to limit rotation of blades to a speed not to exceed the
designed limits of the WECS or TMT. The applicants professional engineer must
certify that the rotor and overspeed control design and fabrication conform to
applicable design standards. No changes or alterations from certified design
shall be permitted unless accompanied by a professional engineers statement
of certification approved by the City.
c. Lightning. Every WECS or TMT shall have lightning protection.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
267
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
d. Guy Wires. If an On-site WECS or TMT is supported by guy wires, the wires shall
be clearly visible to a height of a least six (6) feet above the guy wire anchors.
Every Commercial WECS must be of a freestanding monopole design and guy
wires shall not be used.
e. Grade Clearance. The minimum vertical blade tip clearance from grade
shall be twenty-five (25) feet for any horizontal-axis WECS or from any moving
component of a vertical-axis wind energy conversion system.
f. Electromagnetic Interference. No WECS or TMT shall be installed in any
location where its proximity to existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or
reception antennae for radio, television, or wireless phone or other personal
communication systems or emergency broadcast systems would produce
electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or reception unless the
applicant provides a replacement signal to the affected party that will restore
reception to at least the level present before operation of the wind energy
system. No WECS or TMT shall be installed in any location within the line of sight
of an existing microwave communications link where operation of the wind
energy system is likely to produce electromagnetic interference in the links
operation unless the interference is insignificant.
g. Color. Towers and blades shall be painted a non-reflective neutral color
designated on the application and approved by the City or as otherwise
required by law.
h. Climb Prevention. Every WECS or TMT must be protected by anti-climbing
devices twelve (12) feet from base of pole.
G. Removal of Abandoned On-Site WECS or TMT. In the event an On-Site WECS or TMT
is abandoned or unused for a period of one hundred and eighty (180) days, or if a
WECS or TMT is damaged, the owner of the tower or the land shall promptly remove
the tower and all related equipment. Failure to remove the tower and related
equipment in accordance with the foregoing shall subject the tower owner and land
owner to fines established by the City Council. In addition, by accepting a permit for
the On-Site WECS or TMT, the applicant and land owner agree that the tower and
equipment shall be removed after thirty (30) days written notice from the City.
H. Additional Requirements for Commercial WECS. The following standards and
requirements shall apply to every Commercial WECS:
1. Warnings. A visible warning sign of High Voltage shall be placed at the base of
every Commercial WECS. The sign must have at least six (6) inch letters with
-inch stroke. Such signs shall be located a maximum of three hundred (300) feet
apart and at all points of site ingress and egress.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
268
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
2. Signage. In addition to warning signs and signs required by law, every
Commercial WECS shall be equipped with a sign containing owner identification
and contact information. No other signs or advertising are permitted.
3. Liability Insurance. The owner or operator of a Commercial WECS shall maintain
a current commercial liability and property damage insurance policy with
coverage limits acceptable to the City pertaining to installation and operation
of the Commercial WECS. The amount and terms of the policy shall be noncancellable
established as a condition of conditional use permit approval.
The City and land owner shall be named as additional insured. Certificates of
insurance shall be provided to the City annually.
4. Security. The application shall include a description of security to be posted
at the time of receiving a building permit for the WECS to ensure removal of
the WECS when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in
subsection 10 below. The security shall be the form of: (i) cash; (ii) letter of credit;
or, (iii) an escrow agreement, in an amount approved by the City engineer and
in a form approved by the City Attorney providing for timely removal of the
Commercial WECS as required under this Section, and payment of any costs and
attorney fees incurred by the City in connection with such removal.
5. Visual Appearance; Powerlines. The design of the WECS buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening and landscaping that will blend WECS components with the natural
setting and existing environment. The electrical collection system shall be
placed underground within the interior of each parcel at a depth designed to
accommodate any existing land use to the maximum extent practicable. The
collection system may be placed overhead adjacent to public roadways, at
points of interconnection to the electric grid or in other areas as necessary.
6. Threatened and Endangered Species. The applicant shall submit an endangered
and threatened species survey conducted by a qualified professional, such as an
ecologist or zoologist, describing the potential impact of the WECS on any species
listed as threatened or endangered by the federal government or the state of
Michigan, including but not limited to migratory birds or bats. Permits shall not be
issued unless the study determines that there shall be no negative effect on such
species. Alternatively, the applicant may submit an endangered species permit
from the State of Michigan to fulfill this requirement.
7. Annual Inspection; Maintenance. The WECS and surrounding area shall be
maintained in accordance with industry standards including painting and
landscaping. Every Commercial WECS must be inspected annually by an
authorized factory representative or professional engineer to certify that the
WECS is in good working condition and is not a hazard to persons or property.
Certification records shall be submitted annually to the City.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
269
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
8. Sound Pressure Level. As part of the application and prior to installation of any
Commercial WECS, the applicant shall provide modeling and analysis to the
City that will confirm that the Commercial WECS will not exceed the maximum
permitted sound pressure levels. Modeling and analysis shall conform to IEC
(International Electrotechnical Commission) 61400, which establishes structural
and performance safety provisions for wind energy conversion systems, and ISO
(International Organization for Standardization) 9613, which describes a method
for calculating the attenuation of sound during propagation outdoors in order to
predict the levels of environmental noise at a distance from a variety of sources.
After installation of the Commercial WECS, sound pressure level measurements
shall be done by a third party, qualified professional according to the procedures
in the most current version of ANSI S12.18, which provides an alternative method
of measurement of sound pressure levels in the outdoor environment, considering
the effects of the ground, the effects of refraction due to wind and temperature
gradients, and the effects due to turbulence. All sound pressure levels shall be
measured with a sound meter that meets or exceeds the most current version of
ANSI S1.4 specifications for a Type II sound meter. Documentation of the sound
pressure level measurements shall be provided to the local government within
sixty (60) days of the operation of the project.
9. Shadow Flicker. The applicant shall conduct a four-season analysis of potential
shadow flicker. The analysis shall identify the locations of shadow flicker that
may be caused by the project and the expected durations of the flicker at
these locations from sun-rise to sun-set over the course of a year. The analysis
shall identify all areas where shadow flicker may affect occupants or users of the
structures or properties. The analysis shall describe measures that will be taken to
eliminate or mitigate adverse effects.
10. Removal. A Commercial WECS shall be removed by the owner of the WECS
or land when the Commercial WECS has been abandoned or unused for one
hundred and eighty (180) days (Non-Use Period). For purposes of this section,
the damage, destruction or removal of any part of WECS equipment, or the
cessation of operations shall be considered as the beginning of a Non-Use Period.
The WECS owner or applicant shall notify the City of the beginning of any Non-
Use Period or any removal of equipment. The end of the Non-Use Period may be
sooner than one hundred eighty (180) days after commencement if the WECS
or any portion of the facility becomes a nuisance or is dangerous to the public
health, safety and welfare.
a. At the end of the Non-Use Period, the owner of the WECS or the land shall
immediately apply for and obtain any applicable demolition or removal
permit, and shall immediately proceed with and complete the demolition and
removal of the WECS and restoration of the land to the condition existing prior
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
270
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
to installation, to the extent reasonably feasible.
b. The demolition, removal and restoration of the WECS shall be completed within
sixty (60) days after the end of the Non-Use Period.
SECTION 12.05 SOLAR STRUCTURES AND EASEMENTS
A. Permitted. Active and passive solar energy devices, systems or structures shall be
permitted in all zoning classifications by right, subject to administrative approval,
except when such solar devices or architectural features project into required front
or side yards, or are free-standing elements in a required front or side yard, in which
case they are subject to site plan review in accordance with Article 8.
B. Maximum Height of Structures. Passive solar energy structures, such as flat plate
collectors, photovoltaic cells, etc., which are roof-mounted or integrated otherwise
into the roof structure shall not be included in the calculation of maximum height.
Active solar energy structures, when mounted on either freestanding structural
elements or integrated architecturally with a principal or accessory building shall not
exceed a height of forty (40) feet.
C. Easements. A landowner may enter into an easement, covenant, condition or other
property interest in any deed or other instrument, to protect the solar skyspace of
an actual, proposed or designated solar energy structure at a described location
by forbidding or limiting activities, land uses, structures and/or trees that interfere
with access to solar energy. The solar skyspace must be described as the three (3)
dimensional space in which obstruction is prohibited or limited. Any property owner
may give or sell his right to access to sunlight. Such Solar Access Easements shall be
recorded and copies shall be kept on file with the Troy Building Department.
SECTION 12.06 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. Intent. No use, unless otherwise allowed, shall be permitted within any district which
does not conform to the following minimum requirements of use, occupancy, and
operation.
B. Airborne Emissions.
1. Air Contaminants. All airborne emissions shall, at a minimum, comply with the
applicable Federal and State standards.
2. Smoke.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit the emission of
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
271
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
any smoke from any source to a density greater than that density described
as No. 1 of the Ringlemann Chart; provided that the following exceptions shall
be permitted: smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not
darker than No. 2 of the Ringlemann Chart for a period or periods aggregating
four (4) minutes in any thirty (30) minute period.
b. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart,
as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is
hereby made a part of this Ordinance, shall be the standard. However, the
umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with
the Ringlemann Chart.
3. Dust, Dirt, and Fly Ash.
a. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated,
maintain or cause to be maintained, any process for any purpose, a furnace
or combustion device for the burning of coal or other natural or synthetic
fuels, without maintaining and operating while using said process or furnace or
combustion device, recognized and approved equipment, means, method,
device, or contrivance to reduce the quantity of gas-borne or airborne solids
shall not exceed two-tenths (0.2) grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium
at a temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit.
b. For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such devices, these
conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of excess air in
the stack does not exceed fifty (50) percent at full load. The foregoing
requirement shall be measured by the A.S.M.E. Test Code of dust-separating
apparatus. All other forms of dust, dirt, and fly ash shall be completely
eliminated insofar as escape or emission into the open air is concerned. The
building official may require such additional data as is deemed necessary
to show that adequate and approved provisions for the prevention and
elimination of dust, dirt, and fly ash have been made.
4. Odors. Any condition or operation which results in the creation of odors of such
intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the
public or which interferes unreasonably with the comfort of the public shall be
removed, stopped, or so modified as to remove the odor. This requirement is not
intended to interfere with the operation of a farm, as defined by this Ordinance,
which is lawful pursuant to the Michigan Right to Farm Act, as amended.
C. Waste Disposal. All solid, liquid, and sanitary wastes shall be treated and disposed
of in accordance with the standards of Oakland County and the State of Michigan.
Treatment or disposal of waste shall not create a hazard or nuisance to neighboring
uses.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
272
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
D. Electrical Disturbance, Electromagnetic, or Radio Frequency Interference. No use
shall:
1. Create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operations or
equipment other than those of the creator of such disturbance.
2. Cause, create, or contribute to the interference with electronic signals (including
television and radio broadcasting transmission) to the extent that the operation
of any equipment not owned by the creator of such disturbance is adversely
affected.
E. Hazardous Substances. Use, storage and handling of hazardous substance; storage
and disposal of solid, liquid and sanitary wastes shall comply with the following:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity to pollute,
impair or destroy the air, water, soils or other natural resources within the City
through the use, storage and handling of hazardous substances and/or wastes or
the storage and disposal of solid, liquid, gaseous and/or sanitary wastes.
2. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating a business or
conducing an activity shall disclose the use, storage or generation of hazardous
substances, in conjunction with the following:
a. Upon submission of a site plan;
b. Upon any change of use or occupancy of a structure or premise; or
c. Upon any change of the manner in which such substances are handled, and/
or in the event of a change in the type of substances to be handled.
3. Prior to City approval of a business or activity which uses, stores, or generates
hazardous substances, the site plan and manner of storage shall be reviewed by
the City Fire Department. All businesses and facilities which use, store, or generate
hazardous substances in quantities greater than one hundred (100) kilograms per
month shall comply with the following standards:
a. Above-Ground Storage.
(i) Hazardous substances shall be stored only in product-tight containers within
locations approved by the Zoning Administrator, Building Department, and
Fire Department.
(ii) Secondary containment of hazardous substances shall be provided for all
facilities. Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substance
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
273
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of
any released substance.
(iii) Outdoor storage of hazardous substances is prohibited except in
product-tight containers which are protected from weather, leakage,
accidental damage and vandalism through secondary containment.
Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the equivalent of the
primary container plus an allowance for the expected accumulation of
precipitation.
(iv) Facilities for above-ground storage shall be screened in accordance with
the standards set forth in Section 13.04. Such screening shall be designed
to ensure access by the Fire Department and permit the circulation of air
around the storage facility.
(v) State and federal agency requirements for storage, leak detection, record
keeping, spill prevention, emergency response, transport and disposal shall
be met.
b. Underground Storage. State and federal agency requirements for storage,
leak detection, record keeping, spill prevention, emergency response,
transport and disposal shall be met.
F. Glare and Radioactive Materials. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc
welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be
performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property
line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive
materials and wastes, and including electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray
machine operation, shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by
the U.S. Bureau of Standards when measured at the property line.
G. Fire and Explosive Hazards. The storage and handling of flammable and combustible
liquids, liquefied petroleum gases, and explosives shall comply with applicable State
of Michigan requirements.
H. Noise. The emission of measurable noises from the premises shall not exceed sixtyfive
(65) decibels as measured at the boundary property line, except that where
normal street traffic noises exceed sixty-five (65) decibels during such periods, the
measurable noise emanating from premises may equal, but not exceed such traffic
noises. Within the IB district, sound levels not exceeding seventy (70) decibels may be
permitted.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
274
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 12
Sustainable Design and
Environmental Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
275
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 13
SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION 13.01 INTENT
The intent of this Article is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and
improve the site design and visual appearance of the City by requiring consistent
standards for such site elements as landscaping, lighting, parking, loading, and site
access.
SECTION 13.02 LANDSCAPING
A. Where Required. A separate, detailed landscape plan shall be submitted as part
of the site plan review and tentative preliminary plat review.
1. Plan Requirements. The landscape plan shall be drawn to the same scale as
required in Article 8, Site Plan Review, shall demonstrate that all requirements
of this Section are met, and shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
information set forth in this Section. The Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to waive the requirements for certain information set forth below if
it is determined that such information does not affect compliance with this
Ordinance.
a. The professional seal of the licensed landscape architect who prepared the
plan for sites of one (1) acre or greater;
b. Topographic and grading information, as required in Article 8, Site Plan
Review;
c. The location, spacing, size, number and root type (bare root (BR), balled and
burlapped (BB), pot (p), or container (C)) and botanical and common name
for each plant type proposed for use within the required landscape area;
d. Typical straight cross section including slope, height, and width of berms and
type of ground cover, or height and type of construction of wall, including
footings;
e. Construction and grading details to resolve specific site conditions, such as
tree wells to preserve existing trees or culverts to maintain natural drainage
patterns;
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
276
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
f. Planting details in either text or drawing form to ensure proper installation and
establishment of proposed plant materials;
g. Identify existing trees and vegetative cover to be preserved;
h. Identify a landscape maintenance program including a statement that all
diseased, damaged, or dead materials shall be replaced in accordance with
the standards of this Ordinance.
2. Composition.
a. Plant materials shall be of generally acceptable varieties and species, free
from insects and diseases, hardy to Oakland County, conform to the current
minimum standards for nursery stock of the American Nursery and Landscape
Association and shall have proof of any required governmental regulations
and/or inspections.
b. A mixture of live plant material, such as evergreen and deciduous trees
and shrubs, is required as a protective measure against insect and disease
infestation. Artificial plant materials are prohibited. A limited mixture of
hardy species is recommended rather than a large quantity of different
species to produce a more aesthetic, cohesive design and avoid a disorderly
arrangement. Additionally, native species of trees and shrubs shall constitute
at least fifty percent (50%) of the total proposed plantings in accordance with
the standards set forth in Section 13.02.A.7.
3. Berms. Berms shall be constructed with slopes not to exceed a one to three (1:3)
gradient. Berm slopes shall be protected with sod, seed, or other form of natural
ground cover.
4. Coordination with Utilities. Provision shall be made to coordinate landscaping
with existing and proposed underground and overhead utility lines so as to avoid
interference with plant growth.
5. Existing Trees. The preservation and incorporation of existing trees in a landscape
plan is encouraged. Where existing trees are used to satisfy the requirements of
this Section, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Paving, or other site improvements, shall not encroach upon the dripline of the
existing tree(s) to be preserved.
b. If existing plant material is labeled To Remain on site plans by the applicant
or required by the City, protective techniques, such as, but not limited to,
fencing or barriers placed at the dripline around the perimeter of the plant
material shall be installed during construction. No vehicle or other construction
equipment shall be parked or stored within the dripline of any plant material
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
277
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
intended to be saved. Other protective techniques may be used provided
such techniques are approved by the City.
c. In the event that healthy trees which are used to meet the minimum
requirements of this Ordinance or those labeled to remain are cut down,
destroyed, damaged, or excavated at the dripline, as determined by the City,
the applicant shall replace them with trees which are either equivalent in size
or replace the total diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) of the trees which have
been removed.
6. Stormwater Retention and Detention Ponds. The integration of stormwater
management systems, including bio-swales, rain gardens, and retention and
detention ponds in the overall landscape concept shall be required. Stormwater
management systems that replicate a natural design and appearance shall be
encouraged.
7. Use of Native Plants in Landscaping.
a. Native plant species chosen for a development shall be based on the native
species currently growing on the site, if any.
b. The arrangement of native plant species may be designed in both natural
arrangements and more conventional arrangements.
c. Natural arrangements emulate the arrangements found in nature, and have a
less manicured appearance. Natural arrangements shall incorporate a wide
mix of species. This landscape style shall be used for landscaping open space,
surface stormwater systems, street tree plantings, and/or parks. If natural
arrangements are used, plant spacing requirements may be waived as long as
the function the plants are to serve is accomplished.
d. Conventional, more formal arrangements are generally used close to buildings
or heavily used areas of a site. Native species may be used in these areas
just as any other commercially-available landscape material. As with any
landscape design, the plants ultimate size, soil and site requirements, and
other characteristics shall be considered to ensure they do not overwhelm
a space, encroach into walkways, or impede sight distance or visibility of
motorists. In entryways, where aesthetics is of primary importance, cultivars of
native plant species may be considered to ensure the plants appearance.
e. Plantings installed in areas used for stormwater management shall be planted
with native species that specifically perform the necessary runoff attenuation,
filtration, water uptake, and purification functions needed in such areas. Both
herbaceous and woody species shall be incorporated into the mix where the
desired function dictates.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
278
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
8. Installation, Maintenance, and Completion.
a. All landscaping required by this Ordinance shall be planted before obtaining
a certificate of occupancy or the appropriate financial surety as required in
Article 3, Administration and Enforcement.
b. All landscaping and landscape elements shall be planted, and earth
moving or grading performed, in a sound workmanlike manner, according to
accepted planting and grading procedures.
c. Landscaping required by this Ordinance shall be maintained in a reasonably
healthy condition, free from refuse and debris. All unhealthy and dead
material shall be replaced within one (1) year of damage or death or the next
appropriate planting period, whichever comes first. All landscaped areas
shall be provided with irrigation or a readily available and acceptable water
supply.
d. Failure to install and maintain approved landscaping shall be considered a
violation of this Ordinance.
B. Screening Between Land Uses.
1. Where Required. The use of physical barriers or screens is considered a necessary
requirement to allow for the transition from one zoning district or land use to
another contrasting zoning district or land use. This promotes compatibility
with existing uses and helps to protect the value of buildings and property.
The purpose of this section is to create varying degrees of visual and physical
separation between divergent land uses based upon the similarity and/or
compatibility of the uses.
2. Screen Requirements.
a. A landscape buffer shall be constructed to create a visual screen at least
six (6) feet in height along all adjoining boundaries when a proposed use is
either more intense or incompatible with an adjoining property, as set forth in
Table 13.02-A. A landscape buffer shall consist of berms and living materials
so as to maintain a minimum opacity of approximately eighty percent (80%).
Opacity shall be measured by observation of any two (2) square yard area of
landscape screen between one (1) foot above the established grade of the
area to be concealed and the top or the highest point of the required screen.
The plantings must meet this standard based upon reasonably anticipated
growth over a period of three (3) years.
b. The width of the screen area, location and density of plantings shall be based
upon the specific characteristics of the proposed use and adjacent land uses.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
279
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
i. Plants shall be arranged in a staggered pattern to create a continuous
screen.
ii. Existing vegetation which is located on the property to be developed
within the area of the proposed screen, is in good condition, and meets
the size and type requirements in the various screening alternatives may be
counted toward meeting screening requirements.
iii. Screening shall be located along all adjoining boundaries. However,
the width and location of the screening may be modified due to site
conditions, provided the intent of screening requirements are met.
c. Landscape Screening Schedule: Landscape screening alternatives are
established in Table 13.02-A. The application of these landscape screening
alternatives shall be controlled by Table 13.02-B, Landscape Screening
Schedule. Table 13.02-B describes the required screening on the lot of the
use indicated in the left column of the schedule where it is contiguous to land
used or zoned as indicated across the top of the schedule. The numbers in
the middle columns refer to the landscape screening alternatives described in
Table 13.02-A, below, and illustrated in Figures 13.02-A through C.
Table 13.02-A Landscape Screening Alternatives
Screening Alternative Minimum Quantity Type/Size
1 1 tree per three lineal feet Narrow evergreen tree
2 1 tree per 10 lineal feet Large evergreen tree
3
1 tree per 10 lineal feet Large evergreen tree
1 tree per five lineal feet Narrow evergreen tree
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
280
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Figure 13.02-A Landscape Screening Alternative 1
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
281
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Figure 13.02-B Landscape Screening Alternative 2
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
282
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Figure 13.02-C Landscape Screening Alternative 3
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
283
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 13.02-B, Landscape Screening Schedule
Screening Required on These
Land Uses: When Contiguous with These Land Uses:
Use Group 1:
Residential Uses
Use Group 2:
Residential/Lodging
Uses
Use Group 3:
Office/Institutional
Uses
Use Group 4:
Auto/Transportation
Uses
Use Group 5:
Retail/Entertainment
Uses
Use Group 6:
Misc. Commercial
Uses
Use Group 7:
Industrial Uses Use Group 1: Residential Uses
One-family dwellings
Two-family dwellings
Use Group 2: Residential/Lodging
Uses
Multiple-family dwellings
Live/work units
Senior assisted/independent
living
Group day care
Child care centers
Screen
Alt. 1
or 2
Use Group 3: Office/Institution
Uses
General office
Professional office
Hospitals
Medical office
Primary/secondary schools
Colleges
Places of worship
Data centers
Technology centers / Office
research
Experimental research & testing
labs
Public service buildings
Funeral homes
Veterinary clinics
Screen
Alt. 1
or 2
Screen
Alt. 1
or 2
Screen
Alt. 1
or 2
Use Group 4: Auto/Transportation
Uses
Auto sales
Auto service station
Auto repair station
Auto body repair
Auto wash
Screen
Alt. 3
and/or
wall
Screen
Alt. 3
and/or
wall
Screen
Alt. 3
and/or
wall
Screen
Alt. 1
and/or
wall
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
284
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Screening Required on These
Land Uses: When Contiguous with These Land Uses:
Use Group 1:
Residential Uses
Use Group 2:
Residential/Lodging
Uses
Use Group 3:
Office/Institutional
Uses
Use Group 4:
Auto/Transportation
Uses
Use Group 5:
Retail/Entertainment
Uses
Use Group 6:
Misc. Commercial
Uses
Use Group 7:
Industrial Uses Use Group 5: Retail/Entertainment
Uses
Financial Institutions
General retail
Retail, large-format
Multi-tenant shopping centers
Fitness centers
Theatres
Indoor recreation establishments
Restaurants
Personal service
Dry cleaning
Hair care
Screen
Alt. 2 or
3 and/
or wall
Screen
Alt. 2 or
3 and/
or wall
Screen
Alt. 2 or
3 and/
or wall
Screen
Alt. 1
or 2
Use Group 6: Misc. Commercial
Uses
Building & lumber supply
Garden centers, nurseries
Outdoor recreation
Golf driving ranges, mini-golf
Commercial outdoor storage
Mini/Self-storage
Commercial kennels
Pet day care
Screen
Alt. 3
and/or
wall
Screen
Alt. 2 or
3 and/
or wall
Screen
Alt. 2 or
3 and/
or wall
Screen
Alt. 2
or 3
Screen
Alt. 1
or 2
Use Group 7: Industrial Uses
Contractors equipment storage
Food products
Manufacturing, processing, etc.
Metal plating
Plastics
Printing
Tool & die, gauge & machine
shops
Truck/trailer rental
Warehousing/wholesale
Screen
Alt. 3
and/or
wall
Screen
Alt. 3
and/or
wall
Screen
Alt. 3
and/or
wall
Screen
Alt. 2
or 3
Screen
Alt. 2
or 3
Screen
Alt. 2
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
285
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. Solid Wall or Fence. Where a land use activity creates noise, light, dust or other
similar nuisance that cannot be effectively screened by a landscape buffer,
a solid opaque wall or fence may be required. Such wall or fence shall be a
minimum of six (6) and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height as measured on
the side of the proposed wall having the higher grade. A required wall shall
be located on the lot line, except alternate locations may be approved where
underground utilities interfere, where this Ordinance requires conformity with
front yard setback requirements, or where an alternate location provides more
effective screening.
4. Combinations. A combination of landscaping and a solid opaque wall or fence
may be approved where such a combination provides more effective screening.
5. Screenwall Modifications and Waivers. Screenwall modifications approved
pursuant to Section 43.76.00 of the repealed Chapter 39 shall remain in effect
until the expiration of the time period granting the modification, as long as there is
compliance with the repealed Chapter 39 and the resolution granting approval.
When such waivers expire, the Zoning Administrator may determine whether the
requirements of Section 13.02.B must be met.
C. Parking Lot Landscaping.
1. Where Required. Separate landscape areas shall be provided within and at
the perimeter of parking lots so as to break up the broad expanse of pavement,
guide the circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and moderate the
changes to the micro climate which results from additional pavement.
2. Landscaping Standards within Parking Lots.
a. There shall be a minimum of one (1) tree for every eight (8) parking spaces.
b. Landscaping shall be arranged in curbed islands within the parking lot which
shall not be less than two hundred (200) square feet in area. Modifications in
curbing may be permitted when islands are used as part of the stormwater
management system.
c. A minimum distance of three (3) feet from the backside of the curb and the
proposed landscape plantings shall be provided. Where vehicles overhang a
landscape island or strip, a minimum distance of five (5) feet from the backside
of the curb and the proposed landscape plantings shall be provided.
d. An equivalent amount of landscape plantings at the perimeter of parking lots
may be approved where landscaping within parking lots would be impractical
due to the size of the parking lot, detrimental to safe and efficient traffic flow,
or would create an unreasonable burden for maintenance and snowplowing,
provided all other landscaping requirements are met.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
286
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. Landscaping Standards at the Perimeter of Parking Lots.
a. Parking lots that serve uses set forth in Section 13.02.A shall meet the screening
requirements set forth in Section 13.02.B, Screening Between Land Uses, where
such screening is needed to promote a compatible relationship with an
adjacent use.
b. Parking lots that front on a public roadway shall be screened by a landscaped
berm at least three (3) feet in height along the perimeter of the road right-ofway.
Alternative landscape plantings or a solid wall that does not exceed
three (3) feet in height may be approved, where it is found that space
limitations or visibility for vehicular circulation prevent construction of a
landscape berm.
Figure 13.02-D Parking Lot Landscaping
D. Greenbelts.
1. Where Required. Except as otherwise required by this Ordinance, a greenbelt
shall be provided along all public streets upon which a site has frontage, in
accordance with the standards set forth in this Section.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
287
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
2. Greenbelt Standards.
a. The greenbelt shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width.
b. The greenbelt shall be landscaped with a minimum of one (1) deciduous tree
for every thirty (30) lineal feet, or fraction thereof, of frontage abutting a public
road right-of-way. Deciduous trees within a greenbelt shall be a minimum
caliper of two and a half (2 1/2) inches or greater and evergreen trees shall be
a minimum of five (5) to six (6) feet in height.
c. Creative placement of the trees, such as staggering, clustering and/or other
methods, is encouraged in an effort to eventually achieve a canopy.
d. In addition to the required trees within the greenbelt, the remainder of the
greenbelt shall be landscaped with grasses, ground covers, shrubs and other
natural landscape materials.
e. Access drives from public rights-of-way through required greenbelts shall be
permitted, but such drives shall not be subtracted from the lineal dimension
used to determine the minimum number of trees.
Figure 13.02-E Greenbelt
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
288
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
E. Site Landscaping.
1. Site Landscaping Standards.
a. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the site area shall be comprised of
landscape material.
b. Site area landscaping may include a combination of the preservation of
existing tree cover, planting of new trees and plant material, landscape
plazas, gardens and building foundation planting beds.
c. Site area landscaping shall be provided to screen potentially objectionable
site features such as, but not limited to, retention/detention basins, loading
areas, and trash areas.
d. The landscaping design shall promote compatibility, and preserve the
character of the site, in relation to the immediately surrounding area and in
relation to the general area in which the property is situated.
Figure 13.02-F General Site Landscaping Overview
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
289
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
F. Subdivision and Site Condominium Landscaping.
1. Where Required. Landscaping for subdivisions and site condominiums shall be
provided in accordance with the standards set forth in this Section.
2. Standards.
a. The frontage of all internal public or private streets shall be landscaped
with the equivalent of one (1) tree for every fifty (50) lineal feet, or fraction
thereof. Such street trees shall meet the minimum size, spacing and species
requirements set forth in Sections 13.02.H, Minimum Size and Spacing
Requirements, and Section 13.02.I, Prohibited Species.
b. Where a subdivision or site condominium contains uses which are more intense
or incompatible with an adjoining property, the screening requirements set
forth in Section 13.02.B, Screening Between Land Uses, shall be met. The
preservation of existing trees along perimeter boundaries is encouraged
regardless of whether screening is required.
c. Where a subdivision or site condominium abuts a public road right-ofway
located outside of the proposed subdivision or site condominium, the
screening requirements set forth in Section 13.02.B, Screening Between Land
Uses shall be met in the following manner:
i. Where a subdivision or site condominium abuts I-75 or a street right-of-way
of two hundred and four (204) feet as designated in the City of Troy Master
Plan, the screening alternative number 3, as set forth in Section 13.02,
subsection B.2.c, shall be required.
ii. Where a subdivision or site condominium abuts a street right-of-way of
either one hundred and twenty (120) or one hundred and fifty (150) feet as
designated in the City of Troy Master Plan, the screening alternative number
2, as set forth in Table 13.02-A, shall be required.
d. A landscape plan for a subdivision or site condominium development shall also
include landscaping details of the entrance to the development, stormwater
retention and/or detention areas, community buildings and other recreational
areas, and any other site improvement which would be enhanced through the
addition of landscaping.
G. Sustainable Design Techniques. Projects with Prequalified Sustainable Development
Project (SDP) status may be eligible for modification of the standards in Section
13.02, as set forth in Section 12.01 Sustainable Design Option, provided the measures
proposed for SDP status are so qualified for that purpose.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
290
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
H. Minimum Size and Spacing Requirements. Where landscaping is required, the
following minimum size and spacing requirements set forth in Table 13.02-C for
representative landscape materials shall be applicable, unless otherwise specified in
this Section:
Table 13.02-C: Minimum Size and Spacing Requirements for Landscaping Materials
MINIMUM SIZE ALLOWABLE MAXIMUM ON-CENTER SPACING**
Height Caliper Spread Feet
5 - 6 3 - 4 2 - 3 2 2.5 18
- 2 2 gal. 30 25 15 10 6 5-6 5 4 3 2 1
Large Evergreen Trees:
Fir (Abies)
Spruce (Picea)
Pine (Pinus)
Hemlock (Tsuga)
Douglas Fir (Psudotsuga)
Tamarack; Larch
(Larix)
Narrow Evergreen Trees:
Arborvitae (Thuja)
Juniper (Juniperus)
Large Evergreen Shrubs:
Hicks Yew (Taxus)
Upright Yew (Taxus)
Spreading Yew
(Taxus)
Upright Juniper
(Juniperus)
Spreading Juniper
(Juniperus)
Mugho Pine (Pinus)
Small Evergreen Shrubs:
Spreading Yew
Dwarf Spreading
Juniper
Dwarf Mugho Pine
Euonymous varieties*
Vines:
Euonymous varieties*
Virginia Creeper
Wisteria
Riverbank Grape
American Bittersweet
Large Deciduous Trees:
Oak (Quercus)
Maple (Acer)*
Beech (Fagus)
Linden or Basswood
(Tilia)
Sweetgum (Liquidambar)
* Refer to prohibited species list.
** Maximum on-center spacing refers to the largest space allowed between the centers of the plants of the same species/variety.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
291
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 13.02-C: Minimum Size and Spacing Requirements for Landscaping Materials
MINIMUM SIZE ALLOWABLE MAXIMUM ON-CENTER SPACING**
Height Caliper Spread Feet
5 - 6 3 - 4 2 - 3 2 2.5 18
- 2 2 gal. 30 25 15 10 6 5-6 5 4 3 2 1
Ginkgo (Male Only)
(Ginkgo)
Honeylocust (Gleditsia)
Birch (Betula)
Sycamore (Plantanus)
Hickory (Carya)
Black Cherry (Prunus)
Tulip Tree (Liriodendron)
Blackgum (Nyssa)
Small Deciduous Trees (Ornamental):
Dogwood
Flowering Cherry,
Plum, Pear
Hawthorn
Redbud
Magnolia
Flowering Crabapple
Mountain Ash
Hornbeam
Sassafras
Ironwood
Serviceberry,
Juneberry
Ground Cover:
Euonymous varieties*
Wild Strawberry
Wild Ginger
Large Deciduous Shrubs:
Lilac
Sumac
Pyrancantha
Weigela
Flowering Quince
Cotoneaster*
Sargent Crabapple
Dogwood (Red Osier,
Grey, Silky)
Euonymous varieties*
Viburnum varieties
Witch-hazel
Ninebark
Vaccinium (Blueberry)
Holly
Spicebush
Hazelnut
* Refer to prohibited species list.
** Maximum on-center spacing refers to the largest space allowed between the centers of the plants of the same species/variety.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
292
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 13.02-C: Minimum Size and Spacing Requirements for Landscaping Materials
MINIMUM SIZE ALLOWABLE MAXIMUM ON-CENTER SPACING**
Height Caliper Spread Feet
5 - 6 3 - 4 2 - 3 2 2.5 18
- 2 2 gal. 30 25 15 10 6 5-6 5 4 3 2 1
Chokeberry
Chokecherry
Buttonbush
American Elder
Small Deciduous Shrubs:
Fragrant Sumac
Cotoneaster*
Potentilla
Meadowsweet
Leatherleaf
Rubus/Ribus varieties
* Refer to prohibited species list.
** Maximum on-center spacing refers to the largest space allowed between the centers of the plants of the same species/variety.
I. Prohibited Species. As of the effective date of this ordinance, the following species
set forth in Table 13.02-D shall not be newly planted in landscaping. These plants are
not native to the area, reproduce profusely and have potentially harmful effects on
natural ecosystems.
Table 13.02-D
Prohibited Species
Trees
Common Name Scientific Name
Norway Maple Acer plantanoides
Amur Maple Acer ginnala
Silver Maple Acer saccharinum
Box Elder Acer negundo
Tree of Heaven Alianthus altissima
European Alter Alnus glutinosa
Northern Catalpa Catalpa speciosa
White Ash* Fraxinus americana
Green Ash* Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Golden Rain Tree Koelreuteria paniculata
Amur Cork Tree Phellodendron amurense
Princess or Royal Empress Tree Paulownia tomentosa
Poplar Populus spp.
Black Locust** Robinia pseudocacia
Willow (all) Salix spp.
American Elm*** Ulmus americana
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
293
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Chinese Elm Ulmus parvifolia
Siberian Elm Ulmus pumila
* A native species, but prohibited due to Emerald Ash Borer.
** A native species, but tends to be invasive.
*** Except cultivars that are resistant to Dutch Elm Disease.
Shrubs and Vines
Common Name Scientific Name
Porcelainberry Ampelopsis brevipendunculata
Japanese Barberry Berberis thunbergii
Common Barberry Berberis vulgaris
Oriental Bittersweet Celastrus orbiculatus
Autumn Olive Eleagnus umbellata
Russian Olive Eleagnus angustifolia
Burningbush Euonymus alatus
Wintercreeper Euonymus fortunei
English Ivy Hedra helix
Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana
Privet Ligustrum vulgare
Honeysuckle (all) Lonicera
Common Buckthorn Rhamnus cathartica
Glossy Buckthorn Rhamnus frangula
Multiflora Rose Rosa multiflora
Guelder Rose Viburnum opulus var. opulus
Grasses and Grass-Like Plants
Common Name Scientific Name
Chinese Silver Grass Miscanthus sinensis
Giant Reed Phragmites communis
Reed Canary Grass Phalaris arundinacea
Flowers and Groundcovers
Common Name Scientific Name
Garlic Mustard Alliaria officinalis
Spotted Knapweed Centaurea maculosa
Crown Vetch Coronilla varia
Queen Anns Lace Daucus carota
Foxglove Digitalis purpurea
Japanese Knotweed Fallopia japonica
Dames Rocket Hesperis matronalis
Purple Loosestrife Lythrum salicaria
J. Preservation or Restoration Areas.
1. Landowners may establish Preservation or Restoration Areas as per Chapter 82,
Property Maintenance Code.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
294
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 13.03 TRASH CONTAINERS
A. Where Required. The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses that
have refuse disposal service by collective trash container. This does not include
curbside pickup for single-family residential uses.
B. Standards.
1. Containers used to dispose of trash, grease, recyclables, and similar materials shall
be screened on all sides with a wall, and gate at least as high as the container,
but no less than six (6) feet in height, and shall be constructed of durable material
and construction which is compatible with the architectural materials used in the
site development.
2. Containers shall be consolidated to minimize the number of collection sites,
located in close proximity to the building they serve, and easily accessed by
refuse vehicles without potential damage to parked vehicles.
3. Containers and enclosures shall be located in a side or rear yard and screened
from public view whenever possible.
4. Containers and enclosures shall be situated so that they do not cause excessive
nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby buildings.
5. Concrete pads and aprons of appropriate size and construction shall be
provided.
SECTION 13.04 EQUIPMENT SCREENING
A. Where Required. The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses for
which mechanical equipment is placed upon a roof of any building or on the
ground outside of the building. Mechanical equipment includes, but is not limited to:
generators, heating, ventilation and air conditioning units.
B. Screening Requirements. All equipment shall be screened as follows:
1. Rooftop screening.
a. Rooftop equipment shall be screened with architectural materials matching or
harmonious with the building.
b. Screens provided to obscure mechanical equipment shall be an opaque
barrier at least as high as the equipment being screened.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
295
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
c. Rooftop equipment shall be located on the side or rear of a pitched-roof
building, screened from public view.
d. Rooftop equipment shall be situated so that they do not cause excessive
nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby buildings.
2. At-grade equipment.
a. At-grade equipment shall be screened with architectural and/or landscape
materials matching or harmonious with the building or landscape materials
provided elsewhere on site.
b. Landscape materials shall be evergreen species so as to provide a screen
year-round.
c. Walls provided to screen mechanical equipment shall be an opaque fence or
wall, with a gate at least as high as the equipment being screened.
d. At-grade equipment shall be located in a side or rear yard, screened from
public view.
e. At-grade equipment shall be situated so that they do not cause excessive
nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby buildings
SECTION 13.05 LIGHTING
A. Where Required. The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses for
which exterior lighting is provided.
B. Lighting Plan Requirements. The following information must be provided on all site
plan submissions:
1. Location of all free-standing, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures on the
site plan and/or building elevations.
2. Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan, indicating the overall light
intensity throughout the site (in foot-candles) and ten feet beyond the parcel
lines. The Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement for sites with parking
lots of twenty (20) spaces or less or for sites that are not adjacent to residentially
zoned property.
3. Specifications and details for the type of fixture being proposed, including
the initial lumen rating, type of lamp, method of shielding, type of lens and all
applicable accessories. The details shall include a depiction of the lighting
pattern and light levels applicable for the proposed pole height.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
296
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
C. Freestanding Pole Lighting.
1. Fixture Design.
a. Exterior lighting shall be a full cut-off fixture or a fully shielded fixture, downward
directed with a flat lens to prevent glare.
b. Decorative or historic light fixtures may be approved as an alternative to
shielded fixtures when it can be shown that there will be no off-site glare
through the use of low wattage lamps and the proposed fixtures will be more
consistent with the character of the site.
2. Lighting Levels.
a. The intensity of light at the base of a light fixture pole shall not exceed twenty
(20) foot-candles during business hours and ten (10) foot-candles after business
hours.
b. Light shall not exceed one-tenth (0.1) foot-candle along any boundary
adjacent to residentially zoned or used property, and one (1) foot-candle
along all nonresidential property boundaries.
c. Light levels shall be measured on the horizontal plane at grade level within the
site, and on the vertical plane of any property line boundary or street right-ofway
line at a height of five (5) feet above grade level.
3. Height. The maximum height of a base, a pole and fixtures shall be twenty-five
(25) feet. A maximum height of thirty (30) feet may be permitted in the IB or PV
districts when fixtures are no closer than two hundred (200) feet to any residential
district.
4. Duration. All outdoor lighting fixtures, existing or hereafter installed and
maintained upon private property, shall be turned off or reduced in lighting
intensity between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise. The following exceptions may be
approved:
a. Where greater lighting levels are necessary for security or safety purposes; or
b. Where permissible commercial or industrial uses such as sales, assembly and
repair operate after 11:00 p.m., in which case the lighting levels shall be turned
off or reduced after the use ceases for that day.
D. Building-Mounted Lighting. Building-mounted lighting for the purpose of lighting
entrances, adjacent sidewalks, parking areas and loading areas is permitted subject
to the following restrictions:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
297
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
1. Building-mounted lighting shall be a full cutoff fixture or fully shielded and directed
downward to prevent glare. The intensity of light shall not exceed twenty (20)
foot-candles during business hours and ten (10) foot-candles after business hours
at the ground level for any building-mounted fixture. Maximum height shall be
twenty (20) feet.
2. Light shall not exceed one-tenth (0.1) foot-candle along zoned or existing
residential property lines and one (1) foot-candle along non-residential property
lines.
3. Decorative or historic light fixtures may be approved as an alternative to shielded
fixtures when it can be proven that there will be no off-site glare through the use
of low wattage lamps and the proposed fixtures will be more consistent with the
character of the site.
E. Architectural Lighting of Building Faades. The lighting of a building faade for
architectural, aesthetic, or decorative purposes is permitted subject to the following
restrictions:
1. All building faade lighting shall be low intensity, with a fixture rating of less than
nine hundred (900) lumens. All building faade lighting shall be fully shielded
and fully confined from projecting into the sky by eaves, roofs or overhangs, and
mounted as flush to the wall as possible.
2. Luminaries with fixture ratings exceeding nine hundred (900) lumens shall be
downward directed and fully shielded, mounted as flush to the wall as possible.
3. The maximum illumination of any vertical surface or angular roof surface shall not
exceed five (5) foot-candles.
4. Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting may be permitted as
an architectural detail on all buildings, such as along the roof line and eaves,
and around windows. Internally illuminated architectural bands or external
lighting directed on buildings may be approved where it can be shown that
the treatment will serve a legitimate function and will not adversely impact
neighboring properties.
F. Flagpole Lighting. A flagpole may be illuminated by one of the following methods:
1. With one (1) upward-aimed spotlight fixture, fully shielded and directed away
from streets, shining only on the flag and minimizing light spill into the dark night
sky. The fixture rating shall not exceed three thousand five hundred (3,500) lumens.
The fixture shall be placed as close to the base of the flagpole as reasonably
possible.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
298
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
2. With one (1) downward-aimed light fixture, fully shielded and directed away from
streets, shining only on the flag and minimizing light spill into the dark night sky.
The fixture rating shall not exceed three thousand five hundred (3,500) lumens.
G. Prohibited Lighting Types. The following lighting types are prohibited:
1. The use of search lights or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertisement
or entertainment.
2. Flashing, moving or intermittent type lighting.
3. Exterior exposed luminous tube lighting except neon lighting used for signage
or lighting approved by the Zoning Administrator as an element of the building
faade under Section 13.06.D of this Ordinance.
H. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the lighting requirements of this Section,
except that the Zoning Administrator may require a lighting and photometric plan
when deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
1. Sports fields.
2. Swimming pools serving the public or private club members.
3. Holiday decorations.
4. Three (3) foot high, shielded pedestrian walkway lighting.
5. Ornamental low voltage lighting (twelve (12) volts or less), low wattage
ornamental landscape lighting fixtures, and solar operated light fixtures having
self-contained rechargeable batteries, where any single light fixture does not
exceed one hundred (100) lumens.
6. Street lights or lights within a public or private road right-of-way.
I. Lamp or Fixture Substitution. Should any light fixture or the type of lamp therein
regulated under this Article be changed after the permit has been issued, a request
must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for administrative approval, together
with adequate information to assure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, which
must be received prior to substitution. Fixtures and lamps that match the original
fixture type and number as part of regular maintenance are not required to submit
this request.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
299
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 13.06 PARKING AND CIRCULATION
A. Where Required. The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses for
which off-street parking and circulation is provided.
B. General Off-Street Parking Requirements.
1. There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of
any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking with adequate
access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with
all land or building uses shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy as hereinafter prescribed.
2. Off-street parking for uses in all districts shall be on the same lot as the use or
building served by the parking, unless joint parking with abutting properties and
uses is provided in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and executed and
recorded by the parties sharing the parking.
3. Off-street parking spaces for single family detached units or duplexes on individual
lots shall consist of a parking strip, driveway, garage or combination thereof, and
shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve.
4. Parking areas for uses other than single-family detached units or duplexes
on individual lots shall be approved as part of a site plan. Minor changes to
the parking layout, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall require a
submittal of a parking plan.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided for a principal use erected, altered, or
expanded after the effective date of this Ordinance. Required off-street parking
shall be maintained so long as the principal use remains, unless an equivalent
number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this
Ordinance.
6. No off-street parking which exists at the time this Ordinance becomes effective
which is provided for the purpose of complying with provisions of this Ordinance
shall thereafter be reduced below the requirements established by this
Ordinance.
7. Within non-residential districts, off-street parking for continuous periods of more
than twenty-four (24) hours shall be prohibited with the following exceptions:
a. Parking in conjunction with an automobile sales and service facility, major and
minor automobile repair facility, and automobile towing service, as permitted
and regulated by this Ordinance.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
300
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
b. Automobiles and commercial vehicles owned and operated in conjunction
with the principal use of the property.
8. The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of
vehicles is prohibited.
9. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking
facilities shall be in accord with a use which the Planning Commission considers is
similar in type.
10. Off-street parking areas shall be designed to provide for removal and storage of
snow.
C. Parking Location and Setbacks.
1. Parking spaces shall be provided either on the same lot, within lots under the
same ownership or where a shared parking easement is provided on an adjacent
lot within three hundred (300) feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured
from the nearest public building entrance to the nearest parking space of the offstreet
parking lot.
2. Off-street parking is allowed in all required and non-required yards, provided all
other standards of this Ordinance are met.
3. Paved areas shall be ten (10) feet from any side or rear lot lines that abut an
adjacent residentially zoned or used property. Paving setbacks between nonresidentially
zoned or used property may be waived by the Planning Commission
for cross-access and joint parking.
D. Units and Methods of Measurement. For the purpose of determining off-street
parking requirements, the following units of measurement shall apply:
1. Floor Area. Where floor area is the unit for determining the required number of
off-street parking spaces, said unit shall mean the net floor area, as defined by this
Ordinance, unless otherwise indicated.
2. Employees. For requirements stated in terms of employees, the calculation shall
be based upon the maximum number of employees likely to be on the premises
during the largest shift.
3. Places of Assembly. Seating capacity shall be based upon the building code
requirements currently in effect. In cases where a place of assembly has both
fixed seats and open assembly areas, requirements shall be computed separately
for each type and added together.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
301
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
4. Fractional Requirements. When the number of required parking or loading
spaces result in a fractional space, then the fraction shall be counted as one (1)
additional space if it equals one-half () or greater.
E. Shared Parking.
1. The developed parking for adjacent zoning lots may be shared, provided a
signed agreement is provided by the property owners, and the applicant can
demonstrate that the peak usage will occur at different periods of the day.
2. To demonstrate shared parking compatibility, the applicant shall use the
methodology for calculating shared parking established by the most recent
edition of the Urban Land Institute Shared Parking book. Underlying parking
space requirements for each use shall be based on the City of Troy parking
requirements noted herein or as otherwise modified by the provisions of this
Article.
3. Side or rear parking lot setbacks may be reduced or waived where a shared
access driveway, connected parking lots, and/or internal service drives are
provided.
F. Flexibility in Application.
1. The City recognizes that, due to the specific requirements of any given
development, inflexible application of the parking standards may result in
development with inadequate parking or parking far in excess of that which is
needed. The former situation may lead to traffic congestion or unauthorized
parking on adjacent streets or neighboring sites. The latter situation may result in
excessive paving and stormwater runoff and a waste of space which could be
left as open space. Projects with Prequalified Sustainable Development Project
(SDP) status are automatically eligible for a parking deviation, provided the
measures proposed for SDP status are so qualified for that purpose.
2. The City may grant deviations from off-street parking requirements. These
deviations may require more or less parking based upon a finding that such
deviations are more likely to provide a sufficient number of parking spaces to
accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question. In the event
that a deviation is granted, the following shall apply:
a. An applicant may request a parking deviation as part of a development
application or as a separate and distinct action with no other concurrent
request.
b. The applicant shall provide a parking study with adequate detail and
information to assist the City in determining the appropriateness of the request.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
302
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
c. A parking deviation may be included in an action on a concurrent request or
be made separately by resolution.
d. The City may attach conditions to the approval of a deviation from the offstreet
parking requirements that bind such approval to the specific use in
question.
e. The City may require the applicant to set aside area for reserve parking
(landbanking) that can be constructed as needed, although this is not a
prerequisite for the approval or a deviation. Where an area is set aside for
reserve parking, it shall be easily developed, not devoted to a use other than
open space, and shall be designed to accommodate attendant facilities such
as maneuvering lanes and drainage.
3. It is the intent of this Ordinance to minimize excessive areas of pavement which
reduces aesthetic standards and contributes to high rates of storm water runoff.
Exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by more than twenty
percent (20%) shall only be allowed with approval by the City. In granting such
additional space, the City shall determine that such parking will be required,
based on documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a typical day.
G. Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces. The minimum number of offstreet
parking spaces shall be determined by the type of use in accordance with
Table 13.06-A. For uses not specifically listed below, the required parking shall be in
accordance with that of a similar use as determined by the Zoning Administrator,
or determined by the Planning Commission during site plan review based on
documentation regarding the specific parking needs of the use.
Table 13.06-A
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Residential
Single-family and two-family residential 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Multiple-family residential
1 space per each efficiency dwelling unit
2 spaces per each dwelling unit
Bed and Breakfast 2 spaces for dwelling and 1 space for each bed and breakfast room
Mobile home park 2 spaces per each mobile home unit or site and 1 space for each employee on the largest typical shift
Housing for the Elderly
Convalescent and nursing facilities 1 space per each 3 beds or 2 rooms, whichever is less, plus 1 space for each employee on the largest typical
shift
Senior assisted or independent living 1 space for each 0.65 dwelling units plus 1 space for each employee on the largest typical shift
Institutional and Places of Gathering
Places of worship 1 space for each 3 seats or 6 feet of pews in the main unit of worship
Primary and secondary schools 1 space for each 1 teacher, employee, or administrator in addition to the requirements for separate auditorium
or stadium seating
Post-secondary schools, including high schools, colleges,
and commercial schools
1 space for each 1 teacher, employee, or administrator and 1 for each 10 students, in addition to the requirements
for auditorium or stadium
Social clubs, fraternal organizations, and other similar
uses
1 space for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by the fire or building
codes
Places of assembly and auditoriums 1 space for each 3 seats or 6 feet of bleacher seating, in public, private, recreational, or theatre settings
Day care centers and preschools 2 spaces plus 1 additional space for each 8 children of licensed authorized capacity
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
303
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Family day care homes, group day care homes, and
adult foster care homes 1 space per 4 clients plus employee parking
Office
Banks, credit unions, or savings and loans 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus 2 spaces for each non-drive-up ATM
Drive-through facilities for non-restaurant uses 4 stacking space for each window or drive-up ATM
Office or professional buildings, except medical offices 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
Medical, dental, and veterinary offices, including clinics
and medical laboratories 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area
Medical clinics, outpatient centers, 24-hour urgent care
centers, etc.
2 spaces per exam or outpatient procedure/operating room, plus 1 space per laboratory or recovery room,
plus 1 space per 1 employee
Hospitals 2 spaces per inpatient bed plus 1 space per each 200 square feet of office or outpatient area
General Commercial/Retail
All commercial/retail 1 space per each 250 square feet of gross floor area
Commercial/retail centers
<50,000 square feet - 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area
50,000 to 450,000 square feet - 1 space for each 300 square feet
>450,000 square feet of gross floor area - 1 space for each 350 square feet
Non-retail uses such as restaurants, bars, and theatres shall be calculated separately based upon their respective
requirements. The square footage of restaurants, bars, and theatres shall not be counted against the
square footage for the overall commercial/retail center square footage, but shall be added to that total.
Vehicle dealership, sales and service 1 space for each 250 square feet of net floor area, plus 2 spaces per each auto service bay
Recreational vehicles, boat, mobile home, and similar
sales 1 space for each 500 square feet of net floor area, plus 2 spaces per each vehicle sales service bay
Restaurants and Cafs
Standard restaurant 1 space for each 2 seats, based on maximum seating capacity as determined by the building code in effect
in the City
Fast food restaurant 1 space for each 70 square feet of net floor area
Restaurant drive-through window 9 stacking spaces which do not conflict with use of other required spaces
Commercial Service
Vehicle fueling/multi-use station 1 space for each 125 square feet of net floor area, plus 2 parking spaces per fueling station
Vehicle repair station 2 spaces for each service bay, plus 1 space for each tow truck if applicable, plus adequate spaces for overnight
parking, plus 1 space per 1 employee on the largest typical shift
Vehicle wash 2 spaces, plus 12 stacking spaces per bay for a semi- or fully-automatic wash, 1 stacking space per bay for a
self-serve wash, plus 1 space per 1 employee on the largest typical shift
Barber shop / Beauty salon 2 spaces for each barber chair or station
Funeral home and mortuary 1 space for each 70 square feet of service parlors, chapels, and reception area, plus 1 space for each funeral
vehicle stored on premises
Motel/hotel 1 space for each guest room, 1 space per 1 employee on the largest typical shift, plus any additional spaces
required for dining establishments, calculated separately as noted herein
Banquet halls or conference rooms, and similar uses
without fixed seats
1 space for every 2 persons of capacity authorized by the fire or building code, or 1 space for each 100
square feet of net floor area, whichever is greater, plus any required parking for other uses, such as restaurants,
gift shops, etc.
Self-storage mini-warehouse 1 space for each 100 storage units, with a minimum of 6 spaces
Recreational
Health fitness centers, athletic clubs, martial arts studios,
and other similar uses 1 space for each 200 square feet of net floor area
Bowling alleys 5 spaces for each lane
Indoor and outdoor recreational uses of public or private
ownership or use
1 space for each 1,000 square feet of enclosed recreational space, plus 1 space for each employee on the
largest typical shift, 2 spaces for each court (tennis, raquetball, etc.), and 4 for each hole of golf
Industrial
Light industrial, manufacturing, laboratories, research
and development centers, and related accessory offices 1 space for each 550 square feet of gross floor area
Warehousing 1 space for each 1,500 square feet net floor area, plus 1 space for each employee on the largest typical shift
H. Mixed Use Parking. Parking for mixed-use development shall be determined
applying the shared parking methodology established by the most recent edition of
the Urban Land Institute Shared Parking book. This methodology shall be applied by
compiling the required parking for all the proposed uses within the development as
they would be required if developed separately, and then incorporating the shared
parking calculations to realize efficiencies in complementary used can then allow for
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
304
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
an overall reduction in required parking. As with traditional shared-parking projects,
underlying parking space requirements for each use shall be based on the City of
Troy parking requirements noted herein or as otherwise modified by the provisions of
this Article.
I. Parking Structure Design Standards and Requirements.
1. Providing of parking within structures or buildings shall serve to increase the value
and convenience of related development, and to enhance, rather than detract
from, the appearance of the overall development. Structured parking shall be
designed and operated in a manner which does not negatively impact the safety
and security of the public.
2. The exterior treatment of the parking structure element of a building complex shall
be substantially the same in appearance to that of the main building element,
and shall further be designed so that all architectural and vehicular lighting is
shielded or screened from view from adjacent properties.
3. Parking structure development shall be in accordance with the City of Troy Safety
and Security Standards for Parking Structures, as adopted by the City Council,
including, but not limited to, Chapter 87 of the City Code.
J. Off-Street Parking Lot Design Standards and Requirements.
1. Barrier-Free Parking. Off-street parking lots are required to provide Barrier-
Free Parking spaces in accordance with the Michigan Department of Labor,
Construction Code Commission Barrier-Free Design Division.
2. Pavement. All driveways and parking lots, shall be hard surfaced with concrete
or asphalt and shall have concrete curbing on all sides. Bumper blocks shall not
be used in parking lots except where the City may approve alternative paving
materials, such as permeable / grass pavers, for overflow, seasonal or low usage
parking, based upon the review and recommendation of the City Engineer.
3. Drainage. All parking lots shall be graded or drained to dispose of stormwater
runoff. The City may permit openings in the curbing for drainage purposes. No
surface water shall be permitted to drain directly onto adjoining property unless
a drainage easement has been obtained. Discharge of drainage into a public
right-of-way, County Drain or municipal storm sewer shall require written approval
from the appropriate local, County, or State agency.
4. Dimensions.
a. Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with the
minimum requirements set forth in Table 13.06-B.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
305
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Table 13.06-B
Parking Dimensions
Parking Angle Stall Width Aisle Width Parking Stall
Length Curb to Curb
0 Deg. to 15 Deg. 9.0 feet 12 feet 23 feet 30.0 feet
16 Deg. to 37 Deg. 9.0 feet 11 feet 19 feet 46.6 feet
38 Deg. to 57 Deg. 9.0 feet 13 feet 19 feet 53.2 feet
58 Deg. to 74 Deg. 9.0 feet 18 feet 19 feet 60.4 feet
75 Deg. to 90 Deg. 9.5 feet 24 feet 19 feet 62.0 feet
b. All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering
lanes. Parking spaces with parking angles less than ninety (90) degrees shall
be accessed by one-way drives. Parking spaces that are perpendicular to the
drive (ninety (90) degree angle) may be accessed by two (2) way movements.
5. Illumination. All illumination of parking lots or display areas shall be designed and
installed to comply with the requirements of Section 13.05.
6. Landscaping. The parking area shall provide screening, greenbelts, buffers and
parking lot landscaping in accordance with Section 13.02. Where parking abuts
required landscape islands or greenbelt areas, landscape islands or greenbelts
shall be increased by two (2) feet to accommodate vehicle overhang. The
parking space may be decreased by two (2) feet in length if curbing is provided.
7. Parking Abutting Sidewalks. Where a parking space overhangs a sidewalk, the
minimum sidewalk width shall be seven (7) feet.
8. Construction and Maintenance.
a. Plans and specifications for parking areas shall be submitted and approved
following the site plan review requirements of Article 8, Site Plan Review.
b. Required parking lots shall be installed and completed before issuance of an
occupancy permit.
c. Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed
to any other use unless and until equal facilities meeting the standards of this
Article are provided elsewhere or the parking requirements of the site are
changed.
d. Pavement shall be maintained in good condition. The visibility of pavement
markings delineating parking spaces and directional control shall be
maintained.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
306
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
e. All off-street parking and loading facilities required by this Section shall be
maintained free of accumulated snow, debris or other materials which
prevent full use and occupancy of such parking facilities, except for
temporary periods of no more than five (5) days in the event of heavy rainfall
or snowfall.
f. The storage of and/or the repair of merchandise, materials, equipment or
vehicles are prohibited on required off-street parking or loading spaces.
SECTION 13.07 WOODLAND PROTECTION
A. Purpose and Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to help prevent unregulated
and, in many cases, unnecessary removal of trees and related natural resources.
The protection of trees, woodlands and woodland resources will promote the
preservation of important physical, aesthetic, recreational and economic assets for
both present and future generations. Specifically, it is found that:
1. Trees and woodlands provide for public welfare and safety through the
reduction of erosion, siltation, and flooding;
2. Trees and woodlands help protect water quality by protecting groundwater
recharge areas, reducing risk of groundwater contamination and maintaining
base flows in streams and rivers, thus reducing the risk of degrading vegetation,
wildlife, wetlands and surface water systems throughout the city;
3. Trees and woodlands increase the economic value of land for most uses;
4. Tree and woodland growth protects public health through the absorption of
air pollutants and contamination and reduces carbon dioxide content of the
ambient air; and
5. Tree and woodland growth serves as an essential component of the general
welfare of the City by maintaining natural beauty, recreation, and natural
heritage.
The purpose of this section is as follows:
1. To encourage the preservation of trees and related natural resources of the
woodland ecosystem on undeveloped and underdeveloped land and in
connection with the development of land;
2. To provide for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance and use of
trees and woodlands in order to minimize damage from erosion and siltation,
loss of wildlife and vegetation, and/or from the destruction of the natural
habitat;
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
307
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. To protect trees and woodlands (including woodland resources) for their
economic support of local property values when allowed to remain uncleared
and/or unharvested in whole or in significant part, and for their natural beauty,
character, and ecological or historical significance; and
4. To provide for the paramount public concern for these natural resources in the
interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City,
consistent with Article II, Section 201 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act of 2006,
and in keeping with Article IV, Section 52 of the Michigan Constitution of 1963 and
the intent of the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
PA 451 of 1994.
B. Applicability:
1. The provisions of tree protection shall apply prospectively to all parcels in the City
where site plan review is required as set forth in Section 8.02, and any Subdivision
as set forth in Chapter 41 of the City Code.
2. If it is determined that based on associated historical aerial photographs or other
evidence, an owner or developer of property required to comply with this section
has removed or cleared protected trees within five (5) years of the time of site
plan or subdivision approval , the Planning Commission may require the property
owner or developer to install additional landscaping as required by the site plan
or subdivision approval and to offset the impact of the new development upon
adjacent properties.
C. Protected Trees as Defined:
1. Landmark Tree: A woody plant, in a healthy, live condition (has a health and
condition standard factor of over 50% based on standards established by the
International Society of Arboriculture). The following species that meet the
minimum size (DBH) requirement are considered landmark trees.
Common Name Botanical Name Size (inches)
Basswood Tilia 18
Beech, American Fagus grandifolia 18
Black Cherry Prunus serotina 18
Black Walnut Juglans nigra 18
Buckeye, Ohio Aesculus glabra 18
Douglas Fir Pseudotsuga menziesii 18
Fir Abies 18
Kentucky Coffeetree Gymnocladus dioicus 18
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
308
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
London Planetree/
American Sycamore
Platanus 18
Pine (All species) Pinus 18
Spruce Picea 18
Tulip Poplar Liriodendron tulipifera 18
Hickory Carya 16
Honey Locust Gleditsia tricanthos 16
Maple (Red) Acer rubrum 16
Maple (Sugar) Acer saccharum 16
Oak (All species) Quercus 16
Arborvitae Thuja 12
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum 12
Birch Betula 12
Black Tupelo Nyssa sylvatica 12
Cherry, Flowering Prunus spp. 12
Crabapple/Hawthorne Malus/crataegus 12
Dawn Redwood Metasequoia
glyptostroiboides
12
Ginkgo Ginkgo 12
Hackberry Celtis occidentalis 12
Hawthorn Crataegus 12
Hemlock Tsuga 12
Larch/Tamarack Larix 12
Magnolia Magnolia 12
Pear Pyrus spp. 12
Persimmon Diospyros virginiana 12
Sassafras Sassafras albidum 12
Sweetgum Liquidamber styraciflua 12
Yellow Wood Cladrastis lutea 12
Blue-Beech/Hornbeam Carpinus caroliniana 8
Butternut Juglans cinera 8
Cedar of Lebanon Cedrus spp. 8
Chestnut Castanea 8
Dogwood, Flowering Cornus florida 8
Hop-Hornbeam/
Ironwood
Ostrya virginiana 8
Maple, Mountain/Striped Acer spicatum/
pensylvanicum
8
Paw Paw Asimina triloba 8
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
309
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
Redbud Cercis canadensis 8
Serviceberry Amelanchier 8
Any healthy tree with a DBH 24 or greater, (except invasive species), or
a healthy tree of the species described above with the minimum DBH
listed.
2. Woodlands: Trees in a Woodland, which is defined as one-quarter () acre or
more of contiguously wooded land where the largest trees measure at least six (6)
inches in diameter at breast height (DBH). The acreage is to be measured from
the dripline to dripline of trees on the perimeter. Contiguous shall be defined as
the majority of the one-quarter () acre being under the vegetation dripline.
D. Tree Inventory. A Tree Inventory is required as a component of the preliminary site
plan submission as set forth in Section 8, and any Subdivision as set forth Chapter 41
of the City Code.
1. Tree Inventory shall contain the following:
a. Location of all trees over six (6) inches in DBH.
b. Common and botanical names of all identified trees, their size in inches at their
DBH, and a description of each trees health.
c. Indication of all trees to be removed.
d. Indication of all trees to be preserved.
2. A Tree Inventory must be prepared by either a certified forester or Registered
Landscape Architect.
E. Tree Replacement:
1. When as part of a site plan or subdivision approval the Troy Planning Commission
authorizes the removal of Landmark Trees and trees within a Woodland, the
removal shall be mitigated as follows:
a. Woodland Trees six (6) inches or larger DBH shall be mitigated by installation
of replacement trees equal to a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the original
DBH removed.
b. Landmark Trees (including those located within Woodlands to be removed)
shall be mitigated by installation of replacement trees equal to a minimum of
one hundred percent (100%) of the original DBH of the tree(s) removed.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
310
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
c. Replacement trees shall be non-sterile varieties of species native to
southeast Michigan, and not prohibited by Chapter 28 of the City of Troy
ordinance. The minimum size of a deciduous replacement tree shall be
two and one-half (2.5) inch caliper. The minimum size of a coniferous
replacement tree shall be six (6) feet in height. Deciduous replacement
of one-half (.5) caliper inch is equal to one foot in height for coniferous
replacement.
2. A Tree Replacement Plan must be prepared by either a certified forester
or Registered Landscape Architect. The property owner shall have the
proposed Tree Replacement Plan approved by the Planning Commission.
3. These tree replacement requirements are separate from and in addition to
the landscape requirements set forth in Article 13.02
F. Tree Replacement Alternatives:
1. Any identified Woodland and Landmark Tree that is retained onsite as part
of the development may count towards two (2) times the inch for inch
replacement requirement.
2. When reviewing site plans, the Planning Commission prioritizes Landmark and
Woodland Tree protection and mitigation in order as follows:
a. Protecting and preserving existing onsite Landmark and Woodland Trees.
b. Providing all required mitigation on the site of development.
G. Exemptions from Replacement:
1. The following shall be exempt from the requirements of these Tree
Replacement as set forth in Section 13.07.F:
a. Parcels of land that are not subject to site plan review.
b. Tree trimming and removal necessary to the operation of essential service
facilities of a municipal or other governmental department or agency or
public utility franchised to operate in the City.
c. Tree clearing within an existing public road right-of-way or an existing
private road easement.
d. The removal of any tree which is demonstrated by the property owner
to the Zoning Administrator or designees satisfaction to have a health
and condition standard factor of less than 50 percent based upon the
standards established by the International Society of Arboriculture.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
311
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
e. Trees that are considered invasive by the International Society of Arboriculture
f. Removal of trees that have become a potential danger to human life or
property.
H. Tree Protection. Protected trees, shall be preserved to the greatest extent
practicable through the use of site development techniques including but not limited
to the following:
1. In general, Landmark Trees should not be removed for development. Site design
should consider any Landmark Tree on a site as an important design element.
2. Locate development in areas of the site that are already disturbed or cleared of
trees and woody vegetation.
3. Minimize clearing and grading of the site by working with the sites existing
topography. Grading, roads, walkways, utility lines, and all other aspects of soil
disturbance shall be minimized to the extent possible considering standards of
sound design and public safety. Clearing for buildings should be limited to the
smallest area needed for safe and effective building work.
4. Use retaining walls and other techniques to minimize grade changes near trees.
5. Maintain trees along the perimeter of sites to provide buffer.
6. Maintain grades and moisture conditions within the Critical Root Zone (CRZ) of
trees, being that area in which the loss, disturbance, or damage to any roots
will adversely affect the trees long term health and structural stability. Many of
the native hardwood trees: oaks, hickories, maples and beeches, for example,
and most old trees do not adapt to environmental changes brought about
by construction. Grading changes should not occur within the CRZ of a tree.
In addition, grading on a site should neither increase or decrease moisture
conditions within a trees CRZ. The area of concern around an important tree
may be significantly larger than the CRZ. The drip line of the tree shall be used for
comparison, and if larger than the CRZ, the dripline should be used to determine
how best to protect an important tree.
7. Locate utility lines away from trees to be retained. If this is not possible, install utility
lines through bored tunnels instead of trenches.
8. Conduct any necessary excavation around trees by hand.
9. Applicant must provide a Tree Protection Plan that is compliant with requirements
as set forth Chapter 28, Tree Regulations.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
312
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
10. Upon reasonable notice to the property owner and/or Applicant, the City
shall have the right to periodically inspect the site during site plan review, land
clearing, and/or construction to ensure compliance.
I. Tree Removal as a Result of Construction Activity:
1. Any protected tree identified for preservation on an approved site plan that has
died within three years (3) of the start of construction shall be replaced under the
appropriate Landmark Tree and Woodland replacement requirement.
J. Site Plan Approval and Enforcement:
1. Tree protection and mitigation as approved by the Planning Commission is a
condition of Site Plan approval and enforced as such.
K. Appeals and Variances. All appeals or requests for variances from the provisions of
this section shall be made to the City of Troy Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance
with Article 15 of the City of Troy Zoning Ordinance.
L. Violations and Penalties. Violations of the provisions of this section are violations of
the City of Troy Zoning Ordinance and subject to Article 3 of the City of Troy Zoning
Ordinance.
SECTION 13.08 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS
A traffic impact analysis may be required by the Zoning Administrator, in consultation
with the Traffic Engineer, to analyze the effect of development upon existing street
traffic. The traffic impact analysis shall be paid for by the applicant and shall
examine existing and proposed traffic flow, trip generation studies, impacts on major
intersections, turning movement analysis, roadway capacity, parking generation
and site ingress / egress. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer or transportation planner.
SECTION 13.09 ACCESS MANAGEMENT
A. Where Required. The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses which
access a public street.
B. General Requirements.
1. Adequate ingress and egress to the parking facility shall be provided by clearly
defined driveways. Access to public roads shall be controlled in the interest
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
313
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
of public safety. Each building or group of buildings used for non-residential
purposes, and its parking or service area, shall be physically separated from
public roads by a greenbelt, curb, or other suitable barrier against unchanneled
motor vehicle access or egress, except for access ways authorized herein.
2. Driveway design and placement must be in harmony with internal circulation
and parking design such that the entrance can absorb the maximum rate of
inbound traffic during a normal peek traffic period. Parking lots shall be designed
to prevent vehicles from backing into the street or requiring use of the street for
maneuvering between parking rows.
3. Cross access is required and shall be located to provide a direct connection with
the existing or future access of the abutting non-residential properties. A site plan
without cross access may be approved when it can be demonstrated that there
are either physical limitations or functional circumstances that would prevent such
access from being installed.
4. There must be sufficient on-site storage to accommodate at least three (3)
queued vehicles waiting to park or exit without using a portion of the public rightof-
way obstructing exiting vehicle sight distance, or otherwise interfering with
street traffic.
5. Driveways shall be designed to accommodate all vehicle types having occasion
to enter and exit the site, including delivery vehicles. There shall be clear
delineation and / or separation, where appropriate, of entry and exit lanes within
driveways.
6. Ingress and egress to an off-street parking lot for all uses other than single-family
residential shall not cross land zoned for single-family.
C. Location and Spacing.
1. Ingress and egress from an off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for all
uses other than single-family residential shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from
adjacent property zoned single-family residential.
2. The number of access points shall be limited to the minimum needed to provide
reasonable access. Access points shall be designed and located to minimize
conflicts with traffic operations along the street and be placed as far from
intersections as practical, but no closer than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet
as measured from centerline to centerline. The minimum separation between
driveways shall be based upon the posted speed limit of the street.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
314
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 13.10 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS
A. Where Required. On premise space for standing, loading and unloading vehicles
shall be provided for each use involving the receipt or distribution of goods. The City
may permit central loading areas to be shared by multiple uses, such as in a retail
shopping center or office park.
B. Traffic Flow Location. The location of the loading area shall be sufficient to prevent
undue interference with adjacent, required parking spaces, maneuvering aisles,
or traffic flow and no unloading on public streets. Loading/unloading areas and
docks shall not be provided in the front yard. Where possible, loading areas shall be
integrated into the design of the building to minimize visibility.
C. Alleys. Where an alley exists at the rear of the building, the required loading area
may be computed from the centerline of the alley.
D. Size. The size of all required loading/unloading spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet
by fifty (50) feet or five hundred (500) square feet in area, with a clearance of at least
fourteen (14) feet in height. The City may modify this requirement for uses that will
involve smaller delivery trucks.
E. Pavement. Loading dock approaches shall be constructed of an asphalt or
concrete with a base sufficient to accommodate expected vehicle weight.
F. Number. The minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements set forth in Table 13.10-A.
Table 13.09-A
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Institutional, Commercial, and Office Uses
Up to 5,000 sq. ft. Gross Floor Area (GFA) 1 space
5,001 to 60,000 sq. ft. GFA 1 space, plus 1 space per each additional 20,000 sq. ft. GFA
60,001 sq. ft. GFA and over 3 spaces, plus 1 space per each additional 50,000 sq. ft. GFA
Industrial Uses
Up to 1,400 sq. ft. GFA 0
1,401 to 20,000 sq. ft. GFA 1 space
20,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. GFA 1 space, plus 1 space per each additional 20,000 sq. ft. GFA in
excess of 20,000 sq. ft.
100,001 sq. ft. GFA and over 5 spaces
SECTION 13.11 PEDESTRIAN ACCESS
A. Where Required. The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses that
attract non-motorized and pedestrian traffic.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
315
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
B. General Standard. The parking and circulation system within each development
shall accommodate the movement of vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians and transit,
throughout the proposed development and to and from surrounding areas, safely
and conveniently, and shall contribute to the attractiveness of the development.
The on-site pedestrian system must provide continuity, street crossings, visual interest
and security as defined by the standards in this Section.
C. Safety Considerations. To the maximum extent feasible, pedestrians shall be
separated from vehicles.
1. Minimizing Pedestrian/Vehicular Conflicts. Physical separation of pedestrian and
vehicular access is the most effective means of avoiding conflicts and unsafe
conditions. Where complete separation of pedestrians and vehicles is not
possible, potential hazards shall be minimized by the use of techniques such as
special paving, grade separations, pavement marking, signs or striping, bollards,
pedestrian safety island, landscaping, lighting or other traffic calming measures to
clearly delineate pedestrian areas, for both day and night use.
2. Multi-Use Paths. Where bicycle paths are required or are specifically part of a site
plan and pedestrians and bicyclist share walkways, the pedestrian/bicycle system
shall be designed to be wide enough to easily accommodate the amount of
pedestrian and bicycle traffic volumes that are anticipated. The minimum width
shall meet American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) guidelines and applicable City Engineering design standards.
3. Curb Cuts and Ramps. Curb cuts and ramps shall be located at convenient, safe
locations for the physically disabled, for bicyclists and for people pushing strollers
or carts. Curb cuts and ramps shall be located at convenient and safe locations.
The location and design of curb cuts and ramps shall comply with the Michigan
Barrier-Free Code and the Americans with Disabilities Act Standards for Accessible
Design.
4. Site Amenities. Development plans shall include site amenities that enhance
safety and convenience and promote walking or bicycling as an alternative
means of transportation. Site amenities may include bike racks, drinking fountains,
canopies and benches. However, all sites with parking of ten (10) spaces or
greater shall provide a bike rack for at least two (2) bicycles within fifty (50) feet of
the building entrance.
5. Walkways.
a. Walkways within the site shall directly connect points of pedestrian origin
and destination. Walkways shall not be located based only on the outline of
a parking lot if it does not provide direct pedestrian access. Walkways shall
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
316
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 13
Site Design Standards
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
either be grade separated from parking lots or clearly delineated to avoid
pedestrian/vehicular conflicts.
b. Where it is necessary for the pedestrian access to cross maneuvering aisles
or internal roadways, the crossings shall emphasize and place priority on
pedestrian access and safety. The pedestrian crossings must be well-marked,
using such measures as pavement treatments, signs, striping, signals, lighting,
pedestrian safety islands, landscaping and other traffic calming techniques.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
317
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 14
Non-Conforming Lots, Uses, and
Structures
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 14
NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES
SECTION 14.01 INTENT
A. It is the purpose of this Article to provide regulations governing lots, buildings,
structures and uses which were lawful prior to the enactment of this Ordinance,
or amendments thereto, but which are regulated under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
B. It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this Article and
subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which
were lawful before this Article was passed or amended which would be prohibited,
regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments.
Such uses are declared by this Article to be incompatible with permitted uses in
the districts involved. It is further the intent of this Article that nonconformities shall
not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding
other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same District.
C. The standards of this Article are intended to accomplish the following:
1. Eliminate nonconforming uses which are considered to be incompatible with
permitted uses and encourage redevelopment into more conforming uses.
2. Permit legal nonconforming buildings, structures or uses to remain until they are
discontinued or removed.
3. Encourage investment in surrounding neighborhoods by bringing nonconforming
structures into compliance with this Ordinance.
4. Encourage upgrading of site elements such as site landscaping, parking,
paving, signage, access, pedestrian circulation or other features of a site which
was developed in compliance with the standards at the time of construction,
but which do not meet current site standards.
5. Encourage combination of contiguous nonconforming lots of record to create
lots which conform to current standards, are compatible with other lots in the
appropriate zoning district, to promote public health, safety and welfare and to
eliminate problems associated with over-crowding.
D. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was
lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Article
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
318
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 14
Non-Conforming Lots, Uses, and
Structures
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
provided progress has been diligently pursued and substantial construction has
occurred.
E. The authorization of nonconformities that were legally established prior to enactment
or amendment of this Ordinance to continue shall not apply to buildings, structures or
uses which were not legally established prior to the enactment or amendment of this
Ordinance. Those nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures which have not
been legally established shall be declared illegal and shall be discontinued at the
effective date of this Ordinance.
SECTION 14.02 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
A. Use of Nonconforming Lots. In any District where single-family dwellings are
permitted, any single lot of record existing at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this Article that fails to meet the applicable Zoning District
requirements for area or width, or both, shall be considered to be a nonconforming
lot of record. A single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
constructed on a nonconforming lot of record provided setbacks and all other
requirements of this Ordinance are met.
B. Nonconforming Contiguous Lots Under Same Ownership. If two (2) or more lots or
combinations of lots with contiguous frontage in single ownership are of record at
the time of passage or amendment of this Article, and if all or part of the lots do
not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this Article, the
lots or combination of lots involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel
for the purposes of this Article. No portion of said parcel shall be used or occupied
in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements
established by this Article, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which creates
a lot width or area below the requirements stated in this Article.
SECTION 14.03 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND
A lawful use of land or structure or land in combination existing at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this Article that is no longer permissible under the terms
of this Article as enacted or amended, shall be considered a nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
A. A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy
a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Article.
B. A nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
319
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 14
Non-Conforming Lots, Uses, and
Structures
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Article.
C. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which
were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time
of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building.
D. A nonconforming use that is replaced by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the District in which the use is located, and the nonconforming use
may not thereafter be resumed.
E. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination,
removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status.
F. An existing structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall not be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is
located, or to bring the structure into greater conformity with the Ordinance.
G. A nonconforming use that is determined to be abandoned shall not be reestablished,
and any subsequent use shall conform to this Ordinance. A
nonconforming use shall be determined to be abandoned if one or more of the
following conditions exist:
1. The use ceases for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days.
2. Utilities, such as water, gas and electricity to the property have been
disconnected.
3. The property, building, or grounds have fallen into disrepair in a manner which
result in violation of applicable zoning and property maintenance codes, or
would otherwise give the appearance of neglect or abandonment.
4. Signs or other indications of the existence of the nonconforming use have been
removed.
5. Equipment or fixtures necessary for the operation of the nonconforming use have
been removed.
6. Other actions, which in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, constitute
an intention on the part of the property owner or lessee to abandon the
nonconforming use.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
320
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 14
Non-Conforming Lots, Uses, and
Structures
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 14.04 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
A lawful structure that existed prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this Article that is no longer permissible under the terms of this Article as enacted or
amended shall be considered a nonconforming structure. A nonconforming structure
may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
A. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its non-conformity.
B. A nonconforming building or structure that is destroyed by any means to an extent
of more than sixty (60) percent of its replacement cost, exclusive of the foundation
at the time of destruction, shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this Article.
C. A nonconforming building or structure that is moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the District in which it is
located after it is moved.
D. A nonconforming building or structure that is altered so as to eliminate, remove or
lessen any or all of its nonconforming characteristics, shall not be altered or modified
and any time thereafter to reestablish the nonconforming characteristics.
SECTION 14.05 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
A. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be
done in any period of twelve (l2) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair
or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not
exceeding fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the building, provided that the
cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of
this chapter shall not be increased.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official
charged with protecting the public safety, upon order to such official.
SECTION 14.06 CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing
nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises provided there is no change in the
nature or character of such nonconforming uses.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
321
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 15
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION 15.01 BOARD ESTABLISHED
A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established, in accordance with Act 110 of
the Public Acts of 2006, as amended (MCL 125.3601 et. seq.), and in such a way
that the objectives of this Zoning Ordinance shall be observed, public health, safety
and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The Zoning Board of Appeals
is established to ensure that the objectives of this Ordinance may be more fully
and equitably achieved, that a means be provided for competent interpretation
of this Ordinance, and that reasonable relief be provided in the application of this
Ordinance. The BZA in existence at the time of the effective date of this ordinance
shall continue to act as the ZBA in accordance with this Ordinance
SECTION 15.02 MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS
A. Membership.
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) permanent members
and two (2) alternate members appointed by the City Council. One (1)
regular member shall be a member of the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission representative shall not serve as Chair of the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The remaining members shall be selected from the electors of the City,
and shall be representatives of the population distribution and of the various
interests present in the City.
2. An employee or contractor of the City Council may not be a member or
employee of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
3. The City Council shall appoint two (2) alternate members of the Zoning Board
of Appeals who shall serve as a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals upon
the call of the Chairperson when a regular member is absent from or unable to
attend one (1) or more meetings. An alternate member may also be called to
serve in place of a member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case
in which the member has abstained for the reason of a conflict of interest. The
alternate member having been appointed shall serve on the case until a final
decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same voting
rights as a regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
4. The term of each permanent member shall be three (3) years, except for
members serving because of their membership on the Planning Commission,
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
322
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
whose terms shall be limited to the time they are members of the Planning
Commission. A successor shall be appointed within one (1) month after the term
of the preceding member has expired. All vacancies for unexpired terms shall be
filled for the remainder of the term.
B. Removal. Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be removed by the City
Council for misfeasance, malfeasance or non-feasance in office upon written
charges and after a due process hearing. A member shall disclose when there is
or may be a conflict of interest prior to the matter being considered by the Zoning
Board or Appeals. Failure of a member to disclose that there is or may be a conflict
of interest to allow the Board to disqualify that member from a vote shall constitute
malfeasance in office.
SECTION 15.03 RULES GOVERNING THE BOARD OF APPEALS
A. Rules. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedures to govern its
procedures. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect a Chairperson, and Vice-
Chairperson from its membership in accordance with adopted rules of procedure.
B. Votes. A concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be necessary for any decision related to administrative review,
interpretation and variances other than use variances. Use variances shall require an
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members for approval. A current member
of the Zoning Board of Appeals who is also a current member of the Planning
Commission shall not participate in a public hearing or vote on the same matter that
the member voted on as a member of the Planning Commission.
C. Representation. Any applicant may appear on their own behalf at a hearing or may
be represented by an agent or attorney.
D. Time Limit. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide upon all matters
properly before it within a reasonable time. The decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be in the form of a resolution containing a full record of its findings and
determinations in each case. The time limit may be extended by written agreement
between the applicant and the Zoning Board of Appeals.
E. Meetings and Record of Proceedings. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such times as the Board in its rules and
regulations might specify. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not conduct business
unless a majority of the members of the Board are present. The Board shall maintain
a record of its proceedings, and all its official actions. The vote of each member
upon a question, or a members absence or abstention, shall be recorded into the
minutes of the meeting, which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
323
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 15.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
A. General. The Zoning Board of Appeals has the power to act on matters as provided
in this Ordinance and Act 110, of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended (MCL 125.3601
et. seq.). The specific powers of the Board are enumerated in the following Sections
of this Article.
B. Delegated Duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide upon the
following:
1. Appeals of administrative decisions.
2. Requests for interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map.
3. Requests for dimensional and other non-use variances.
4. Requests for use variances.
5. All matters upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance.
C. Appeals of Administrative Decisions. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by an administrative official or body in the
enforcement of this Ordinance.
1. Appeals shall be filed in writing within thirty (30) days of the written decision in
question with the Zoning Administrator. The appellant must have a property
interest and standing to be recognized under the law to challenge the decision.
The appellant shall submit a clear description of the order, requirement, decision,
or determination for which the appeal is made and the grounds of the appeal.
The appellant may be required by the Zoning Board of Appeals to submit
additional information to clarify the appeal.
2. Appeals may be taken by the person aggrieved or by any officer, department,
board, agency, or bureau of the City or State governments. In addition, a
variance in the Zoning Ordinance may be applied for and granted under Section
4 of the Uniform Condemnation Procedures Act, 1980 PA 87, MCL 213.54.
3. An appeal stays all proceedings in the furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals that a stay
would cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall
not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the
Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
324
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
4. An administrative decision may be reversed, in whole or in part, or may be
modified. To that end, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all the powers of
the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken. In reaching its decision,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall only modify or reverse an administrative
decision being appealed if one (1) or more of the following requirements are met:
a. The administrative decision was arbitrary or capricious.
b. The administrative decision was based on an erroneous finding of material
fact.
c. The administrative decision constituted an abuse of discretion; or
d. The administrative decision was based on erroneous interpretation of the
Zoning Ordinance or zoning law.
D. Interpretation.
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide requests for interpretation
of this Ordinance or the Zoning Map, taking into consideration the intent and
purpose of the Ordinance and the Master Plan. In an interpretation of the
Zoning Map, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be governed by the Rules of
Interpretation set forth in Section 4.03, Interpretation of District Boundaries. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power to alter or change zoning
district boundaries, except where uncertainty exists as to the location of a
boundary, land use classifications of any property, or Zoning Ordinance text.
2. A record shall be kept by the Zoning Board of Appeals of all decisions for
interpretation of this Ordinance or Zoning Map. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
request the Planning Commission to initiate an Ordinance amendment that would
correct or clarify the Ordinance.
E. Dimensional and Other Non-Use Variances.
1. Where a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would involve
practical difficulties within the meaning of this Article, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall have the power to authorize such variation of the provisions of this
Ordinance with such conditions and safeguards as it may determine as may be
in harmony with the spirit of this Article and so that public safety and welfare be
secured and substantial justice done.
2. Dimensional or other non-use variances shall not be granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals unless it can be determined that all of the following facts and
conditions exist:
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
325
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
a. Exceptional characteristics of property for which the variance is sought
make compliance with dimensional requirements substantially more difficult
than would be the case for the great majority of properties in the same
zoning district. Characteristics of property which shall be considered include
exceptional narrowness, shallowness, smallness, irregular shape, topography,
vegetation and other similar characteristics.
b. The characteristics which make compliance with dimensional requirements
difficult must be related to the premises for which the variance is sought, not
some other location.
c. The characteristics which make compliance with the dimensional requirements
shall not be of a personal nature.
d. The characteristics which make compliance with dimensional requirements
difficult must not have been created by the current or a previous owner.
e. The proposed variance will not be harmful or alter the essential character of
the area in which the property is located, will not impair an adequate supply
of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion
in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety,
or unreasonably diminish or impair established property value within the
surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety,
comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the City.
3. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not find that any of the above criteria have
been met without substantial evidence provided by the applicant to that effect.
4. The proposed variance will be the minimum necessary, and no variance shall be
granted where a different solution not requiring a variance would be possible.
F. Use Variances.
1. Use Variance Standards for Review. A use variance may be allowed by the
Zoning Board of Appeals only in cases where there is reasonable evidence of
unnecessary hardship in the official record of the hearing, and that all of the
following conditions are met:
a. The applicant has demonstrated that the site cannot reasonably be used
for any of the uses allowed within the current zoning district designation. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may require submission of documentation from
professionals or certified experts to substantiate this finding.
b. That the condition or situation of the specific parcel of property or the
intended use of such property for which the variance is sought is unique to
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
326
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
that property and not commonly present in the general vicinity or in the zoning
district. The applicant must prove that there are certain features or conditions
of the land that are not generally applicable throughout the zone and that
these features make it impossible to earn a reasonable return without some
adjustment. Such unique conditions or situations include:
i. Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property on the
effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
ii. Exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation on the
land, building or structure.
iii. The use or development of the property immediately adjoining the property
in question.
iv. Any other physical situation on the land, building or structure deemed by
the Zoning Board of Appeals to be extraordinary.
c. The use variance will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or
the intent of the Master Plan, or be a detriment to adjacent properties.
d. The capacity and operations of public roads, utilities, other facilities and
services will not be significantly compromised.
e. The immediate practical difficulty causing the need for variance request was
not self-created by the applicant.
G. Dimensional Variance in Special Use Approval and Planned Unit Developments.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant dimensional or other site plan related
variances (e.g. lot dimensions, setbacks, building height, lot coverage, parking, etc.)
for special approval uses. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power to
reverse or modify the Planning Commissions decision to approve or deny a special
use permit, nor grant variances to any conditions placed on special use approval.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to grant variances to any
regulations or any requirement placed upon a project approved as a Planned Unit
Development or conditional rezoning. However, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
have the authority to decide appeal requests by individual lot or unit owners for
variances from other sections of the Zoning Ordinance following final approval of
a Planned Unit Development, provided such variances do not affect the terms or
conditions of the original approval.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
327
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
SECTION 15.05 RULES AND PROCEDURES FOR VARIANCES
A. General.
1. An application for a variance shall be filed by the record owner of the lot in
question, or by an agent authorized in writing to act on the record owners behalf,
with the Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall provide such information as is
required by the Zoning Board of Appeals by way of completed application form,
fee and additional information.
2. After a public hearing and upon findings of fact based upon the applicable
standards set forth in this Article, the Zoning Board of Appeals may approve the
variance(s) as requested, approve variance(s) that better complies with the
Ordinance than that requested, or deny the request.
3. The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose conditions with an affirmative decision.
The conditions may include those necessary to promote the public health,
safety and welfare, ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses, and protect
and preserve natural features. Any conditions imposed by the Zoning Board of
Appeals must be related to a valid exercise of the police power, and purposes
which are affected by the proposed use or activity.
4. Any variance approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals permitting the erection
or alteration of a building shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, provided
a building permit for the work has been obtained within that time period and
work has commenced on the site. Additionally, the applicant must demonstrate
continued progress towards completion of the project. The Zoning Administrator
may grant extensions, not to exceed six (6) months for each extension, upon
a showing of good cause and good faith effort being made to achieve
completion.
5. A variance which is legally utilized and maintained runs with the property and
any subsequent owners may legally continue the variance under its original or
amended terms.
6. An application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from
the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence not previously discovered
at the time the variance was denied or changed conditions found by the Zoning
Board of Appeals to be valid.
B. Use Variances.
1. Application. In addition to the information required for other variance
requests, an application for a use variance shall include a sketch plan with the
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
328
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
required information as set forth in Section 8.03.A detailing the specific use and
improvements proposed by the applicant, and a summary of the facts which
support each of the following conclusions:
a. Applicants property cannot be used for the purposes permitted in the zoning
district.
b. Applicants plight is due to unique circumstances peculiar to his property and
not to general neighborhood conditions.
c. Applicants suggested use would not alter the essential character of the area.
d. Applicants problem has not been self-created.
e. Unavailability of administrative relief which may afford reasonable use of
applicants property.
The applicant shall identify all persons who will testify at the hearing with respect
to each of the facts and respective conclusions. If any person is to be offered
as an expert witness, the application shall include a resume which shows the
education and experience of such person within the particular area of expertise.
2. Pre-Hearing Conference for Use Variances.
a. Prior to the scheduling of a hearing, the applicant shall contact the Zoning
Administrator for the purpose of scheduling a pre-hearing conference.
b. The purposes of the pre-hearing conference shall be to:
i. Review the procedure for the hearing and identify all persons who will
testify either directly or through affidavit and the evidence to be offered on
behalf of the applicant;
ii. Attempt to secure a statement of agreed-upon facts to be used to narrow
the matters of dispute and shorten the hearing;
iii. Explore a means of providing relief to the applicant by way of non-use
variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals, or other relief which may
require action by persons or bodies other than the Zoning Board of Appeals
which will afford an adequate remedy for the applicant;
iv. Discuss the need, desirability, and the terms of providing a verbatim record
of the hearing.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall determine who should be present at the prehearing
conference based upon the application submitted, and taking
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
329
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
into consideration the discussion with the applicant or the applicants
representative.
d. The pre-hearing conference shall be scheduled and conducted on an
expeditious basis so as to avoid unreasonable delay to the applicant.
Sufficient time shall be taken, however, to achieve the purposes of the prehearing
conference stated above. The Zoning Administrator may waive the
requirement for a pre-hearing conference if such a waiver is requested by the
applicant.
3. Hearing Procedure for Use Variances.
a. In order to be entitled to relief, the burden shall be upon the applicant to
demonstrate each of the five factors in subsection (B)(1) of this section.
b. Manner of Presentation.
i. The Zoning Administrator shall present an overview of the zoning regulations
involved. This may include an indication of the objectives sought to be
achieved in the zoning district, and any planning, engineering, financial,
environmental or other considerations which are generally relevant within
the zoning district and/or in the general area of the property at issue.
ii. The applicant may present witnesses, including the applicant, or
may submit affidavits, for the purpose of attempting to prove facts or
conclusions. The applicant shall be provided with the opportunity to
present all testimony and evidence proposed to be presented at the prehearing
conference, either through witnesses or affidavits; however, the
chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals may restrict testimony and
evidence which would result in unreasonable duplication. In addition, by
motion made on its own or at the request of a person at the hearing, the
Zoning Board of Appeals may require the presence of any witness who
has offered either testimony by affidavit on a material question of fact or
testimony of an expert nature, with the view of permitting members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals to ask questions of such witnesses.
iii. At the conclusion of the applicants presentation, interested persons
attending the hearing shall be provided with the opportunity to present
testimony and evidence in the same manner and subject to requiring
the presence and questioning of witnesses, as provided above for the
applicant.
iv. When interested persons have completed their presentations, at the same
meeting and/or at an adjourned meeting date, testimony and evidence
may be presented on behalf of the community in the same manner, and
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
330
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
subject to requiring the presence and questioning of witnesses, as provided
above for the applicant. The purpose of such presentation shall be to
ensure that all relevant information is before the Zoning Board of Appeals
for consideration as it relates to the specific application presented.
v. If testimony or evidence has been offered by or on behalf of interested
persons and/or the community, the applicant shall have the opportunity to
make a responsive presentation, restricted to answering the points raised
by interested persons and community representatives. The manner of
presenting witnesses, and requirement of their presence and questioning,
shall be the same as provided above for the applicants principal case.
vi. At the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals may determine to
establish other rules of procedure, such as meeting hours on any
given day, procedure for presentations by interested persons and/
or on behalf of the community, or other rules found to be necessary or
appropriate by the board. When questions of procedure arise during
the hearing, the chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals may solicit
the recommendation of the representatives of the applicant and the
community and/or the City Administration.
vii. If a hearing is not completed at a given meeting within the time period
allowed by the Zoning Board of Appeals, the board shall adjourn the
hearing to a date certain for continuation.
4. Decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals may deem it appropriate in any given case to
provide an opportunity for anyone presenting testimony or evidence to submit
proposed findings of fact and conclusions.
b. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals may make its
decision at that meeting, or it may adjourn the hearing to a new date for the
purpose of reviewing the testimony and evidence, and reviewing proposed
findings and conclusions submitted by hearing participants, in preparation for
making its decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals may also request the Zoning
Administrator to prepare findings and conclusions.
c. If the Zoning Board of Appeals determines to grant variance relief, it shall be
the minimum relief required to allow reasonable use of the property, while
maintaining the essential character of the area. Such relief may be in the form
of one (1) or more non-use variances and/or in the form of a use variance. The
motion may include conditions that are authorized by law.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
331
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
C. Public Hearings and Notification. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a
public hearing on all appeals, interpretations, and requests for variances. Public
hearing and notification requirements are set forth in Section 3.04 Public Notice
Requirements.
SECTION 15.06 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
If an application to the Board of Zoning Appeals requires site plan approval by the
Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of Article 8.0, the applicant shall first
apply for site plan approval as set forth in Article 8.0. The Planning Commission shall
review the site plan, including site layout and other design features, but shall not grant
Preliminary Site Plan Approval nor make a recommendation on the variance. The
Planning Commission shall then transmit the site plan and the minutes related to said
site plan to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall transmit
its decision related to the application to the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall then take action on the site plan.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
332
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 15
Zoning Board of Appeals
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
This page intentionally left blank
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
333
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 16
Amendments
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
ARTICLE 16
AMENDMENTS
SECTION 16.01 AUTHORITY
The City Council may amend the District boundaries or the regulations herein, or
subsequently established herein pursuant to the authority and procedure established
in Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006 as amended. Amendments to the Ordinance
requirements are referred to as text amendments. Amendments to the official zoning
map that constitute a change in zoning classification are referred to as rezonings.
Amendments may be initiated by: resolution of the City Council or the Planning
Commission; petition of one (1) or more property owners; or by one (1) or more persons
acting on behalf of a property owner(s).
SECTION 16.02 VESTED RIGHT
Nothing in this Chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any
permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, District, zoning
classification or any permissible activities therein; and, they are hereby declared to be
subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to
the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 16.03 REZONING PROCEDURES
A. Procedure for Rezoning of Property.
1. An applicant seeking the rezoning of property within the City of Troy shall file an
application with the Zoning Administrator, together with the appropriate fee, not
less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the Regular Meeting of the Planning
Commission.
2. A completed application for rezoning shall be transmitted by the Zoning
Administrator to the Planning Department for a report on the application.
3. A sign shall be placed on the subject property to inform the public that an
application for rezoning has been filed, and to indicate the location where the
information regarding the request can be obtained.
4. The Planning Commission shall review the application for rezoning, any
supplementary materials, and the Planning Department report and hold a
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
334
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 16
Amendments
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
public hearing. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make
a recommendation to the City Council.
5. The application for rezoning, the entire record at the Planning Commission, the
report from the Planning Department, and the recommendation of the Planning
Commission shall be forwarded to the City Manager and subsequently to the City
Council. The City Manager shall establish a date on which the City Council shall
hold a public hearing on the matter.
6. The City Council shall review the application for rezoning, the Planning
Commission recommendation, and Planning Department report. The City
Council, after a review of the matter, shall adopt a resolution which shall either:
a. Approve the rezoning application for all or part of the property.
b. Deny the rezoning application; or,
c. Postpone the rezoning application.
B. Application Requirements. A rezoning shall be submitted on forms provided by the
Zoning Administrator. Failure to provide the information and materials required as
a part of the application for rezoning shall render the application deficient and the
application shall be held in abeyance until all required items are submitted. The
following information shall be submitted:
1. The present zoning classification of the property.
2. The proposed zoning classification.
3. The name, address and telephone of the person applying for the rezoning.
4. The name, address and telephone of the person who owns the subject property.
5. The relationship between the applicant and the property owner.
6. A Certified Survey that meets PA 132.
7. The proposed use of the property shall be indicated on the application.
C. Standards for Approval. A rezoning may only be approved upon a finding and
determination that all of the following are satisfied:
1. The proposed rezoning is consistent with the Master Plan. If the current zoning is in
material conflict with the Master Plan, such conflict is due to one of the following:
a. A change in City policy since the Master Plan was adopted.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
335
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 16
Amendments
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
b. A change in conditions since the Master Plan was adopted.
c. An error in the Master Plan.
2. The proposed rezoning will not cause nor increase any non-conformity.
3. Public services and facilities affected by a proposed development will be
capable of accommodating service and facility loads caused by use of the
development.
4. The rezoning will not impact public health, safety, or welfare.
5. The rezoning will ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land.
SECTION 16.04 CONDITIONAL REZONING PROCEDURES
A. Authorization and Limitations. City Council shall have the authority to place
conditions on a rezoning provided the conditions have been voluntarily offered in
writing by the applicant and are acceptable to the City Council.
In exercising its authority to consider a conditional rezoning, the City is also authorized
to impose the following limitations:
1. An owner of land may voluntarily offer written conditions relating to the use and/
or development of land for which a conditional rezoning is requested. This offer
may be made either at the time the application for conditional rezoning is filed,
or additional conditions may be offered at a later time during the conditional
rezoning process as set forth below.
2. The owners offer of conditions may not authorize uses or developments not
permitted in the requested new zoning district. The owners offer of conditions
shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the property for which the
conditional rezoning is requested.
3. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would
require special use approval under the terms of this Ordinance may only be
commenced if special use approval for such use or development is ultimately
granted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
4. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would
require a variance under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if
a variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
336
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 16
Amendments
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
5. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would
require site plan approval under the terms of this Ordinance may only be
commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately
granted in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance.
B. Amendment of Conditions. The offer of conditions may be amended during the
process of conditional rezoning consideration, provided that any amended or
additional conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner, and confirmed in writing.
An owner may withdraw in writing all or part of its offer of conditions any time
prior to final rezoning action of the City Council provided that, if such withdrawal
occurs subsequent to the Planning Commissions public hearing on the original
rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred back to the
Planning Commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new
recommendation.
C. Procedure. The procedure for consideration of Conditional Rezoning request
shall be the same as provided in Section 16.03 for other rezoning requests and the
requirements of said Sections shall be applicable to Conditional Rezoning in addition
to the following:
1. Application Requirements. A Conditional Rezoning request shall be initiated by
the submission of a proposed Conditional Rezoning Agreement. A Conditional
Rezoning Agreement shall include the following:
a. A written statement prepared by the applicant that confirms the Conditional
Rezoning Agreement was proposed by the applicant and entered into
voluntarily.
b. A written statement prepared by the applicant that confirms that the property
shall not be used or developed in a manner that is inconsistent with conditions
placed on the rezoning.
c. A list of conditions proposed by the applicant.
d. A time frame for completing the proposed improvements.
e. A legal description of the land.
f. A Sketch Plan prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth in
Section 8.03.A.
2. Public Hearing. The Notice of Public Hearing on a Conditional Rezoning request
shall include a general description of the proposed agreement being considered.
A review of the proposed agreement shall be conducted at the public hearing.
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
337
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 16
Amendments
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
3. Standards for Approval. A Conditional Rezoning may only be approved upon a
finding and determination that all of the following are satisfied:
a. The conditions, proposed development, and/or proposed use of the land are
designed or proposed for public health, safety, and welfare purposes.
b. The conditions, proposed development and/or proposed use are not in
material conflict with the Master Plan, or, if there is material conflict with the
Master Plan, such conflict is due to one of the following:
i. A change in City policy since the Master Plan was adopted.
ii. A change in conditions since the Master Plan was adopted.
iii. An error in the Master Plan.
c. The conditions, proposed development and/or proposed use are in
accordance with all terms and provisions of the zoning district to which the
land is to be rezoned, except as otherwise allowed in the Conditional Rezoning
Agreement.
d. Public services and facilities affected by a proposed development will be
capable of accommodating service and facility loads caused by use of the
development.
e. The conditions, proposed development and/or proposed use shall insure
compatibility with adjacent uses of land.
D. Amendment to Zoning Map. Upon approval by City Council of a Conditional
Rezoning request and a Conditional Rezoning Agreement, as provided by this
Section, the Zoning Map shall be amended to reflect a new zoning classification
along with a relevant designation that will provide reasonable notice of the
Conditional Rezoning Agreement.
E. Expiration. A Conditional Rezoning Approval shall expire following a period of two
(2) years from the effective date of the rezoning unless progress has been diligently
pursued and substantial completion has occurred in accordance with permits issued
by the City.
1. In the event the conditional rezoning expires, the rezoning and the Conditional
Rezoning Agreement shall be void and of no effect.
2. If the Conditional Rezoning becomes void, no development shall be undertaken
and no permits for development shall be issued until such time as a new zoning
district classification of the property has become effective as a result of one or
Authority and
Administration
Development
Regulations
Processes and
Procedures
Supplemental Design
Regulations
Nonconformity,
Appeals,Amendments
338
ZONING
ORDINANCE
Article 16
Amendments
Table of Contents Zoning Map Definitions Figures & Maps Tables
both of the following actions that may be taken:
a. The property owner seeks a new rezoning classification for the property, and/or
b. The City initiates a new rezoning request for the property to a reasonable
district classification, in accordance with the conventional rezoning procedure.
F. A Conditional Rezoning Approval shall not become effective until the Conditional
Rezoning Agreement is recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds and a
certified copy of the Agreement is filed with the City Clerk.
G. If development and/or actions are undertaken on or with respect to the property in
violation of the Conditional Rezoning Agreement, such development and/or actions
shall constitute a violation of this ordinance and deemed a nuisance per se. In
such case, the City may issue a stop work order relative to the property and seek
any other lawful remedies. Until curative action is taken to bring the property into
compliance with the Conditional Rezoning Agreement, the City may withhold, or,
following notice and an opportunity to be heard, revoke permits and certificates, in
addition to or in lieu of such other lawful action to achieve compliance.
SECTION 16.05 PUBLIC NOTICE OF PROPOSED REZONINGS AND TEXT AMENDMENTS
Public hearing and notification requirements for proposed rezoning and text
amendments are set forth in Section 3.04, Public Notice Requirements.
SECTION 16.06 PROTEST PETITION
If a protest petition in conformance with State law is presented to the City Council prior
to the final adoption of an amendment to this ordinance, such amendment shall not be
passed except by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the City Council. A protest petition shall be
signed by the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of land included in the
proposed change, or by the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of land
included within an area extending outward one hundred (100) feet from any point on
the boundary of the land included in the proposed change, excluding publicly owned
land. The protest petition shall be submitted to the City Clerk by 12:00 P.M. on the day
of the City Council Public Hearing on the proposed amendment, on a form provided by
the City.
SECTION 16.07 ANNUAL REPORT
The Planning Commission shall prepare an annual report for the Troy City Council on the
administration and enforcement of the zoning ordinance and recommendations for
amendment or supplements to the ordinance.
F E
H G
I
J
K
M L
N
O
Q P
R
S
U T
A
B
C
D
PUD #2
PUD #1
PUD #4 PUD #9
PUD #7
PUD #8
PUD #5
PUD #9
PUD #10
PUD #14
SHELLDRAKE
BEACH BEACH
BEACH BEACH
MERRICK
PALMERSTON
AXTELL
DONALDSON
GOLFV IE W
LAMB
CU NNINGHA M
HAMMAN
TROYW OOD
SOMERS ET
NORTHFIELD PARKWAY
NORTHFIELD PARKWAY
NORTHFIELD PARKWAY
NORTHFIELD PARKWAY
DEVONWOOD
LANERGAN
FINCH
BLAIR
WHEATON
CORPORATE
NAUGHTON
MACAW
TROY CENTER
M ANORW OOD
CHERRY
NEW KING
ROCHESTER
DALEY
CYPRESS
ELLENBORO
WOO DG ATE
FOREST PARK
ELMSFORD
MYDDLETON
KEY WEST
BOROS
DOUGLAS FIR
EVANSWOOD
BRETBY
GREENWICH
TALLMAN
CUMBERLAND
HOUGHTEN
BRITTANY TREE
BLOOMINGDA LE
SWEET
CHANTE R ELL
WHITEHALL
KRISTIN
WENTWORTH
HERITAGE
DEVONWOOD
ENDICOTT
BOYD
SUTHERLAND
CORPORATE
JUDY
ALMOND
CHERISHED VIEW
PAR IS
HOPEDALE
HILLCRESCENT
LONDON
CADM U S
LANGFORD
QUINCY
AVA LON
SANTI A
HAVERFORD
BYWATE R
PENROSE
NORTH LAKE
HANOVER
HARMONY
HAMPTON
TIMMER
ROCKFIELD
SCOTTSDALE
SPRINGBROOK
CORAL
WILLARD
VALLEY V ISTA
ASTER
BRISTOL
JAMES PLACE
BUTLER
HIDDENPINE
TIMBERCRES T
REVERE
AMBERLY
GATWICK
HURST
WILMET
KIRKTON
ANVIL
KRISTIN
ELEANOR
ROXBU RY
KIRTS
KIRTS
KIRTS
K IRTS
BRIDGE PARK
BROOKLA WN
HALLMARK
WHITFIELD
NIA GARA
HUNTSFORD
PINE HILL
TENNYSON
BRONSON
BELHAVEN
BOULDER
BARCLAY
FAIRCASTLE
DOVER
HAWTHORNE
FALMOUTH
KINGSWAY
WILSHIRE
BLOOMINGDALE
NORTHPOINT
HEMPSTEAD
BRAEMAR
ALFRED
EUCLID
BERWYCK
PEARL
QUARTZ
TALL OAKS
COLLINGTON
ANDOVER
WITHERB E E
WILLOW GROVE
FIELDSTONE
LOVELL
OTTAW A
ECKERMAN
EDITH
WILTON
RANIERI
OSPREY
CAMEO
AMBERWOOD
FOU NTAIN
ROSS
RANGEMORE
BRISTOL
MAYFLO WER
IVANHOE
COLLING
CLEARVIEW
ARLUND WAY
R ANDALL
ABINGTON
SM ALLBROOK
CHATHAM
HUBBARD
CRESTMONT
RAINTREE
DREXEL
WINCHESTER
VALLEYVIEW
HUNTERS GATE
SQUIRREL HILL
WESTMORELAND
STONEYCOVE
THRE E LAKES
HILMORE
REDWOOD
REILLY
TIM BERVIEW
DAKOTA
LEAFGREEN
STREA MVIEW
MESA
DUNCA N
DENISE
BUCKTHORN
HERTFORD
HOME STEAD
VASSAR
CHERRYWOOD
MAYFAIR
WOODINGHAM
RUTHLAND
BRIDGE PARK
LE XINGTON
LITTLE CREEK
S AXONY
BLUE SP RUCE
HAMPSHIRE
DOWNEY
C HESW ICK
FOX CHASE
PARTRIDGE
DURAND
LILA
MILVERTON
ESTATES
FOREST PARK
PALMETTO
SAFFRON
FAIR FIELD
MELANIE
TYLER
DINA
DREW
PARK VIEW
KINGS POINT
HEIDE
CRESTVIEW
CALVERT
BROOKLAWN
TOPAZ
EAGLE
OAKRIVER
WACON
BANMOOR
WYNGATE
MARBLE
MUERKNOLL
SERENITY
OAK RIVER
BASSWOOD
TOWER
BRADLEY
ROSEGLEN
RIDGE
ALEXANDER
CARR
WAVERLY
PROSPER
COLONIAL
PROVINCIAL
ORCHARDCREST
PIER
TREVINO
FALLING BROOK
REDM APLE
HALE
WHITE OAKS
CASTLETON
CAMELOT
MIRA CLE
HEATHERBROOK
BEACH
SHADY CREEK
MC IN TOSH
SEASONS
AM BERWOOD
HIGHOAKS
FADI
WITHERBEE
KENYON
WE SLEY
JOSHUA
BUTTERNUT HILL
GREENSBORO
GA BRIEL
CLAYTON
DUCHESS
VICTORIA
NOTTINGHAM
HEARTHSIDE
KILMER
PASADENA
DANBURY
FENW ICKE
MILLAY
OA K HILL
WHISPER W AY
WELLING
FIRWOOD
MOUNTAIN
CONGRESS
ALLE GHENY
BELLINGHAM
HARTSHORN
ELM
ARDMORE
MANDALE
ORCHARD RIDGE
LYDIA
WARDLOW
RENSHAW
KENWYCK
HARTLAND
HILL TOP
CO UNTRY
NASH
ESSEX
SHALLOW DALE
MC KINLEY
CASPER
WINDMILL
MARK
LUDSTONE
GL ENWOOD
CHELTENHAM
CRIMSON
THAMES
BLA NC HE
COLUMBIA
FOREST TRAIL
BENJAMIN
ENGLISH
EMERALD LAKE
CLIFFSIDE
TUSCANY
MARYW OOD
ROLLING WOODS
SH ADOW
COTSW OLD
HOLLY
HYCLIFFE
ROSEBROOK
AVERY
THALES
HYDE PARK
VERNMOOR
JAMAICA
CAROL
GATESFORD CIR
ARROWHEAD
ACORN
TRUFFLE
DEMARET
BURNS
HIDDEN FOREST
RAINTREE
CHIPPEWA
OAKCREST
HIGHBURY
SARATOGA
SPARTA
BINBROOKE
ACACIA
CHAPEL
GAR RY
UPTON
WHITESELL
S TONETREE
YANICH
SUTTON PLACE
TELFORD
FORGE
ADRIE NNE
GLENSHIRE
ATLAS
HAROLD
WOODCREST
NEW GATE
ALTON
TIPTON
PADDINGTON
GOLFVIEW
GATE
WOLVERINE
PATTERSON
RAVENNA
EDGEMONT
OTTER
ORC HARD TR AIL
DARTMOOR
ARGYLE
CARPENTER
CARDINAL
COUNTRY RIDGE
STODDARD
BOULAN
BARTON
CARLSON PARK
MA RCUS
KNIGHT
QUAIL RUN
SHADROCK
LAW SON
BELDALE
LARKINS
GLASGOW
CHARRINGTON
FOLKSTONE
MEDFORD
TRAVERSE
DUKE
BRADBURY
ASHWOOD
OAK RIDGE
SHEPHERDS
WINTER
DENTON
LAKE CHARNWOOD
BENTLEY
SCONE
CLEVELAND
ROTHWELL
GLENDALE
NILES
TEROVA
S TRAWBERRY
KIMBERLY
RENEE
DAYTON
STANDISH
CLARKE
SEMINOLE
ESTATES
DELTA
VERNIER
SHAKESPEARE
PLAYER
RIVERCHASE
RAMBLING
LEDGESTONE
CEDAR RIDGE
HILL
STONEYRID GE
BRAMFORD
BONNIEBROOK
ARTHUR
PORTS MOUTH
BRACKEN
ASPINWAL L
RIVER VALLEY
INGRAM
WHITING
MARTINIQUE
O GD EN
FABI US
ROBINW OOD
LIMERICK
ATKINS
SERENA
JEFFREY
JOHNATHON
STALWARTCLOISTER
SUSS EX
LAKESIDE
ROCKINGHAM
HIDDE NRIDGE
SHAKER
PELICAN
ELMOOR
ANDREW
WRENWOOD
RAIN BO W
JACK
BABBIT
ASHBURY
BELLE MEADE
TAYLOR
BROOKINGS
LEDWIN
HEIDE
WAYFARER
STONE HAVEN
MADIS ON
DIAMOND
HOUNDSCHASE
FALCON
DORSHIRE
RHODES
LEHIGH
LYSTER
WEXFORD
CRABAPP LE
JULIAN
BRENTWOOD
DELAWARE
ABBOTSFORD
EDENDERRY
CALIPER
THORNCROFT
BURKOFF
WESTPOINTE
VINEYARDS
MICHELE
CONNOLLY
VIRGILIA
SHEFFIELD
DARLENE
CHEROKEE
WOODMAN
TAMARACK
SILVERSTONE
EDGEWATER
CUSTER
GLENCASTLE
SPARR OW
OLIVER
CHOICE
GRANGER
CATALPA
BELLOWS
DONEGAL
LEDGE
CYPRESS
BUTTERFIELD
GARW OOD
CARNABY
TEASD ALE
CHESTNUTHILL
CAMERON
WOO DSLEE
BEACHVIEW
WALKER
O AKLEAF
BA RNES
TOTHILL
COBBLESTONE
W ASHINGTON CRESCENT
ROUGE CIR
CHESAPEAKE
RAMB LING
ASPEN
ENTERPRISE
RAMBLEWOOD
TROYVALLY
GLYNDEBOURNE
DRAKE
CREEK BEND
MIRAGE
TECHNOLO GY
KETTLE
COLEBROOK
NEWBUR GH
ELM PARK
WAGONWHEEL
ECKFORD
NAPIER
VIRGILIA
TROMBLEY
HARTLAND
MUER
DENTON
C HELSEA
RED FOX TRL
CRICKETCOVE
CARMEL
BRANDYWYNE
RIVERTON
RHODE ISLAND
DEVONSHIRE
BLANEY
FAWN
ROW LAND
BEECH LANE
CAITLIN
PIPPIN
AURORA
SIENA
MAYA
MINNESOTA
LENOX
KEATS
DORAL
BRIARGROVE
STARR
BRIARWOOD
CANARY
HISTORIC
MORNINGDALE
SPRING MEADOWS
AUBURN
KIPLING
TWAIN
BONITO
TROY
WORTHINGTON
QUILL CREEK
FARMBROOK
BELZAIR
HEATHE RW OOD
BADDER
OXLEY
DALEY
PINECREEK
OAK RIVE R
DE WULF
COFFEY
SONGBIRD
HICKORY
CACTUS
WHISPER WAY
ATHE NA
LAUREL
JORDAN
HUBBARD
HAZEL NUT
BROOK E VIEW
VIRGILIA
MARINA
LYNWOOD
THURBER
REDBUD
WESSELS
PINEVIEW
CHARNW OOD
KNOLL
MALVERN
FRENCHCREEK
TIMB ERWYCK TRAIL
PIERCE
WA LDEN
PINOAK
NEW CASTLE
SENORA
RAMSBURY
NORWAY
SALEM
JOANNE
MONTCLAIR
CHOPIN
BE RKSHIRE
NORW ICH
SPRINGTIME
SOMERTON
HENHAW K
DEACON
DOMINIQUE
FLOWERHILL
FROSTWOOD
ALPINE
LYONS
ODETTE
BRUNSWICK
ASHLEY
SHIRLEY
BRIGGS
RUTGERS
SUGARGROVE
DURHAM
DONALDSON
BISHOP
S ELBY
GREENDALE
CROWFOOT
APPLE
MCCLURE
STONEHENGE
WEMBLEY
CRESTLINE
CAMBRIDGE CRESCENT
ABB EY
HENRIETTA
MEADOW
WOODFIELD
PHILATHA
URBANCREST
THISTLE
HINGE
TROY
BRE EZEHILL
SALMA
ROCKDALE
ALLISON
CASWELL
CHOPIN
FLEETWOO D
CURRAN
DICKENS
BIRC HWOOD
CEDAR CREST
VERMONT
FULTON
BYRON
SUNBURST
GORDON
RUS HMORE
JARMAN
LONGFELLOW
GULLIVER
OAKWOOD
RAVEN WOOD
STIRLING
BURD IC
BRENTWOOD
W ILSHIRE
TAMARACK
WOODS LEE
TALBOT
MA CLYNN
WALTHAM
CLUB
WARBLER
ANSLOW
SA NDALWOOD
BABCOCK
BIRCHWOOD
MALVERN
CARSON
MINNESOTA
LOUIS
WILDWOOD LANE
MAYBE RRY
COLWELL
MANCHESTER
HARNED
PRESCO TT
CHOPIN
BRINSTON
KENT
WILLOW CREEK
PREMIE R
CARRIAGE
HELENA
KEATON
RONALD
STONINGTON
PEBBLE POINT
SUNRIDGE
FRANKTON
BENDER
LARCH WOOD
CHANCERY
HABRAND
DELOY
LOVELL
HOUGHTEN
MIDDLEBURY
PARASOL
WRIGHT
PORTO BELLO
SACHIN
NEW K IN G
MUER
CALVERT
ROBART
BRAHMS
BOOTH
DEEPWOOD
FUR OAK
REDFORD CIR
BAKER
EASTBOURNE
MA JESTIC
MOHICAN
BORDEN
CHAUCER
KERRY
FREDMOOR
ALGER
KELLEY
OWENDALE
TOTHILL
ELIZABETH
RADCLIFFE
ALBANY
BIRCHDALE
SHERWOOD
LARAYNE
ELLIOTT
WINDSOR
GRENADIER
HORSESHOE
BIG OAK
TOWNHILL
TANNER
CHE STNUT HILL
CUTTING
DALEY
BAYSIDE
FORDHAM
S YLVANWOO D
CONDOR
FERNLEIGH
HEDGEWOOD
WILS HIRE
ROBBINS
IVY
SHADYWOOD
LOCUST
FEDORA
BOLINGBROKE
WARWICK
FINCH
CHARRINGTON
WINDRUSH
EXECUTIVE
TUTBURY
BLACK P INE
MILLPOND
TRINWAY
WATERLOO
SANDBURG
TEMP LE CITY
BINGH AM
DORCHESTER NORTH
MAPLELAWN
DANIELS
SMITHFIELD
REDDING
AUGUSTA
LARCHWOOD
TODD
WINTERGREEN
MOREHEAD
SPICEWAY
PEACOCK
TRAILWOOD
DERBY
THREE OAKS
VAN COURTLAND
DAVIS
CLIFFSIDE
CRESCENT WAY
LAK EW OOD
BALDWIN
HARTWIG
CAMBR IA
KINGSBURY
RED OAK
GAMBER
AB E RDEEN
INDUSTRIAL ROW
ACADEMY
RING
VALLEYVISTACIR
HAVERFORD
SCOTT
ADAMSPOINTE
HOMEWOOD
PARK
LIMESTONE
SHORELINE
BURTMAN
DALESFORD
LAKEVIEW
FREEMONT
PRESTWICK
ZENIA
ORIOLE
GREEN HILL
W HITEHAVEN
PICKFORD
COVENTRY
CHICAGO
SLATE
CRESTFIELD
CEDAR KN OLL
AXTELL
SHERBOURNE
HIGHLAND
NEWPORT
OAK FOREST
VINEYARDS
HAMLET
KINLOCK
SPENCER
MOONGLOW
FAIRFAX
GLOUCHESTER
BRA NDYWYNE
CHURCH HILL
BRIDLE PAT H
BEATTIE
RUSSET
CLAYMONT
CHAPS
MAYAPPLE
LOCKSLEY
ISABELL
COLLEEN
STRATFORD
WINTHROP
PEACHTREE
PHEAS A NT RUN
SHALE
JASMINE
TARRAGONA W AY
WENDE LTON
MIC HAEL
KIRK
BOYD
BRIGHTWOOD
BALFOUR
CHARLEVOIS
EMERALD SHORES
MILLSTONE
KIRKTON
NILES
BLACKWALL
PRENTIS
ME RRIWEATHER
RANKIN
NICKLAUS
BARTONWAY
SNEAD
WESTWOOD
TAR A
EMERSON
HILLMAN
EVA LINE
MARTELL
INDUSCO
CAMILLA
FORTHTON
CLOVERIDGE
BILTMORE
REGENT S
MAXWELL
BELMONT
SHAGBARK
TU CKER
TANGLEWOOD
WOODS LE E
LARCHWOOD
ARTHUR
ALGAN SEE
FAIRMONT
SUNDEW
DEVONSHIRE
SEYMOUR
HART
CAPRI
CORBIN
ORP INGTON
GAYLORD
TORPEY
LENOX
FLORENCE
TACO MA
CARTER
WEBB
LONGVIEW
EASTPORT
TECHNOLOGY
ROOT
HURST
LANGE
OLY MPIA
DEETTA
CANMOOR
EASTBOURNE
PARA GON
HANNAH
OXFORD
HARRIS
TEWKSBURY
LAKEVIEW
FLEMINGTON
LOVELL
TREE KNOLL
PICADILLY
WALNUT HILL
CONTINENTAL
ELMWOOD
EVAL INE
DUBLIN FAIR
PINEWAY
CAHILL
GARRETT
HYLANE
MEADOWBROOK
JENNINGS
KILLARNEY
BANMOOR
LOWRY
CHALGROVE
STUTZ
AUSTIN
E LSEY
WESTAWAY
PIEDMONT
SANDSHORES
MARENGO
COMBERMERE
GLASE R
MCMANUS
AVONHURST
VANDERPOOL
BARRETT
NORTHWOOD
CRESTON
ALLEN
SOUTER
THUNDERBIRD
HARTLAND
INVESTM ENT
VIRGINIA
IOWA
WISCONSIN
VERMONT
DASHWOOD
LO VINGTON
MEIJER
FORSYTH
LEETONIA
R ANDALL
S OMERSE T
TOWER
SCOTTSDALE
LEELAND
RIDGEDALE
JUSTINE
ESTATES
FIRESIDE
TOWER
ADAMS
JOHN R JOHN R
MAPLE
FOURTEEN MILE
DEQUINDRE DEQUINDRE
ROCHESTER
MAIN
CROOKS
COOLIDGE
STEPHENSON
BIG BEAVER
LIVERNOIS
SQUARE LAKE
WAT TLES
WATTLES
SOUTH BLVD
LONG LA KE
R-1D R-1D
R-1B
R-1B R-1B
R-1A
R-1C
R-1C
R-1C R-1C
R-1C
R-1B
R-1B
R-1C
R-1B
R-1C R-1C
R-1B
R-1C
R-1B
R-1B
R-1B
R-1B
R-1B
R-1A
R-1A
R-1B
R-1B
R-1B
R-1C
R-1E R-1C
R-1C
R-1E
R-1E
R-1E
R-1C
R-1B
R-1E
R-1C
R-1D
R-1D
R-1C
R-1E
R-1E
R-1E
R-1E
R-1B
6
7
5
8
4 3
9 10 11 12
2 1
14 13
23 24
17 16 15
20 21 22
18
19
30
31 32
29 28 27
34
35 36
26 25
ZONING OVERVIEW MAP
ADOPTED: April 18, 2011
PREPARED BY THE CITY OF TROY PLANNING DEPARTMENT
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! !
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
R-1A ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
R-1B ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
R-1C ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
R-1D ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
R-1E ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
R-1B
R-1C
R-1D
R-1E
R-1A
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
RT ONE FAMILY ATTACHED
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
!
!
MF MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
UR URBAN RESIDENTIAL
R-1C
R-1C
R-1C
MHP MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
COMMERCIAL
 
OFFICE
O OFFICE
IB INTEGRATED INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
iiiiii
iiiiii
iiiiii
iiiiii
OM OFFICE MIXED USE
KKKKKKKK KKKKKK KKKKKKK KKK
CB COMMUNITY BUSINESS
GB GENERAL BUSINESS
RESEARCH
RC RESEARCH CENTER
SPECIAL
PV PLANNED VEHICLE SALES
" " " "
" " " "
" " " "
" " " "
" " " " P VEHICULAR PARKING
   
   
   
    
    
H H H H
H H H H
H H H H H
H H H H H
H H H H H
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
CF COMMUNITY FACILITIES
EP ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
CONTROLLED BY CONSENT JUDGMENT
PUD#
CONDITIONAL REZONING
FORM BASED ZONES
BB BIG BEAVER ROAD
MR MAPLE ROAD
A NN NEIGHBORHOOD NODES (A - U)
0 500 1000 2000 3000 4000
Feet
I
REVISED: February 25, 2019
Chapter 40 - City Planning Commission
40-1
Chapter 40-City Planning Commission of the Code of the City of Troy is repealed by the
Council of the City of Troy, Oakland County Michigan, at a Regular Meeting of the City Council
held at City Hall, 500 W. Big Beaver, Troy, MI on the 27th day of September 2004 and is
effective ten (10) days from the date hereof or upon publication, whichever shall occur later.
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-1
ARTICLE I - SHORT TITLE
1.00 Short Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Troy
Subdivision regulation.
(Rev. 04-29-1969)
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS
2.00 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, words and phrases shall,
wherever used in this chapter, have the meaning herewith defined as follows:
Block. Subdivided property surrounded by, but not separated by, one or more of
the following barriers: streets, un-subdivided acreage, rivers or live streams, or
by any of the foregoing and any other barriers to the continuity of development.
Cul-De-Sac. A minor street of short length, having one end open to traffic and
being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn-around.
Easement. A quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege or
advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation, or some
particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes, and shall
be designated a "public" or "private" easement depending on the nature of the
user.
Block. Subdivided property surrounded by, but not separated by, one or more of
the following barriers: streets, un-subdivided acreage, rivers or live streams, or
by any of the foregoing and any other barriers to the continuity of development.
Cul-De-Sac. A minor street of short length, having one end open to traffic and
being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn-around.
Easement. A quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege or
advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation, or some
particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes, and shall
be designated a "public" or "private" easement depending on the nature of the
user.
Final Plat. A map on approved material of all or part of a subdivision prepared
and certified as to its accuracy by a registered Professional Engineer or a
registered Professional Surveyor. Such maps must meet the requirements of this
chapter and Act 288, Public Acts, 1967, as amended. The final plat shall
conform to the approved preliminary plat.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Governing Body. The City Council of the City of Troy.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-2
Improvements. Grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks, crosswalks,
water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities,
landscaping, streams, lakes, improvements, and other additions to the natural
state of land which increase its value, utility, or habitability.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
Industrial Street. A street intended to serve primarily as a means of access from
within industrial subdivisions or industrial districts to major thoroughfares and not
intended to serve residential properties or carry residential traffic.
(Rev. 04-29-1968)
H. Major Thoroughfare. An arterial street of great continuity which is intended to
serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate area and region
beyond, any may be designated in the major thoroughfare plan as a major
thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term to identify those
streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Marginal Access Street. A minor street parallel and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
Master Plan. A Master Plan as defined in the Municipal Planning Act No. 285 of
1931, as amended, being Section 125.31 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled
Laws.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Minor Street. A street supplementary to a major or secondary thoroughfare
intended to serve the local needs of the neighborhood, of limited continuity, low
pedestrian and vehicular volumes, and used primarily as access to abutting
residential properties.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Multiple-Family Residential Streets. A street intended to serve primarily the
greater traffic demands of multiple family residential developments. Such streets
may or may not have continuity within the over-all thoroughfare system.
(Rev. 04-29-1968)
Municipality. The City of Troy.
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Troy.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-3
Preliminary Plat. A map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision in
sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review and to meet the
requirements and procedures set forth in this ordinance.
Public Reservation. A portion of a subdivision which is set aside for public use
and made available for public use and acquisition.
Registered Professional Engineer. A Civil Engineer who is a Professional
Engineer licensed under Article 20 of the Occupational Code, Act No. 299 of the
Public Acts of 1980, being sections 339.2001 to 339.2014 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Registered Professional Surveyor. A Professional Surveyor licensed under
Article 20 of the Occupational Code, Act No. 299 of the Public Acts of 1980,
being sections 339.2001 to 339.2014 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
(09-11-2006)
Survey. A survey map and/or report prepared by a Registered Professional
Surveyor.
(09-11-2006)
Secondary Thoroughfare or Collector Street. A street intended to serve as a
major means of access from minor streets to major thoroughfares which have
considerable continuity within the framework of the Master Thoroughfare Plan.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
Street. A right-of-way dedicated to public use, which provides vehicular and
pedestrian access to adjacent properties whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, lane, or however otherwise
designated, and includes the land between the right-of-way lines whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, curbs and gutters,
shoulders, sidewalks, parking areas, lawn areas, and other areas within the rightof-
way lines.
(Rev. 04-29-1968)
Subdivider. Shall be deemed to include the plural as well as the singular and
may mean a person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or any legal
combination of them or any other legal entity proceeding under these regulations
to effect a subdivision of land for himself/herself or for another. The word
subdivider shall include the word proprietor as used in Act 288, Public Acts of
Michigan, 1967, MCL 560.101 et seq., as amended.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-4
Turn-Around. A minor street or short length with two openings to traffic with a
median strip in the center, beginning from the same street, and projecting
parallel to each other and connecting at their termination by a loop.
Walkway. An area and improvement, either dedicated to the public or on private
property, which is intended to provide for pedestrian access and movement.
(Rev. 08-01-1977)
(Renumbered: 09-11-2006)
ARTICLE III - SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL
2.99. The review and approval of subdivision development plats shall be in accordance with
this chapter and the Michigan Subdivision Control Act, Act 288, Public Acts of 1967, as
amended, (M.S.A. 26.430) and shall follow the steps as listed below:
Section 3.00.Preliminary Investigation
Section 3.01.Preliminary Plat - Tentative Approval
Section 3.02. Improvement Design - Review and Approval
Section 3.03.Preliminary Plat - Final Approval
Section 3.04.Final Plat Approval
Section 3.05.Fees
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
3.00. Preliminary Investigation.
A. Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the subdivider should meet
informally with the Planning and Engineering Departments to investigate the
procedures and standards of the City of Troy, and the ecological impact of the
proposed development.
(Rev. 06-18-1990)
B. It is the responsibility of the subdivider to:
1. Familiarize himself/herself with the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
Regulations, Tree Regulations, Master Land Use Plan, Master
Thoroughfare Plan, Engineering Design Standards, Landscape Design
and Tree Preservation Standards, Soil Removal and Filling Regulations,
and Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Regulations relative to the
subdivision and improvement of land, so as to make himself/herself aware
of the requirements of the City of Troy.
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-5
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. Review the existing zoning of the proposed subdivision to determine if it is
zoned for the intended use.
3. Review the development options of the Zoning Ordinance to determine
the feasibility of utilizing one of these approaches.
4. Investigate the standards of sewage disposal, water supply and drainage
of the City of Troy and other reviewing agencies, which may include the
State of Michigan, Oakland County and the Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
5. Investigate the adequacy of existing schools and public open spaces
including parks and playgrounds to serve the proposed subdivision.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
6. Review Act 288, Public Acts, 1967, as amended, and the requirements of
those State and County Agencies which are required by said Public Act to
review and approve the plat.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
C. In addition to meeting informally with the Planning and Engineering Departments
as suggested in subsection A, the subdivider may request a pre-application
review meeting by submitting a written request to the chairperson of the County
Plat Board and submitting copies of a concept plan for the Preliminary Plat to the
City of Troy and to each officer or agency entitled to review the Preliminary Plat
under Sections 113 to 118 of Michigans Land Division Act, MCL 560.113 to MCL
560.118. If this process is followed, then a pre-application review meeting shall
take place not later than 30 days after the written request and concept plan are
received. The meeting shall be attended by the subdivider, representatives of
each officer or agency entitled to review the Preliminary Plat under Sections 113,
114, and 118 of Michigans Land Division Act, and a representative of the
municipality. Representatives of each agency entitled to review the Preliminary
Plat under Sections 115 to 117 of Michigans Land Division Act, MCL 560.115 to
MCL 560.117, shall be informed of the meeting and may attend. The purpose of
the meeting is to conduct an informal review of the subdividers concept plan for
the Preliminary Plat.
(09-11-2006)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-6
3.01. Preliminary Plat - Tentative Approval.
A. Plat Preparation and Contents:
1. The Preliminary Plat shall be designed and drawn by a Registered
Professional Engineer or a Registered Professional Surveyor to a scale of
no smaller than 100 feet to an inch.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. Identification and Description - The Preliminary Plat shall include:
(A) All items as required by Act 288, Public Acts, 1967, MCL 560.101
et seq., and by the administrative rules of all State of Michigan
Departments and Agencies that are required to review the plat
under said Act.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
(B) Location by section, town and range, including legal description.
(C) Date of preparation.
(D) North arrow.
(E) Scale of Plat.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
3. Existing Conditions - The Preliminary Plat shall include:
A) A location map showing the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to the surrounding area, including schools, shopping
areas, parks and other community facilities. The location map shall
be drawn to a minimum scale of 800 feet to an inch, and shall
include all areas which lie within one-half of the subdivision
boundaries in all directions.
B) The location of significant natural features such as natural water
courses, bodies of water, flood plain areas, wetland areas, and tree
information for determination of buildable land area, water resource
management and as required for the preparation of a Tree
Preservation Plan in accordance with the provisions of the
Landscape Design and Tree Preservation Standards. This
information shall be confirmed by a report from the Citys
environmental staff prior to submittal of the Preliminary Plat to the
Planning Commission.
(Rev. 01-10-2000)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-7
C) Boundary line of proposed subdivision and Section or corporation
lines within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
D) Adjacent tracts of subdivided and un-subdivided land shown in
relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision.
E) Location, width, and names of existing or prior platted public and
private streets, and public easements within or adjacent to the tract
being proposed for subdivision.
F) Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other
underground facilities within and, if necessary, adjacent to the tract
being proposed for subdivision.
G) Location of all easements within and if necessary, adjacent to the
tract being proposed for subdivision.
H) Topography drawn at two (2) foot contour intervals, except where
the average grade exceeds 5%, the contour interval shall be 5'.
Topography to be based on U.S.G.S. Datum.
I) Location of severe variations in topography, and other areas having
difficult or potentially unbuildable physical conditions.
(Rev. 06-18-1990)
4. Proposed Conditions - The Preliminary Plat shall include:
A) Layout of streets, right-of-way widths, connections with adjoining
platted streets and also the widths and locations of alleys,
easements and public walkways.
B) Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots, including building setback
lines showing dimensions.
C) Identification of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set
aside for public use or for the use of property owners within the
subdivision, or land set aside for future street connections to
adjacent tracts.
(D) Identification of all major easements, as determined to be
necessary by the City Engineer. Minimum lots areas and
dimensions shall be computed excluding such easements.
(Rev. 09-26-1976)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-8
E) Indication of how all parcels either identified on the plat or by the
Planning Department as "outlots", "excepted", or unplatted, and
as determined by the Planning Director, could be developed in
accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district
while maintaining an acceptable relationship to the layout of the
proposed Preliminary Plat.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
F) A Tree Preservation Plan developed in accordance with the City of
Troy Landscape Design and Tree Preservation Standards.
(Rev. 05-21-1990)
G) An indication of the means by which significant natural features
such as water course, bodies of water, flood plain areas and
wetland areas are to be preserved or treated in conjunction with the
development of the proposed subdivision.
(Rev. 05-21-1990)
B. Submission
1. At least twenty (20) days prior to a regular meeting of the Planning
Commission, the subdivider shall submit to the City Clerk 16 copies of the
Preliminary plat and other data as requested by the Planning Department.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. In addition, the subdivider shall file an application in duplicate, and two
copies of the receipt acknowledging the applicable school district has
received a copy of the preliminary plat, and pay all plat review fees as
specified in Article III, Section 3.05 of this ordinance.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
C. Department Review
1. The City Clerk shall retain one copy of the plat for his or her records and
forward the balance of the plats to the Planning Director.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. The Planning Director shall check for completeness of the preliminary
plat. Should any of the data required in this section of this chapter be
omitted, the Planning Director shall notify the subdivider of the additional
data required and further action shall be delayed until the required data is
received.
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-9
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
3. The Planning Director shall forward copies of the preliminary plat to all
affected City departments for their review and recommendation. The
Planning Director shall contact the subdivider to explain any
recommendations of the City departments and seek his or her
cooperation in amending the plat, if necessary.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
4. When the plat has been revised based on the review and
recommendation of the affected City departments, the Planning Director
shall place the plat on the agenda of the next regular Planning
Commission meeting.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
5. The Planning Department shall notify the subdivider and the owners of
land immediately abutting the property to be platted of the submission of
the preliminary plat and the time, place and date of the meeting of the
Planning Commission to consider said preliminary plat.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
D. Planning Commission Review
1. The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plat and determine if it
complies with the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision regulations, Master Land
Use Plan and Master Thoroughfare Plan.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. The Planning Commission, upon completion of this review, and within 45
days of the date of submission by the subdivider, shall make one of the
following recommendations:
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
A) Tentative approval of the preliminary plat.
B) Disapproval of the preliminary plat, with the reasons for the
disapproval to be recorded in the minutes of the meeting, and a
copy of the minutes will be sent to the subdivider by the Planning
Department.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-10
C) Provisional approval conditioned upon specified conditions which
shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. If provisional
approval is given to a subdivision plat, the subdivider shall submit
amended plans containing the specified revisions within ten (10)
days of the date of this approval. If revised plans are timely
submitted and the revisions meet the approval of the Planning
Director as conforming to the conditions imposed by the Planning
Commission, the plat shall be submitted to the City Manager for
presentation to the City Council with the recommendation for
tentative approval. If revised plans are not received within ten (10)
days, the plat shall be submitted to the City Council with the
recommendation for disapproval.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
E. City Council Review
1. After the receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Commission
from the Planning Director, and receipt of the recommendation of the City
Engineer and such other officials deemed necessary by the City Manager,
the City Manager shall place the preliminary plat on the City Council
agenda.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. The City Council shall take one of the following actions with respect to the
preliminary plat:
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
A) Tentatively approve the preliminary plat and make a note of its
approval on the copy of the preliminary plat;
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
B) Tentatively approve it subject to conditions and make a note of its
approval and conditions on the copy of the preliminary plat, which
shall be returned to the subdivider.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
C) Set forth in writing its reasons for rejection and requirements for
tentative approval.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
3. Action on the plat shall be taken within 60 days after it was submitted to
the clerk, if a pre-application review meeting was conducted under section
3.0.4.
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-11
Action on the plat shall be taken within 90 days after it was submitted to
the City Clerk, if a pre-application review meeting was not conducted
under section 3.00C.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
4. Tentative approval shall confer on the subdivider for a period of one year
from the date of approval, approval of lot sizes, lot orientation and street
layout, and permission to submit improvement plans for Engineering
Division Design Review. Such approval may be extended if applied for, in
writing, by the subdivider and granted by the City Council.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
F. Proposed Names of New Streets
After tentative approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit
proposed names for all streets within the subdivision. All names shall comply
with the Troy Street Naming Ordinance, Chapter Two of the Troy City Code, and
shall be reviewed by the appropriate City departments in a manner prescribed by
the City Manager.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
G. Traffic Control Orders
After tentative approval of the Preliminary Plat, the City Engineer and the Traffic
Committee shall review the tentatively approved preliminary plat and send copies
of their recommendations for signing and traffic regulations to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall place the Traffic Control Orders on the City Council
agenda for approval after the Preliminary Plat has received recommended final
approval.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
3.02. Improvement Design - Review and Approval
A. Submission
1. After tentative approval, but before submission of the Preliminary Plat for
final approval, the subdivider shall submit his or her improvement plans
for review and approval. The subdivider shall file the following with the
City Clerk: an application for design review plans for all improvements to
be installed within the proposed subdivision, and all plan review fees, as
specified in Section 3.05 of this chapter.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-12
2. The City Clerk shall forward all plans received to the Engineering Division.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
3. Said improvement plans shall be held for review by the City for a period
not to exceed a total of sixty (60) days.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
B. Plan Contents
1. All improvement plans shall be prepared by a Registered Professional
Engineer.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. Design standards for all improvements shall be as established in Article IV
of this ordinance and as established by the Engineering Division and all
other public agencies having jurisdiction:
A) The water supply system must be acceptable to the Michigan
Department of Community Health, the Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department and Oakland County Health Department.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
B) The storm drainage system, if involving County drains, must be
acceptable to the County Drain Commissioner.
C) The sanitary sewer system must be acceptable to the Oakland
County Health Department, Oakland County Department of Public
Works, Oakland County Drain Commissioner and the Michigan
Department of Community Health.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
C. Plan Review
1. The Engineering Division shall initially review all plans submitted to
determine their conformance to the City's Development Standards and
Article IV of this chapter.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. The improvement plans shall then be reviewed by the other appropriate
City departments in a manner prescribed by the City Manager.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-13
3. After the improvement plans have received final approval, the City
Engineer shall issue a Certificate of Improvement Design Approval to the
subdivider's engineer, with copies to the subdivider and the City Clerk.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
4. The subdivider's engineer shall submit to the Engineering Division cost
estimates for all approved improvements.
5. The City Engineer shall then prepare and submit a detailed summary of
required deposits of cash and bonds or escrow deposits in an amount
sufficient to insure construction of the required subdivision and public
improvements that shall be set forth in an agreement. Copies of the
detailed summary and agreement shall be sent to the City Manager, the
subdivider, and the City Clerk, for approval by City Council of the
agreement.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
3.03. Preliminary Plat - Final Approval
A. Submission
1. A subdivider desiring final approval of a preliminary plat shall file 2 copies
of an application for final approval with the City Clerk.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. With the application, the subdivider shall submit the following items:
A) Fourteen copies of the preliminary plat as approved by all
authorities required by Section 113 through 119 inclusive of Act
288, Public Acts of 1967, as amended.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
B) A certification identifying all authorities required to review the
preliminary plat, as set forth in Sections 113 to 119 of the Land
Division Act, MCL 560.113 to MCL 560.119.
(09-11-2006)
C) Copies of all resolutions and writings granting approval
(09-11-2006)
D) Copies of agreements, covenants or other documents showing the
manner in which areas or facilities intended to be dedicated or set
aside for the public use or for the use of the property owners within
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-14
the subdivision are to be maintained. Such areas or facilities
include, but are not limited to, park or open space areas, and storm
water retention areas. Said documents shall include Articles of
Incorporation and By-Laws of the subdivision association or
organization which is to be responsible for the maintenance of such
public us areas or facilities for the use of property owners within the
subdivision, where applicable. Such documents shall be recorded
simultaneously with the recording of the subject subdivision plat.
(Renumbered 09-11-2006)
E) Cash, escrow deposits, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of
credit; all review and inspection fees and other fees outlined in the
detailed summary as required by the agreement approved by City
Council.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
B. Department Review
1. The City Clerk shall forward copies of the plat to the City Engineer, the
Planning Director, and the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(Rev. 01-13-1992)
2. The City Engineer, the Planning Director, and the Director of Parks and
Recreation and/or their designees shall review the plat as submitted, to
determine compliance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat. If, in
their opinion, the submitted plat conforms to the tentatively approved
preliminary plat, they shall so indicate and forward the plat to the City
Manager. If the plat does not conform to the tentatively approved
preliminary plat, the Planning Director shall reject the plat and return it to
the subdivider, with a statement of the reasons for the rejection.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
3. When the preliminary plat has been approved by the Planning Director,
the City Engineer, and the Director of Parks and Recreation, the City
Manager shall place it on the agenda of the next City Council meeting.
(Rev. 01-13-1992)
C. City Council Review
1. At its next meeting or within twenty (20) days from the date of submission
of the preliminary plat for final approval, the City Council shall:
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-15
A) Grant final approval of the preliminary plat and note its approval on
a copy of the preliminary plat to be returned to the subdivider; or
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
B) Reject the plat and instruct the City Clerk to so advise the
subdivider and explain the reasons for the rejection.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
2. Final approval of the preliminary plat shall confer upon the subdivider for a
period of two (2) years from the date of City Council approval, the
conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which this
final approval of the preliminary plat was granted will not be changed. The
two-year period may be extended by City Council if the subdivider files a
written request and after a review and report from City staff on any
conditions that may have changed.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
D. Construction of Improvements
No construction of improvements shall begin until the subdivider has:
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
1. Received notice from the City Clerk of the final approval of the preliminary
plat by the City Council.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
2. Entered into a subdivision agreement with the City for construction of all
required subdivision improvements.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
3.04. Final Plat Approval
A. Submission
1. The final plat shall conform to the approved final preliminary plat, shall
constitute only that portion of the approved final preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record and develop at that time, and shall conform
in all respects to the requirements of Act 288, Public Acts of 1967, MCL
560.101 et seq., as amended.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-16
2. The subdivider shall file 2 copies of an application for final approval with
the City Clerk, together with:
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
A) One (1) true copy of the plat together with an additional twelve (12)
paper prints of the final plat; and
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
B) The County Plat Board filing and recording fee required by Section
241 of Act 288, Public Acts of 1967, MCL 560.241, as amended.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
C) A current abstract of title that sets forth the recordable interests in
the property to allow for a determination that all proper parties have
signed the plat. In the alternative, a policy of title insurance
currently in force covering all the land included within the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision shall be provided. The City
Council, in lieu of an abstract of title, may accept on its own
responsibility, an attorney's opinion as to the ownership and
marketability of title to the land.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
D) A certification from the subdivider that the construction of
subdivision improvements has begun in the area covered by the
Final Plat.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
E) Documentation indicating that current property taxes on the
property that are part of the Final Plat are paid and that there are
no outstanding Special Assessments on the property.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
B. Department Review
1. The City Clerk shall forward copies of the final plat to the City Engineer
and the Planning Director.
(Rev. 01-13-1992)
2. The City Engineer and the Planning Director shall review the final plat to
determine its conformance with the approved preliminary plat. If the final
plat does conform, they shall so indicate and forward the approved plat to
the City Manager. If the plat does not conform, the Planning Director shall
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-17
return the plat to the subdivider together with reasons for its rejection.
(Rev. 01-13-1992)
3. If approved, the City Manager shall place the final plat on the agenda of
the next regular City Council meeting.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
C. City Council Review
1. At its next regular meeting or a meeting called within twenty (20) days of
the date of submission required under Section 3.04, the City Council shall:
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
A) Approve the plat if it conforms to all provisions of this chapter and
instruct the City Clerk to certify on the plat the City Council approval
and date thereof; the approval of the Oakland County Health
Department, when required, and the date thereof as shown on the
approved preliminary plat, or
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
B) Reject the plat and instruct the City Clerk to advise the subdivide of
the rejection and the reasons for the rejection, and return the plat
to the subdivider.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. The City Clerk shall send a copy of the minutes of the meeting(s) where
action is taken on a final plat to the County Plat Board.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
3. The City Clerk shall transcribe a certificate of approval of the City Council
on the Plat and deliver all copies to the clerk of the County Plat Board
together with the filing and recording fee required by the State Land
Division Act.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
3.05 Fees
The following schedule of fees is adopted as authorized by Sections 241, 246 and 188
of Act 288, Public Acts of 1967, MCL 560.241 and MCL 560.246, as amended.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-18
1. A plat review fee in accordance with Chapter 60, Fees and Bonds of the City of
Troy Code of Ordinances, to be paid at the time of application for tentative
approval of the preliminary plat.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
2. Plan Review and inspection fees, as established by the Planning and/or Building
Departments, to be paid with the application for improvement design review.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
3. All cash, escrow deposits, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit; all
review and inspection fees and other fees outlined in the "Detailed Summary of
Required Deposits" and/or the agreement approved by City Council, along with a
Plat Review Fee in accordance with Chapter 60, Fees and Bonds of the City of
Troy Code of Ordinances, to be paid at the time of submission of the preliminary
plat for Final Approval.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
4. A Plat Review Fee as set forth in Chapter 60, Fees and Bonds of the City of Troy
Code of Ordinances to be paid at the time of application for Final Approval.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
5. The County Plat Board filing and recording fee, in the amount established by
MCL 560.241 as amended. This fee shall be paid at the time of application for
Final Approval.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
6. The State Plat Review Fee, in the amount established by MCL 560.241 as
amended. This fee shall be paid at the time of application for Final Approval.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
ARTICLE IV - DESIGN STANDARDS
4.00. General Requirements
A. The subdivision design standards set forth under this section are conditions of
approval for plats. Complete plans for the construction of all streets, utilities,
drainage and grading, prepared by a registered professional engineer shall be
submitted in accordance with this chapter.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
B. The design and location of all blocks, lots, easements, topographic conditions,
streets, sidewalks, public walkways, and utilities shall conform to at least the
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-19
minimum requirements of the design standards as established by the City
Engineer.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
C. The subdivider shall be responsible for the construction or placement of all
improvements required by this chapter within a time period specified by the
governing body.
(Rev. 09-26-1983)
D. Financial Guarantees
1. Prior to the construction or placement of any improvements, the
subdivider shall deposit with the City Clerk, an escrow deposit of cash,
certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit, whichever the
subdivider selects, in an amount set by the governing body based on an
estimate by the City Engineer, sufficient to guarantee:
(Rev. 01-06-1975)
A) The construction or placement of all required improvements,
including improvements within park or open space areas, except
those items listed in Section 2 below, for which cash payment is
required.
(Rev. 08-01-1977)
B) The placement or replacement, after construction of improvements,
of all lot stakes and monuments.
(Rev. 01-06-1975)
2. The subdivider shall make cash payment for the following:
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
A) Sidewalk closures at intersections, and those sidewalks required in
Section 4.06 C.
B) Water Main testing and chlorination.
C) Street name and traffic signs.
D) Street island improvements.
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-20
E) Landscaping and screen planting of non-access greenbelt
easements and retention basins.
(Rev. 10-09-1972)
F) Maintenance of retention basins.
(Rev. 02-21-1977)
G) Engineering review and inspection fees.
(Rev. 10-9-1972)
H) Sodding or seeding, as approved by the director of Parks and
Recreation, of major and secondary road rights-of-way, and local
street rights-of-way within the subdivision that do not abut lots
within the subdivision, or that abut parcels which are not to be used
for building purposes (open space areas, retention basins, etc.).
(Rev. 02-21-1977)
3. As development progresses, the City may rebate to the subdivider
amounts of cash deposits equal to the ratio of work completed to the
entire project.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
4. Prior to the acceptance of any improvements by the City, the subdivider
shall cause to be deposited with the City a three year maintenance bond
in an amount equal to 35% of the total cost of said improvements.
5. A builder shall be required to deposit with the City Clerk, cash, or certified
check, whichever the builder elects, running to the City of Troy, to insure
construction of all sidewalks required under this chapter. The builder shall
also deposit with the City of Troy, a cash sum to be determined by the
governing body based on an estimate of the Director of Parks and
Recreation to cover the cost of purchasing and installing street trees. No
building permit shall be issued until said deposit for sidewalks and street
trees has been accepted by the City.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
4.01. Blocks
A. Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed 1,400 feet, except where, in the
opinion of the Plan Commission, conditions may justify a greater length.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-21
B. Widths of blocks shall be determined by the conditions of the layout and shall be
suited to the intended layout.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
4.02. Lots
A. Sizes and Shapes
1. The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision shall be
appropriate for the location and the type of development contemplated.
2. Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance for the District in which the subdivision is
proposed.
In areas where the street system of a proposed residential subdivision ties
into that of adjacent existing residential areas, the lot dimensions and
setbacks in the area immediately adjacent to the street connections shall
be adjusted so as to be compatible with those of abutting lots.
3. Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance.
4. Corner lots in a one-family residential subdivision shall be at least fifteen
(15) feet wider than the minimum width required by Article XXX, Section
30.10.00 of the Zoning Ordinance, and may not be modified by use of
Section 35.10.00 (Averaged Lot Sizes).
5. Residential lots having a reverse frontage or rear lot relationship to major
or secondary thoroughfares shall have a minimum depth of 150 feet.
6. Residential lots shall have minimum depths generally conforming to the
following guidelines (unless otherwise provided in the Zoning Ordinance),
except in those instances where the Plan Commission and the City
Council determine that conformance with same will result in a serious
development constraint, or preclude the implementation of a reasonable
and desirable residential subdivision configuration:
ZONING
DISTRICT
MINIMUM DEPTH
GUIDELINE
(In Feet)
R-1A 145
R-1B 135
R-1C 125
R-1D 120
R-1E 120
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-22
7. Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width
ratio of 3 to 1 shall normally be considered a maximum.
8. Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be specifically
designed for such purposes, and shall have adequate provision for offstreet
parking, off-street loading and other requirements in accordance
with the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Arrangement
1. Every lot shall front or abut on a street, except in those instances where
lots are not intended for building purposes.
2. Side lot lines shall generally be at right angles or radial to the street lines,
except in those instances where, in the opinion of the Plan Commission
and the City Council, improved building orientation and lot buildability will
result from the use of non-radial side lot lines.
3. Residential lots abutting major or secondary thoroughfares, where
marginal access streets are not desirable or possible to attain, shall be
platted with reverse frontage lots or with side lot lines parallel to such
thoroughfares. That portion of these lots abutting major or secondary
thoroughfares shall include an approved screen planting contained in a
non-access greenbelt easement having a minimum width of 15 feet.
Residential lots abutting a freeway, or having a side lot or rear lot
relationship to a street which in turn abuts a freeway, shall include an
approved screen planting contained in a greenbelt easement having a
minimum width of 75 feet.
4. Lots shall generally have a front to front relationship across all streets.
4.03. Easements
A. Easements shall be provided along lot lines as necessary. Easements shall be at
least 12 feet wide and shall give access to every lot.
B. Easements shall be provided for utilities and communication facilities.
C. Easements needed for storm drainage purposes shall be determined by the City
Engineer and shall meet the requirements of the City Engineer.
4.04. Topographic Conditions
A. Flood Plain
Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or in
part within the flood plain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or any other areas
which are subject to flooding or inundation by storm water or have inadequate
drainage, shall not be platted for any use as may increase danger to health, life,
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-23
or property. The subdivider may show by way of accurately engineered plans
that a change to the topography in the proposed subdivision will eliminate
flooding in the area in question and shall clearly demonstrate that any such
planned topographical change will not unduly aggravate the flood hazard beyond
the limits of the proposed subdivision. If the City Council determines that a flood
problem does exist, then it shall reject all or that part of the proposed subdivision
lying within the floodplain. Any areas of land lying within a flood plain shall
require specific compliance with all applicable State laws, and rules related
thereto.
Where flood plain contours are established as part of the land subdividing
process, they shall not be altered without approval of City Council.
No building or other permanent structure shall be placed within the defined flood
plain.
(Rev. 09-26-1976)
B. Trees
The subdivider shall take the necessary action to preserve trees within the
proposed subdivision. The following information must be supplied to and
approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation:
(Rev. 10-09-1972)
1. Location of trees to be retained.
2. Specifications for protection during development.
3. Specifications for grading and drainage to assure the preservation of
those trees to be retained.
C. Natural Features
The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever
possible and desirable. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such
as large trees, stands of trees, water courses and similar environmental assets
that will add attractiveness and value to the property if preserved.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
D. Artificial or Man-made Lakes or Reservoirs
According to plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer.
E. Open Space Areas
1. Site plans and development of open space and park areas shall be
approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-24
2. Grading Plans for the Open Space Area shall be submitted to and
approved by the City Engineer, simultaneously with the submittal of
grading plans for the remainder of the subdivision. The entire Open Space
Area shall be brought to a suitable grade as approved by the City
Engineer.
(Rev. 08-01-1977)
3. Within those portions of the Open Space Area to be maintained as
woods, all debris shall be removed; and dead, diseased or hazardous
trees must be felled and removed. Selective clearance shall be
performed, where determined to be necessary by the Director of Parks
and Recreation, in accordance with State of Michigan standards.
4. With the exception of wooded areas, all ground area must be top-dressed
where necessary with suitable soil and seeded or sodded as provided in
the Landscape Design Standards.
(Rev. 02-21-1977)
5. All basic site and grading improvements, as outlined in the previous
sections, shall be completed and approved by the Director of Parks and
Recreation, prior to the issuance of building permits for other than model
homes in the subject subdivision. Other building or facility improvements
proposed within open space areas shall be assured by means of financial
guarantees as outlined in Section 4.00-D.
Financial guarantees related to required improvements within Open
Space Areas shall be retained by the City until the Open Space
maintenance responsibility is expressly assumed by the related
subdivision association, which at that time must be under the control of
the subdivision residents. Until that time, the subdivider shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the Open Space Area.
(Rev. 08-01-1977)
F. Non-access Greenbelt Easements
The non-access greenbelt easements along the rear or side property lines of
those lots arranged according to Section 4.02, B.3 of this chapter shall be
developed in the following manner:
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
1. Easements shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide and shall extend along
all lots abutting major or secondary thoroughfares.
2. Easements shall contain suitable ground cover and a screen planting
including such elements as earth berms, shrubs, coniferous and
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-25
deciduous trees, as approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
3. The grading of these easements shall be approved by the City Engineer.
G. Zoning Boundary Screening Walls
When a non-residential subdivision is to be developed abutting residentially
zoned land, a 6'-0" decorative masonry screening wall shall be constructed along
that boundary of the proposed subdivision which coincides with the zoning
boundary line between the non-residential and the residential land. Such walls
shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Article XXXIX, Section
39.10.00 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
H. Street Rights-of-Way
The margins of major street rights-of-way, and local street rights-of-way within
the subdivision that do not abut lots within the subdivision, or that abut parcels
which are not to be used for building purposes, shall be sodded or seeded as
specified in the Landscape Design Standards. The use of sod or seed in such
areas shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(Rev. 02-21-1977)
4.05. Streets
A. Location and Arrangement
1. All streets within the proposed subdivision shall conform to the various
elements of the Master Thoroughfare Plan.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
2. The street layout shall provide for the continuation of streets adjoining the
subdivision or for the proper protection of streets when the adjoining
property is not subdivided or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit
adopted by the Plan Commission.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
3. The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by
through traffic shall be discouraged.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
4. Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or
proposed major or secondary thoroughfare, the Plan Commission shall
require marginal access streets or lot arrangements as specified in
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-26
Section 4.02 B, 3 of this chapter.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
5. Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain a freeway or other
limited access highway right-of-way, the Plan Commission may require
the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such
right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate
use of the intervening land. Such distances shall be determined with due
consideration for the minimum distance required for approach grades to
future grade separations.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
6. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations, and where the Plan Commission finds
it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is developed. Wherever there exists, adjacent to the
tract to be subdivided, a dedicated or platted and recorded half street, the
other half should be platted.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
7. No proposed subdivision shall be isolated from or isolate other lands from,
existing public streets unless suitable access is provided.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
8. Street names shall conform to the street naming ordinance, Chapter two
of the Troy City Code.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
9. Maximum length for residential cul-de-sac streets shall generally be 500'.
Maximum length for industrial and other cul-de-sac streets may exceed
500', subject to the approval of the Plan Commission.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-27
B. Rights-of-Way Widths
STREET TYPE RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH
1. Major Thoroughfare In conformance with the Master
Thoroughfare Plan of the City of
Troy and the Master Right-of-Way
Plan of the County of Oakland.
2. Secondary Thoroughfare In conformance with the Master
Thoroughfare Plan of the City of
Troy.
3. Industrial Service Streets 60
4. Multiple-Family Residential 60
5. Minor (Single Family Residential Streets) 60
6. Marginal Access Streets 34
7. Turn-Around (Loop) Streets 120
8. Alley 20
9. Cul-de-Sac Streets - Turn-Arounds:
A. Industrial 75 Radius
B. Residential & Others 60 Radius
C. Pavement Widths
STREET TYPE PAVEMENT WIDTH
(Measured from outside of curb to outside of curb)
1. Major Thoroughfare In conformance with the standards and
specifications established by the City Engineer.
2. Secondary Thoroughfares In conformance with the standards and
specifications established by the City Engineer.
3. Industrial Streets 36
4. Multiple-Family Residential 36
5. Minor Residential Street 28
6. Marginal Access Streets:
A. Single Family Residential 22
B. Other Zoning In conformance with Districts, the standards and
specifications established by the City Engineer.
7. Turn-Around (Loop) No less than 80 Streets in diameter at
terminating loop.
8. Alley 20
9. Cul-de-Sac Streets-Turn Arounds  Outside Radius:
A. Industrial 65
B. Residential & Others 50
D. Street Grades
For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall not be less than 0.4%.
Street grades shall not exceed 6% unless approved by the City Engineer.
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-28
E. Alignment
1. Vertical
Vertical curves are necessary when a change in grade of 1.50% or more
occurs. Vertical curves shall be adequate to provide the minimum vertical
visibility as listed below. (Measured from four and one-half (4-1/2) foot eye
level to eighteen (18) inch tail light level)
A) Major Thoroughfares 500 Feet
B) Secondary Thoroughfares 300 Feet
C) Minor Streets 200 Feet
D) Minor Street, Less than 500 Feet long 100 Feet
(Rev. 08-01-1977)
2. Horizontal
A) The minimum centerline radii and tangents between reverse curves
shall be as follows:
Radii Tangent
1) Major Thoroughfares 700 Feet 300 Feet
2) Secondary Thoroughfares 450 Feet 100 Feet
3) Minor Streets 275 Feet 50 Feet
B) Minimum Horizontal Visibility shall be:
1) Major Thoroughfares 300 Feet measured on centerline
2) Secondary Thoroughfares 200 Feet measured on centerline
3) Minor Streets 100 Feet measured on centerline
3. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at 90
degrees.
4. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be avoided.
5. Curved streets intersecting with major or secondary thoroughfares shall
do so with a tangent section of centerline 100 feet long measured from
the right-of-way line of the major or secondary thoroughfare.
F. Intersection Approach Construction
Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be constructed at all intersections of
minor streets with major or secondary thoroughfares, and at all intersections of
secondary thoroughfares with major thoroughfares. When the major
thoroughfare involved consists of just two (2) through lanes, a passing lane or
left turn lane shall also be constructed in order to enable the intersection to
function properly. The design of such acceleration, deceleration, passing and left
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-29
turn lanes shall be as required by the Engineering Design Standards of the City
of Troy.
(Rev. 01-13-1992)
G. Roadway Pavement Construction
All roadway pavements shall be constructed of portland cement concrete with
integral curb and shall otherwise be in accordance with details and specifications
prescribed by the City Engineer.
H. Street Name and Traffic Signs
Street name signs shall be provided at the intersections of all streets. All street
name signs and traffic signs shall meet the material specifications of the City of
Troy. Traffic signs shall conform to the Michigan Manual of Traffic Control
Devices and shall be purchased and installed by the City of Troy or the County of
Oakland.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
4.06. Sidewalks and Walkways
A. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed along those sides of all streets which lie
within or abut the plat. Sidewalks along Major Thoroughfares shall be eight feet (8)
in width.
Sidewalks along all other categories of streets shall be five feet (5) in width.
Sidewalks shall generally be placed one foot (1) off property lines, except in those
instances where the City Engineer determines that an alternate location will be
equally or more physically feasible or desirable, while serving the same access
function.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
B. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed adjacent to retention basins, outlots,
and Open Space Areas when abutting an improved street within the subdivision,
and along those sections of streets that do not abut lots within the subdivision.
Walkways within Open Space Areas may replace those required along the
related street frontage, when it is determined by the Plan Commission that a
similar function will be served by such walkways.
C. Construction of walkways or cross-walks may be required by the Plan
Commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian circulation within the subdivision
where block length exceeds 1,000 feet, or where schools, churches, parks, or
other community facilities require such walkways.
D. An easement or dedicated right-of-way, generally 12' in width, shall be provided.
E. The surface of a walkway shall be 6' wide and constructed to meet City concrete
sidewalk specifications. The balance of the easement or walkway right-of-way
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-30
shall be graded and sodded. Such walkway construction, and related grading
and sodding, shall be the responsibility of the subdivider and shall be carried out
simultaneous with the construction of other required subdivision improvements.
4.07. Utilities
A. Storm Drainage System
The storm drainage system and other storm drainage improvements including
storm water detention or retention facilities shall be provided in accordance with
plans approved by the City Engineer. Detention or Retention basins shall be
surrounded by a planting screen or area as approved by the Director of Parks
and Recreation. Where County drains are involved, a letter or document of
approval from the County Drain Commissioner must be submitted by the
subdivider.
(Rev. 01-06-1992)
B. Rear Yard Storm Drains
Adequate and safe disposal of all rear yard storm drainage shall be provided in
accordance with details and specifications prescribed by the City Engineer.
C. Sewage Disposal
Sewage systems must be constructed to plans approved by the City Engineer.
All lots must be served by a public sewer.
D. Water Supply
Water distribution systems must be constructed to plans approved by the City
Engineer. All lots must be served by a public water system.
E. Power and Communication Facilities
1. All lines for power and communication facilities transmitted by wire or
cable, including all individual service connections, shall be placed
underground throughout the entire subdivision, with the following
exceptions:
A. For electric facilities operated at more than 15 thousand (15,000)
volts to ground for WYE connected systems and over 20 thousand
(20,000) volts for Delta connected systems.
B. In industrial subdivisions where such utilities are located behind the
front building line of the subdivision lots.
2. Exceptions to this requirement will only be permitted where it is
determined that overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to the
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-31
health, safety, general welfare, plat design and character of the
subdivision. Such exceptions must receive the approval of the City
Engineer, Planning Director, Chief Building Inspector and the approval of
the City Council at the time of submittal of improvement plans for
Improvement Design Review and Approval.
(Rev. 01-06-1992)
3. All such facilities shall be planned and constructed so as not to conflict
with other underground utilities.
(Rev. 05-08-1972)
4. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of
construction approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission.
F. Street Lighting
The developer shall install street lighting of a type and lighting intensity
conforming with the Master Plan for municipal street lighting at all intersections of
minor streets with major or secondary thoroughfares; secondary thoroughfares
with major or secondary thoroughfare; major thoroughfares with major
thoroughfares. Materials, equipment and installation shall conform to the
standards and specifications prescribed by the City Engineer.
(Rev. 06-05-1978)
ARTICLE V - INTERPRETATION
5.00. Interpretation
The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and general welfare
of the City of Troy. These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the City of Troy, nor to conflict
with any statutes of the State of Michigan or Oakland County, except that these
regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations impose a greater restriction
than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations.
(Rev. 04-29-1968)
ARTICLE VI - PARCEL SPLITTING
6.00. Splitting Procedure and Requirements
A. Submittal and Review: Any person wishing to split a platted lot or acreage parcel
shall submit to the City Assessor written application for parcel splitting, and two
(2) copies of the proposed split.
(Rev. 02-15-1982)
Chapter 41 - Subdivision Control
41-32
B. Duties of City Assessor: The City Assessor shall review the proposed parcel split
to determine its compliance with the applicable City Ordinances, and with
Michigans Land Division Act, Act 288, Public Acts, 1967, as amended. If the
resultant split is in conformance with these conditions, the City Assessor shall
have the authority to authorize the requested split.
(Rev. 09-11-2006)
C. No lot or acreage parcel shall be split until all taxes have been paid. A receipt of
payment must be submitted with the proposed split plan.
D. Splitting of a lot or acreage parcel or changing any tax parcel description in a
one-family residential or two-family residential zoning district is prohibited, unless
the resultant parcels meet the requirements of Section 30.10.00 of the Zoning
Ordinance, including frontage on a public street, minimum lot area and setbacks
from existing buildings.
In recorded subdivisions utilizing the Averaged Lot Sizes option, these
requirements may be reduced to the minimum standards of Section 35.10.00 of
the Zoning Ordinance if all requirements of Section 35.10.00 through 35.10.04
are met.
(Rev. 03-09-1987)
E. In the case of applications for splits of non-residential property, the City Assessor
may require the submittal of a site plan, conforming to the standards of the
Zoning Ordinance, indicating the potential development of the subject property
as it is presently zoned. Such plans shall indicate potential development of the
parcel, either as an independent parcel or in conjunction with abutting land under
the applicant's ownership, in a manner conforming to Zoning Ordinance
requirements. Failure to provide such a plan when required by the City Assessor
shall constitute grounds for denial of the parcel split application.
F. Applicants for a lot split shall, except on waiver as for minor lot line adjustments,
provide the City Assessor with a certified architectural survey of the property
proposed to be split, which shall show existing buildings, existing City utility lines,
including sewer leads, serving said property, drainage courses, easements and
such other pertinent data as he may request, in addition to showing the proposed
lot split and the dimensions of the new lots to be created thereby. Said survey
shall upon approval of the proposed lot split by the assessor be recorded with
the Oakland County Register of Deeds by the applicant.
(Rev. 06-09-1986)
Chapter 42- Flood Plain Management
42-1
1. Purpose
(1) It is the purpose of this Ordinance to protect human life, health, and property from flood
conditions, to preserve the ability of floodplains to carry and discharge a base flood, and
to significantly reduce potential hazards as a result of flood conditions within the City of
Troy. Further, it is the purpose of this Ordinance to comply with the provisions and
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, as constituted in accord with the
National Flood Insurance Act, and subsequent enactments and rules and regulations.
(2) Additional objectives of this Article include:
(a) Reducing public/private economic loss and social disruption as a result of flood
conditions.
(b) Minimizing public expenditures for:
(i) flood control projects,
(ii) rescue and relief efforts in the aftermath of flooding,
(iii) repair of flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and
(iv) the redevelopment of flood damaged homes, neighborhoods, commercial
and industrial areas;
(a) providing the Public with the most current floodplain information;
and
(b) promote development patterns not subject to flood damage.
2. Definitions
(1) Area of Special Flood Hazard is the land in the flood plain within a community subject to
a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area is designated
as Zone A or AE, AH, AO, AR, A99, V, OR VE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(Rev. 10/06/2008; Eff. 01/16/2009)
(2) Base Flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year; also known as the 100-year flood.
(3) Development means any man-made modification to unimproved or improved real estate,
including but not limited to: buildings, pools, decks or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials.
(4) Encroachment means development or a structure which is located within the area of
special flood hazard.
(02-01-1999)
Chapter 42- Flood Plain Management
42-2
(5) Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) the overflow of inland or tidal waters,
(b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
(6) Flood Damage means any damage to persons, materials, supplies, property or real
estate caused by and as a direct result of flooding and /or the influence of flood
conditions.
(7) Boundary and Floodway Map means an official map of a community, issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards have been designated as Zone A.
(8) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
(9) Flood Insurance Study (Flood Elevation Study) is an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and corresponding water surface elevations.
(10) Floodplain means that land area possessing the potential to be inundated by water from
a flood or flooding.
(11) Floodway or Regulatory Floodway means the designated area of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved from development or
construction activity in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing
the water surface elevation beyond these areas.
(12) New Construction means structures and/or development for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of this ordinance, and includes
any subsequent improvements to structures.
(13) Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground.
(14) Substantial Improvement means any repair, reconstruction, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the
market value of the structure either,
(a) before the improvement or repair is started; or
(b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred.
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur
when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either:
(02-01-1999)
Chapter 42- Flood Plain Management
42-3
(a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions, or
(b) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a
State Inventory of Historic Places.
(15) Watercourse means any natural or artificial drainage way wherein waters flow either
continuously or intermittently, including any adjacent areas subject to flooding.
Watercourses include both natural and man-made open ditches, streams, enclosed
storm drains, lakes, and ponds.
3. Delineation of the Area of Special Flood Hazard
The area of special flood hazard shall overlay existing zoning districts delineated on the official
City of Troy Zoning Map. The boundaries of the area of special flood hazard shall coincide with
the boundaries of the areas indicated as within the limits of the 100-year flood in the most
current report entitled The Flood Insurance Study, City of Troy, as specified by the City
Engineer, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary Maps
and Floodway Maps. Within the area of special flood hazard a floodway may be designated.
The boundaries of the floodway shall coincide with the floodway boundaries indicated on the
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps and Floodway Maps. The Flood Insurance Study and
accompanying maps are adopted by reference, appended, and declared to be a part of this
ordinance.
4. Development Requirements
(1) The owner shall not perform any development nor shall the owner allow others to perform
any development of any property within an area of special flood hazard without first having
secured a development permit(s). Necessary development permits shall have been issued
by appropriate local, state and federal authorities, including but not limited to: a floodplain
permit, approval, or letter of no authority from the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality.
(2) Approval of any development is also subject to the provisions of this ordinance and all
other requirements of the Troy City Code.
5. General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements within an area of special flood hazard,
shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage including, but
not limited to:
(a) be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure;
(b) be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
(c) all new and replacement water supply systems shall not allow infiltration of flood
waters into the systems;
(02-01-1999)
Chapter 42- Flood Plain Management
42-4
(d) all public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed and located to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(e) drainage shall be provided to reduce damage to structures created by flood
hazards.
(2) The City Engineer or his/her representative shall review development proposals to
determine compliance with the standards in this section.
6. Specific Base Flood Elevation Standards
(1) On the basis of the most recent available base flood elevation data the following
standards shall apply in the area of special flood hazard:
(a) all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a minimum of one (1) foot
above the base flood level.
(Rev. 10/06/2008; Eff. 01/16/2009)
(b) all new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall
have either:
(i) the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a minimum of one (1) foot
above the base flood elevation; or
(Rev. 10/06/2008; Eff. 01/16/2009)
(ii) be constructed such that below base flood elevation, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities:
(a) the structure is watertight, with walls impermeable to the passage of
water; and
(b) is constructed with structural components having the ability to neutralize
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads; and
(c) the effects of buoyancy must be resisted.
A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this
subparagraph are satisfied, and that the flood proofing methods employed are adequate
to withstand the flood depth, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with a base flood in the location of the structure. Such certification
shall be submitted to the City Engineer, and shall indicate the elevation to which the
structure is flood proofed.
(2) The most recent base flood elevation data received from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency shall take precedence over data from other sources.
(02-01-1999)
Chapter 42- Flood Plain Management
42-5
7. Flood Zone Development Standards
(1) New construction, substantial improvements and all other development, shall be
prohibited within areas of special flood hazard except where the owner demonstrates
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation
and/or decrease the flood carrying capacity of a base flood. In addition, the provisions of
subsection 2) shall be applied to land situated within the floodway.
(2) Encroachments, new construction, substantial improvements and development shall be
prohibited within the floodway. Exception to this prohibition shall only be made upon
certification by a registered professional engineer or the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality that the proposed development will not result in any increases in
base flood elevation during a base flood discharge.
8. Disputes and Conflict
(1) Where there are disputes as to the location of an area of special flood hazard boundary,
the property owner or permit applicant shall provide field measurements, topographic
data, and any other specified data to assist the designated state and/or federal agencies
in the resolution of the dispute. The property owner or permit applicant shall be
responsible for the application fees, engineering, surveying, or other costs associated
with the preparation of materials required to assist with the area of special flood hazard
boundary dispute.
(2) The requirements of the Floodplain Management ordinance apply to all development
within the area of special flood hazard. If there is a conflict between the Flood Plain
Management ordinances and other provisions of the City of Troy Ordinances, the most
stringent requirements shall be applied, to accomplish the intent of this ordinance.
9. Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based upon National and State regulations and standards. Larger
floods and increased flood elevations may occur on occasions. Approval of the use of land,
construction and/or development under this Ordinance shall not be considered a guarantee or
warranty of safety or damage from flood events. This Ordinance does not imply that areas
outside the area of special flood hazard will be free from flood damage, nor does this Ordinance
create liability on the part of the City of Troy or any officer or employees thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
(02-01-1999)
10. Agency Designated
Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of
Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Department of the City of Troy is
hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Troy
under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Troy
assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act through out its
corporate limits.
Chapter 42- Flood Plain Management
42-6
(09-18-2006)
11. Code Appendix Enforced
Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8(b) of Act
230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall
be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of Troy.
(09-18-2006)
12. Designation of Regulated Flood Prone Hazard Areas
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled
Oakland County Michigan and Incorporated Areas and dated January 16th, 2009 and the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps(s) (FIRMS) panel numbers of 26125C0527F, 0529F, 0531F, 0532F,
0533F, 0534F, 0537F, 0541F, 0551F, 0552F dated September 29, 2006 and 0542G, 0553G,
0554G, 0561G, 0562G dated January 16th, 2009 are adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code.
(Rev. 10/06/2008; Eff. 01/16/2009)
13. (1) Except as otherwise provided in specific sections of this Chapter, a violation of any
section of Chapter 42 is a Municipal Civil Infraction subject to the provisions of Chapter
100 of the Code of the City of Troy. Sanctions for each violation of Chapter 42 shall
include a fine of not more than $500.00, costs, damages and injunctive orders as
authorized by Chapter 100.
(2) A default in the payment of a civil fine or costs ordered under this ordinance or an
installment of the fine or cost may be remedied by any means authorized under the
Revised Judicature Act of 1961, being Section 600.10 to 600.9947 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws, as amended.
(3) The owner of any land, premises or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this
Chapter shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the
commission of such violation shall be responsible for a separate offense and upon a
finding or admission of responsibility for such offense thereof shall be responsible for
payment of fines, costs and damages and subject to each applicable injunctive order.
(4) A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a
violation occurs or continues.
(5) The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other
remedies provided by law.
(Rev. 10/06/2008; Eff. 01/16/2009)
Chapter 46 - Food Establishments
46-1
1. Adoption of Code by Reference.
Pursuant to the Charter of the City of Troy and the provisions of Section 3 (k) of Act 279
of 1909, State of Michigan, as amended, the Oakland County Department of Health
Rules and Regulations Relating to Food Establishments, Resolution 4351, effective
September 21, 1964, as amended through September 21, 1966, prepared and
promulgated by and through the Health Committee of the Oakland County Board of
Health, are hereby adopted in their entirety by the City of Troy for the purpose of issuing
permits, establishing sanitary standards, for the purpose of issuing permits, establishing
sanitary standards, controlling the sale, storage, processing, distribution, display and
serving of foods and to safeguard and health of the public patronizing such food handling
establishments and to protect the public from any health nuisance or health hazard
arising from the operating of such establishments in the City of Troy.
2. Code of File.
Complete printed copies of the Oakland County Department of Health Rules and
Regulations for Food Establishments, as amended, are available for public use and
inspection at the office of the City Clerk.
(12-11-1967)
Chapter 47 - House Trailers and Trailer Courts
47-1
6.41 House Trailers
For the purpose of this Chapter, the term "house trailer" shall mean any vehicle
used or intended for use as a dwelling, regardless of whether such vehicle is selfpropelling
or is moved by other agencies. The following restrictions shall be
applicable to house trailers.
(1) No person shall park overnight or permit the parking overnight of any house
trailer upon any public highway, street, alley, park or other public place
within the City.
(2) No person shall park or permit the parking of a house trailer for occupancy
on any private property within the City except in any authorized trailer camp
licensed under the provisions of MCL 125.1001 et. seq., Act 243, Public
Acts of 1959, State of Michigan, as amended.
a. Exception: The City Council may permit, by resolution, a house trailer to
be occupied as an office or similar occupancy for a period of twelve (12)
months, with an option to renew such approval for a period not to
exceed (6) months, after receiving a report and recommendation from
the Planning Director and Director of Buildings and Inspection. The
renewal of said occupancy after the initial twelve (12) month period shall
be based upon the petitioner starting construction of a permanent facility
on the site on which the house trailer is located; or a business
establishment presently located in Troy erecting a building at a new
location in Troy may be permitted to occupy a house trailer as
designated above on the site of their present facility while the new
facility is being erected.
b. Exception: The City Manager may permit a house trailer to be occupied
as a residence for a temporary period, not exceeding 10 days, as part of
a special event if all of the following conditions exist:
i. The site is zoned other than one-family residential.
ii. The site is located with frontage on a major thoroughfare.
iii. The site is a minimum of 5 acres in size.
iv. The proposed location of the trailer is not in a required setback.
v. The proposed location is such that it will not obstruct fire lanes or
required access lanes to parking areas.
An appeal may be made to the City Council by any person or entity
affected by a decision of the City Manager, in relation to requirements
for temporary occupancy of a house trailer, as provided for under
Exception b of this Section.
(Rev. 10-01-2007)
Chapter 47 - House Trailers and Trailer Courts
47-2
(3) The City Council may permit the temporary placement of a mobile office
unit for lot and home sales on the site of a new residential development for
an initial period of twelve (12) months. A possible six (6) month extension
of this approval may be granted by the City Council.
(08-08-1994)
(4) No person shall park or permit the parking of any unoccupied house trailer
outside of a duly licensed trailer coach park, except the parking of
unoccupied trailers within a completely enclosed building or located behind
the front face of the principal building, but no closer than three (3) feet to
any side or rear lot line, is permitted in all residential areas provided no
living quarters shall be maintained in said house trailer. Provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to hinder or prevent any
person from engaging in business or handling trailer coaches for sale or
resale or for storage, subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by
this Code relative to zoning or regulation of such business.
(Rev. 08-08-1994)
(5) Emergency or temporary parking or stopping is permitted on any street,
alley or highway for not longer than one hour subject to any other and
further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and
parking regulations for that street, alley or highway.
(Rev. 08-08-1994)
6.42 Trailer Courts.
Applications for permits to construct and operate trailer courts made under the
provisions of Act 243 of 1959, State of Michigan, as amended, shall be made to
the Health Officer who shall refer one copy of the application and the
accompanying plans and specifications to the Building Inspector and one copy
thereof to the Planning Commission.
(03-26-1979)
6.43 Building Inspector Certification.
The Building Inspector shall investigate the proposed application and the plans
and specifications to determine whether all proposed construction and all sewers,
drains, roads, plumbing, electrical and heating installations are properly and
sufficiently described on said plans and specifications and conform in all respects
to the requirements of this Code applicable thereto. The Building Inspector shall
further, in conjunction with the Fire Chief, investigate said proposed plans and
specifications to ascertain that the same show compliance with all applicable fire
safety and fire prevention provisions of this Code and of the laws of the State of
Chapter 47 - House Trailers and Trailer Courts
47-3
Michigan and regulations of the State Fire Marshall pertaining thereto. If the
Building Inspector is satisfied that the plans and specifications are sufficient with
respect to the foregoing and in compliance with this Code and other requirements
he shall so certify to the Health Officer, otherwise he shall indicate his disapproval
of said application and indicate his reason therefor to the Health Officer in writing.
(03-26-1979)
6.44 Planning Commission Approval.
When the Planning Commission shall receive a copy of the application for a trailer
court construction permit with the accompanying plans and specifications, it shall
investigate the same to determine whether the proposed operation is in conformity
with Chapter 39 (Zoning), other pertinent provisions of the City Code and Act 243
of the Public Acts of 1959, State of Michigan as amended, relating to the location
of the proposed use and the site plan therefor. If it shall approve said application it
shall so certify to the Health Officer, otherwise it shall disapprove the same and
indicate its reasons in writing to the Health Officer for such disapproval.
(03-26-1979)
6.45 Health Officer.
The Health Officer shall examine the application and the plans and specifications,
and determine whether (1) the application contains the required information, (2)
the plans and specifications for the work for which a permit to construct is sought
are such that the works, if constructed are in accordance therewith, are or would
be, in his judgment, sufficient and adequate to protect the public health, (3) the
specific requirements of Act 243 of the Public Acts of 1959, State of Michigan, as
amended, are complied with.
6.46 Forwarding Application.
After having received the reports of the Building Inspector and the Planning
Commission and having investigated said application and plans and specifications,
if the same shall have been approved by the Building Inspector, the Planning
Commission and the Health Officer, the Health Officer shall approve said
application and forward the same to the State Health Commissioner. In all other
cases, the Health Officer shall disapprove said application and forward the same
to the State Health Commissioner stating his reasons in writing for such
disapproval. Prior to forwarding a disapproved application to the State Health
Commissioner, however, the Health Officer shall notify the applicant of such
disapproval and the reasons therefor, and the applicant shall be given the
opportunity to amend his application or the plans and specifications accompanying
the same, if he shall desire to do so. Amended applications shall be referred to
the officer or the agency which disapproved the original application for
investigation and further report.
Chapter 47 - House Trailers and Trailer Courts
47-4
(03-26-1979)
6.47 License to Operate.
Any person desiring to operate a trailer coach park shall file the application for a
license required by Act 243 of the Public Acts of 1959, State of Michigan, as
amended, with the Health Officer. Upon receipt of such application the Health
Officer shall investigate to determine whether the park has been constructed
according to the approved plans and specifications and the provisions of Act 243
of 1959, as amended, have otherwise been complied with. Applications for
renewal of licenses may be approved by the Health Officer when accompanied by
the required bond and license fee if:
(1) Plans previously approved by the State Health Commissioner are on file;
(2) Park layout and facilities are in substantial conformity with the approved
plans and no deviations exist which, in the judgment of the Health Officer,
cause a hazard to public health or safety;
(3) The Health Officer has inspected the park within six (6) months prior to the
date of application and inspection has shown satisfactory maintenance of
facilities and compliance with the provisions of Act 243 of 1959, as
amended.
6.48 License Fees.
Annual license fees collected by the Health Officer shall be deposited with the City
Treasurer but no special fund shall be established or maintained for such deposits
and the City Treasurer is hereby directed to credit the same to the general fund.
Chapter 48 - Litter
48-1
6.101 Definitions.
In the interpretation of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply, except where
the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended:
(1) "Private premises" shall mean any lot or parcel of land owned or occupied by any
person whether or not improved with any dwelling, house, building, or other
structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to any dwelling, house, building, or other
structure erected thereon.
(2) "Public place" shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or
other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and
buildings.
(3) "Garbage" shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
(4) "Refuse" shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes including
garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles,
junk and solid market and industrial wastes.
(5) "Rubbish" shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
(6) "Litter" shall mean garbage, refuse, and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a
danger to public health, safety and welfare.
6.102 Litter in Public Places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
within the City except in public receptacles, or in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
6.103 Use of Waste Receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so
in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
6.104 Sweeping Litter Into Gutters.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the
City the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of their premises free of litter.
Chapter 48 - Litter
48-2
6.105 Merchants' Duty to Keep Sidewalks Clean.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any
gutter, street or other public place within the City the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying places of business within the City shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
business premises free of litter.
6.106 Litter on Occupied Private Property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private premises within the City, whether
owned by such person or not, except the owner or person in control of occupied private
premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that
litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
6.107 Enforcement.
The Public Works Director is hereby charged with the enforcement of this Chapter.
(Enacted 10/05/2009; Effective: 01/01/2010)
Chapter 59 - Licenses
59-1
1. Licenses Required.
No person shall engage, or be engaged, in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade,
profession, business or privilege for which any license is required by any provision of this Code
without first obtaining a license from the City in the manner provided for in this Chapter.
(Rev. 09-30-1974)
7.2. Multiple Businesses.
The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting or carrying on any trade,
profession, business or privilege which contains within itself, or is composed of, trades,
professions, businesses or privileges which are required by this Code to be licensed, shall not
relieve the person to whom such license or permit is granted from the necessity of securing
individual licenses or permits for each such trade, profession, business or privilege.
7.3. Licensed Businesses.
The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by Oakland County or the State
of Michigan to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business
or privilege shall not exempt such person from the necessity of securing a license or permit from
the City if such license or permit is required by this Code.
(Rev. 09-30-1974)
7.4. License Application.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, every person required to obtain a license from the City to
engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege,
shall make application for said license to the City Clerk upon forms provided by the City Clerk and
shall state under oath or affirmation such facts, as may be required for, or applicable to, the
granting of such license.
7.5. License Year.
Except as otherwise herein provided as to certain licenses, the license year shall begin January
1st of each year and shall terminate at midnight on December 31st of that year. Original licenses
shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee. License applications for
license renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
annual expiration date.
(Rev. 08-30-1976)
7.6. Conditions for Issuance.
No license or permit required by this Code shall be issued to any person who is required to have a
license or permit from Oakland County or the State of Michigan, until such person shall submit
evidence of such state license or permit and proof that all fees pertaining thereto have been paid.
No license shall be granted to any applicant therefor until such applicant has complied with all of
the provisions of this Code applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which
application for license is made.
Chapter 59 - Licenses
59-2
(Rev. 09-30-1974)
7.7. Where Certification Required.
No license shall be granted where the certification of any officer of the City is required prior to the
issuance thereof until such certification is made.
7.8. Health Officer's Certificate.
In all cases where the certification of the Health Officer is required prior to the issuance of any
license by the City Clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding
that the person making application and the premises in which he proposes to conduct or is
conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the sanitary requirements of
the State of Michigan and of the City.
7.9. Fire Chief's Certificate.
In all cases where the certification of the Fire Chief is required prior to the issuance of any license
by the City Clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the
premises in which the person making application for such licenses proposes to conduct or is
conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the fire regulations of the
State of Michigan and of the City.
7.11 Building Inspector's Certificate.
In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege involves the use
of any structure or land, a license therefor shall not be issued until the Building Inspector shall
certify that the proposed use is not prohibited by Chapter 39 of this Code.
(Rev. 09-30-1974)
7.12 Bonds.
Where the provisions of this Code require that the applicant for any license or permit furnish a
bond, such bond shall be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the proper City officer, or,
where the amount thereof is specified in this Code, in the amount so required; the form of such
bond shall be acceptable to the City Attorney. In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or
permit may furnish one or more policies of insurance in the same amounts providing the same
protection as called for in any such bond; and such policies of insurance shall be approved as to
substance by the City official issuing said license or permit and as to form by the City Attorney.
(Rev. 09-30-1974)
7.13 Late Renewals.
All fees for the renewal of any license which are not paid at the time said fees shall be due, shall
be paid as "late fees" with an additional twenty-five (25%) percent of the license fee required for
such licenses under the provisions of Chapter 60 for the first fifteen (15) days that such license
fee remains unpaid and thereafter the license fee shall be that stipulated for such licenses under
Chapter 60, plus fifty (50%) percent of such fee.
Chapter 59 - Licenses
59-3
7.14 Right to Issuance.
If the application for any license is approved by the proper officers of the City, as provided in this
Code, said license shall be granted and shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed
for such license.
7.15 Fees - When Paid.
The fee required by this Code for any license or permit shall be paid at the office of the City Clerk
before the granting of said license or permit. License Fees shall be in accordance with Chapter
60, Fees and Bonds of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
(Rev. 03-17-2003)
7.17 Suspension or Revocation.
Any license issued by the City may be suspended by the City Manager for cause, and any permit
issued by the City may be suspended or revoked by the issuing authority for cause. The licensee
shall have the right to a hearing before the Council on any such action of the City Manager,
provided a written request therefor is filed with the City Clerk within five (5) days after receipt of
said notice of such suspension. The Council may confirm such suspension or revoke or reinstate
any such license. The action taken by the Council shall be final. The same procedure shall apply
where a license application is denied. Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the
fee therefor shall not be refunded. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any
licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new license for the
trade, profession, business or privilege for a period of one (1) year after such revocation.
(Rev. 09-30-1974)
7.18 "Cause" Defined.
The term "cause" as used in this Chapter, shall include the doing or omitting of any act, or
permitting any condition to exist in connection with any trade, profession, business or privilege for
which a license or permit is granted under the provisions of this Code, or upon any premises or
facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is:
(1) Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public;
(2) Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature;
(3) Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit granted; or
(4) Forbidden by the provisions of this Code or any duly established rule or regulation of the
City applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license or
permit has been granted.
Chapter 59 - Licenses
59-4
7.19 License Renewal.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered
in the same manner as an original application.
7.20 Exhibition of License.
No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
upon his person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade,
profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted; except that where such trade,
profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or
establishment, said license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in his place
of business. Every licensee shall produce his license for examination when applying for a renewal
thereof or when requested to do so by any City police officer or by any person representing the
issuing authority.
7.21 Exhibition on Vehicle and Machine.
No licensee shall fail to display conspicuously on each vehicle or mechanical device or machine
required to be licensed by this Code such tags or stickers as are furnished by the City Clerk.
7.22 Displaying Invalid License.
No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a duplicate has been issued.
7.23 Transferability; Misuse.
No license or permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall be transferable unless
specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code. No licensee or permittee shall, unless
specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, transfer or attempt to transfer his license or
permit to another nor shall he make any improper use of the same.
7.24 Misuse-Automatic Revocation.
In addition to the general penalty provision for violation thereof, any attempt by a licensee or
permittee to transfer his license or permit to another, unless specifically authorized by the
provisions of this Code, or to use the same improperly shall be void and result in the automatic
revocation of such license or permit.
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-1
60.01 Schedule Established.
The fee required to be paid to obtain any license to engage in the operation; conduct or
carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is required
by the provisions of this code shall be as hereinafter provided. No license shall be issued
to any applicant unless he first pays to the City Clerk the fee and posts a bond or evidence
of insurance coverage in the amount required for the type of license desired.
(Rev. 03-17-2003)
60.02 Fees for Licenses and Other Transactions.
Fees for licenses and other transactions shall be prescribed in the following section of
this Chapter. License fees shall be categorized under the business, trade, occupation or
privilege to be license.
(Rev. 03-17-2003)
60.03 Fees in Escrow for Professional Review.
Any application submitted to the Planning Department for an activity or use regulated by
Chapters 39 or 41 of this Code and as further set forth in Section 60.04 of this ordinance,
may require the deposit of fees to be held in escrow in the name of the applicant. The
escrow fee is an additional fee above the non-refundable application fee which shall be
used to pay professional review expenses of outside consultants such as community
planners, engineers, and any other professionals who shall review the application at the
request at the Planning Director. The Planning Director may request outside consultants
to review an application based on the following factors: the proposed projects size,
location, or complexity, which may create an identifiable and potential negative impact on
public roads, water or sewer services, other infrastructure or services, the environment,
or adjacent properties. The applicant shall receive a report of any outside consultants
hired by the Planning Director and a statement of expenses for the professional services
rendered, if requested by the applicant.
The applicant must deposit an escrow fee with the City of Troy Treasurer before the
Planning Director will process the applicants application.
If actual outside consultant costs exceed the amount of an escrow, the applicant shall pay
the balance due prior to issuance of any approval issued by the City of Troy. The City of
Troy may request additional escrow fees to cover estimated costs when the amount in
escrow is less than $500 and it appears additional professional services will be required.
Any unused fee collected in escrow shall be returned to the applicant once a final
determination on an application has been made, or the applicant withdraws the request,
and once all charges from the outside consultants are paid.
(02-16-2009)
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-2
60.04 Fee Schedule.
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
Adult Use Business (Chapter 76)
Application Fee $500.00
Investigation Fee $500.00*
*NOTE: for up to & including 4 persons & an additional $100.00 per person thereafter.
Annual License Renewal $500.00
(07-09-2007)
Amusement Devices (Chapter 97)
Application $100.00
Coin-Operated Amusement Device  2 to 5 units $100.00 each
Coin-Operated Amusement Device  More than 5 units $50.00 each
Rides Mechanical
Per day $20.00
Annual Fee $100.00
Annual Fee: Amusement Place  Not otherwise specified $50.00
Animals (Chapter 68)
Rides
Per day $20.00
Annual Fee $100.00
Annual Fee: Riding Stables $10.00
Auction (Chapter 68) $100.00
Auction House (Chapter 68)  Annual Fee $100.00
Board of Zoning Appeals Application (Chapter 39)
Variance $150.00
Variance Renewals $35.00
Special Meeting $500.00
Bowling Alley (Chapter 96)
Annual Fee $50.00
Plus  Each alley over one  Annual Fee $2.00
Cemetery Fees (Chapter 29)
Burial Space $525.00
Perpetual Care $200.00
Carnivals (Chapter 68)
1st day $100.00
Plus - Each Additional Day $20.00
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-3
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
Circus (Chapter 68)
1st day $100.00
Plus - Each additional day $20.00
COPIES:
City Documents
First Copy $1.00
Additional Copies 0.50 each
Budget $30.00
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report $25.00
City Charter $10.00
City Code $50.00
Zoning Ordinance $20.00
Dances (Chapter 67)
Public Dance Hall
Annual Fee $100.00
Special Dance  Each Permit $50.00
Dogs (Chapter 90)
Pound Fees Oakland County
Fee Structure
(03-28-2011)
Domestic Animal Permit (Chapter 90) Five Year Permit $40.00
Inspection fee $30.00
(03-28-2011)
Drive-in Restaurants (Chapter 73) $100.00
Fence Permit (Chapter 83)
300 linear feet or less $15.00
Over 300 linear feet $25.00
FILM PRODUCTION (Chapter 61A)
Application Fee $100.00
Public Property Use Fee (Per Day) $100.00
Fire Inspection Fee (per Inspection)
Hazardous Materials/Pyrotechnical Fee* $100.00
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-4
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
Cost Deposit for Special Conditions*
Cost Deposit for Use of City Personnel*
Cash Bond*
Additional Fees and Costs*
Extension of Permit $100.00
*To be determined after applying and/or as required if production activities change. Other
Ordinance provisions require fees, for example, Building and Fire.
(Rev. 05-19-2014)
Going Out-of-Business Sales (State Statute MCL 442.211) $50.00
Gasoline Stations (Chapter 64 - Repealed 12-02-2002)
Private Filling Station (Chapter 64 - Repealed 12-02-2002)
Landfill Operations (See Chapter 17)
Bulk Storage (Repealed 12-02-2002)
Laundries  Self Service (Chapter 70) - Annual Fee $100.00
Massage Facility License
Application/Investigation Fee for each facility $700.00
Annual License Renewal Fee for each facility $700.00
(Adopted 10-23-2017; Effective 11-02-2017)
Massage Therapist Registration
Registration Fee $10.00
Annual Renewal Fee $10.00*
(09-08-08) *(11-24-2008; Enacted: 01-01-2009)
Medical Marihuana Grow Operation
Application and License Fee $1,500.00
Annual License Renewal Fee $1,500.00
(04-23-2018; Enacted: 05-03-2018)
Motor Vehicle Races (Chapter 66)  Repealed 2/6/2017, Effective 2/16/2017
Motorcycle & Motor Driven Rental Agency (Chapter 59)
Each Location
Annual Fee $100.00
Plus, each motorcycle/motor driven cycle Annual Fee $100.00
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-5
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
NOTARY SERVICE
Required as part of official City business No Charge
Fee per Notary Act $10.00
Troy Resident or Troy Property Owner:
First Notary Act No Charge
Subsequent Notary Act/s (per Notary Act) $10.00
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 04-01-2009)
Peddlers & Solicitors (Chapter 74)
Per week $20.00
Per month $40.00
Annual Fee $100.00
Pet Shop (Chapter 75  Repealed 03-28-2011)
POLICE RECORDS SECTION SERVICE FEES
ALARM REGISTRATION
Alarm Registration Fee (Chapter 103) $25.00
Renewal of Alarm Registration* $25.00
Alarm Shut-off Fee Actual Costs**
Non-Registered Alarms  Alarm Activation:
Penalty/Registration Fee plus one of the following: $50.00***
1st and 2nd alarm $100.00 each
3rd thru 6th alarm $200.00 each
7th or more alarm $500.00 each
Registered Alarms  False Alarm Activation:
1st and 2nd false alarm No Charge
3rd thru 6th false alarm $100.00 each
7th thru 10th false alarm $200.00 each
11th or more false alarm $500.00 each
*Annual renewal fee is due prior to the last business day of the month of the initial Alarm
Registration Anniversary.
**The City of Troy may charge a fee to cover the actual incremental costs, including labor, for
each alarm response involving a manual shut-off of an alarm system.
***$50.00 fee includes a $25.00 penalty plus a $25.00 registration fee. The $25.00 penalty will
be waived if within 30 days of the unregistered alarm notification, a completed Alarm
Registration Form acceptable to the City of Troy, is submitted with the $25.00 registration fee.
(Rev. 11-09-2009)
AUDIO/VIDEO TAPES
Labor charge (first 30 minutes) $18.00
Charge for each additional 15 minute interval $9.00
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-6
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
Plus actual mailing costs, if applicable
Plus actual cost of tape(s), CD(s) and/or DVD(s):
Audio cassette tape $1.29
VHS tape $1.84
Compact Disc 0.40
Digital Video Disc 0.50
FINGERPRINTS/CRIMINAL CLEARANCES
Fingerprint processing fee $14.00
Local criminal history check/certified copy of local arrest record $18.001
Applicant fingerprint criminal clearance fee $14.002
1This fee is for verification of applicants information, checking the LEIN wanted persons file
and criminal clearance processing, along with a certified copy of report, if necessary
2The total fee will include a $14.00 Troy Police Department fingerprint processing fee and a
State of Michigan fingerprint processing fee. State of Michigan fees vary depending upon the
reason for the applicant fingerprints
LIQUOR LICENSES (Chapter 101)
Application and investigation fee $1,000.00
Application for additions or amendments to existing licenses $300.00
One-day liquor license $10.00
PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS AND ITEMS (Chapter 69)
Dealer Fee: Per Establishment $50.00
Fees collected by City Clerk as part of application and permitting process
PRELIMINARY BREATH TEST ADMINISTRATION FEES
City of Troy residents $5.00
Non-residents $10.00
REPORTS
Labor charge-Except CAD Short Report (first 15 minutes) $7.00
Charge for each additional 15 minute interval $7.00
Each page, after the first 10 pages 0.32
CAD Short Report $3.50
These fees also apply to true copies of reports as required by subpoena
TAXICAB/LIMOUSINE DRIVER AND PEDDLER LICENSE CLEARANCES
Taxicab/Limousine driver license processing fee (Chapter 65) $24.003
Peddler license processing fee (Chapter 74) $24.003
3The fee includes $10.00 for the clearance, plus a $14.00 fingerprint processing fee
Fees collected by City Clerk as part of application and permitting process
(04-20-2009)
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-7
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
Pool Room (Chapter 68)
Annual Fee $50.00
Plus - Each table over one $5.00
Shows (Chapter 68): Tent per day $100.00
Sidewalk and Approach Permits (Chapter 34)
Minimum Permit Fee $35.00
Each additional 50 square feet above 500 square feet $1.00
Re-Inspection Fee $20.00
(Rev. 07-07-2008)
Sign Permits (Chapter 85)
Painted Wall Sign  under 100 square feet $ 75.00
Painted Wall Sign  101  200 square feet $100.00
Painted Wall Sign  201  300 square feet $100.00
Attached Wall Sign  under 100 square feet $100.00
Attached Wall Sign  101  200 square feet $125.00
Attached Wall Sign  201  300 square feet $150.00
Ground Sign  under 100 square feet $125.00
Ground Sign  101  200 square feet $150.00
Ground Sign  201  300 square feet $175.00
Road Closure Construction Sign $ 30.00
Special Event Sign $ 30.00
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
Skating Rink (Chapter 68): Annual Fee $100.00
Smoking Lounges (Chapter 77): Annual Fee $100.00
(Enacted: 08-06-2007)
Solicitors - See Peddlers (Chapter 74)
Special Events
Event $25.00
Temporary Street Closing $25.00
Taxicabs (Chapter 65)
Annual Fee: Each Vehicle $20.00
Annual Fee: Drivers License $10.00
Temporary Merchant Businesses (Chapter 61)
Bond Requirements - $500.00 per Chapter 61, Section 10
Christmas Tree Sales - Per application $100.00
Sidewalk Sales - Per application $100.00
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-8
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
Sidewalk Sales - Per extension $50.00
(Rev. 05-11-2009)
Temporary Indoor Uses:
Per application $100.00
Per extension $100.00
(Rev. 11-24-2008; Enacted: 01-01-2009)
Temporary Outdoor Use:
Per application $100.00
Per extension $100.00
(Rev. 11-24-2008; Enacted: 01-01-2009)
Tennis Courts  Indoor (Chapter 68): Annual Fee $100.00
Theaters (Chapter 68)
Annual Fee  Indoor $100.00
Annual Fee  Outdoor $100.00
VITAL STATISTICS
Birth Certificates
1st Copy Oakland County
Each additional copy Fee Structure
(Enacted: 05-14-2007; Effective: 07-01-2007)
Death Certificates
1st Copy Oakland County
Each additional copy Fee Structure
(Enacted: 05-14-2007; Effective: 07-01-2007)
VOTER INFORMATION
CD or Floppy Disk $5.00/1,000 records
$5.00 minimum
Labels 0.02 per label
$10.00 minimum
List $5.00/1,000 records
List: Absent Voter Daily Request 0.25 per page
Electronic Requests:
Each Transfer $5.00 each
Electronic Absent Voter Daily Request (each transfer) 0.50 each
WEDDINGS AT THE GAZEBO
Resident $50.00
Non-resident $75.00
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-9
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
Marriage Ceremony (Performed by the Mayor) $25.00
PLANNING DEPARTMENT FEES (Chapter 41)
Subdivision Tentative Preliminary Plat:
Application Fee $1,000.00 plus
$10.00 per lot
Escrow Fees $1,500.00
Subdivision Final Preliminary Plat:
Application Fee $100.00 plus
$10.00 per lot
Escrow Fees $1,500.00
Subdivision Final Plat $100.00 plus
$10.00 per lot
Subdivision Approval Renewal (before expiration):
Application Fee $500.00 plus
$10.00 per lot
Escrow Fees $1,500.00
(Rev. 02-16-2009)
PLANNING DEPARTMENT FEES (Chapter 39)
Rezoning Request:
Application Fee $1,800.00
Escrow Fees $1,500.00
Conditional Rezoning Request:
Application Fee
$2,800.00
($1,800 rezoning
request+$1,000
site plan review)
Escrow Fees $2,000.00
Preliminary Site Plan Review:
Application Fee $1,000.00
Escrow Fees $1,500.00
Preliminary Site Plan Review:
(Deviation from Parking Space Requirements ONLY)
Application Fee $500.00
Escrow Fees $1,500.00
(03-23-2009; Effective: 04-01-2009)
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-10
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
Final Site Plan Review: $100.00
Site Plan Renewal (before expiration):
Application Fee $500.00
Escrow Fees $1,500.00
Special Use Request:
Application Fee $1,800.00
Escrow Fees $1,500.00
Special Use Request (before expiration):
Application Fee $500
Escrow Fees $1,500
Zoning Text Amendment: $1,500
Street Vacation Request:
Application Fee $500.00
Escrow Fees $1,500.00
Zoning Compliance Letter: $100.00
P.U.D. - Pre-Application Meeting: $300.00
P.U.D. - Concept Development Plan Review:
Application Fee $3,000.00
Escrow Fees $5,000
P.U.D. - Preliminary Development Plan Review:
Application Fee $1,500.00
Escrow Fees $5,000.00
P.U.D.  Final Development Plan Review: $500.00
P.U.D.  Compliance Inspection: $100.00 per hour
Site Condominium - Preliminary Site Plan Review:
Application Fee $1,000.00 plus
$10.00 per unit
Escrow Fees $2,000.00
Site Condominium - Final Site Plan Review: $100.00 plus
$10.00 per unit
Site Condominium Approval Renewal (before expiration):
Application Fee $500.00 plus
$10.00 per unit
Escrow Fees $2,000.00
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-11
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
Public Hearing Re-notification $300.00 per
public hearing
Planning Commission Study Session
(no public hearing required) $200.00
Site Plan Compliance  Re-inspection $100.00 per hour
(02-16-2009)
FIRE DEPARTMENT FEES (Chapter 93)
Permit Fee: Fireworks  Public Display (Plan Review & 1 Site Visit) $180.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Permit Fee: Occupancy $ 90.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Permit Fee: Approved Open Burning  IFC 2015, 307.2 $180.00
Permit fee covers plan review & one site visit
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Permit Fee: Special Event $ 90.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Hazardous Material Permit Fees
Permit Fee (Covers initial plan review and two site visits) $250.00
Additional Site Visits / Plan Review (per visit/review/per insp.)
NOTE: Fee will be calculated prior to permit issue
$ 90.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Annual Renewal Fee (for Applications Returned Prior to Expiration Date):
If no changes with product, amounts or locations $100.00
If an amount exceeds maximum allowable quantities of IFC 2015 Table
5003.1.1(1) or 5003.1.1(4) $250.00
Hazmat Permit Renewal Applications received after expiration date are
subject to new permit application fees.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Sprinkler Systems-Riser(s) & Sprinkler Heads:
1 - 20 Heads $125.00
21 - 50 Heads $150.00
51 - 100 Heads $225.00
101 - 200 Heads $300.00
201 - 300 Heads $400.00
301 - 400 Heads $550.00
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-12
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
401 - 500 Heads $600.00
501 + Heads $675.00*
*Plus $0.75 per head over 500
(Rev. 03-23-2009; Effective: 04-01-2009)
Standpipes $90.00**
**Base Fee plus $10.00 per hose connection
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Fire Pump $250.00
Dry or Wet Chemical Fire Suppression Systems $250.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Each additional system reviewed at the same time $ 90.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Total Flooding Agent Extinguishing System
***Includes associated alarm devices
$250.00***
(Rev. 03-23-2009; Effective: 04-01-2009)
Alterations, additions, or modifications to existing system $ 90.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Subsequent plan reviews & inspections of the same system $ 90.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Fire Alarm and Detection Systems and Devices:
Minimum Permit Fee $ 90.00
Control Panel $ 90.00
Central Station Connection $ 45.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Fire Initiating Device (Smoke Detector, Heat Detector, etc.) $ 25.00
Each Additional Initiating or Auxiliary Control Device $ 10.00
First Auxiliary Control Device (Control Switch, Relay, etc.) $ 25.00
Each Additional Auxiliary Control Device $ 10.00
First Audio/Visual Device (Horn, Speaker, Bell Strobe, etc.) $ 25.00
Each Additional Audio/Visual Device $ 10.00
First Communication Device (Firefighter Phone, etc.) $ 25.00
Each Additional Communication Device $ 10.00
Exception: One and two family residential alarm systems must meet the requirements of the
Troy Building Department.
Other System or Device / Item $ 90.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Chapter 60  Fees and Bonds Required
60-13
ITEM/SERVICE: FEE:
Additional Fees
Each Re-inspection: During Normal Working Hours per hour $ 90.00 per hour
Each Re-inspection: During Non-working hours with a minimum
assessment of three hours per person $135.00 per hour
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Occupancy Permit Fee $90.00
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Cost Recovery-Hazardous Materials
See Recovery
Charges Fee
Schedule in
Cost Recover-Fires Section 60.04
60.04 Recovery Charges Troy Fire Department: Apparatus, Equipment, and
Personnel Cost
(Does not include personnel costs)
Apparatus Charges for Each Hour or Portion Thereof
Engine $446.00 -
Grass Truck $ 47.00 $110.00
Ladder Truck $828.00 -
Pumper-Ladder $448.00 -
Air Tender $146.00 -
Mobile Command $400.00 $147.00
Field Comm. Unit* $216.00 -
Rescue Truck* $347.00 -
Staff Vehicle $ 38.00 -
(Rev. 03-23-2009; Effective: 04-01-2009)
Personnel
The cost of Firefighters and Officers are to be commensurate with their pay rate, fringe
benefits, and overtime rate where applicable.
(Rev.03-23-2009; Effective: 04-01-2009)
Expendable Items
Replacement cost for reasonable and customary items necessary in firefighting, hazmat, and
EMS operations may be recovered. Examples of such items that can be recovered are
extinguishing agents (Foam, AFFF), absorbent materials, chemical suits, etc.
(Rev. 03-23-2009; Effective: 04-01-2009)
Non-Retrievable Items
Items that are lost, stolen, or destroyed will be charged replacement value.
(03-23-2009; Effective: 04-01-2009)
Chapter 61  Temporary Merchant Businesses
61-1
1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter:
 Applicant means a person that submits an application for a Temporary Merchant
Business License.
 Christmas Tree Sales means the retail sale of real Christmas trees.
 Lot means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main
building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the
principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open spaces as are
required under the provisions of Chapter 39. A lot may or may not be specifically
designated as such on public records.
 Mobile windshield repair means a temporary outdoor use involving the injection,
curing and polishing of specially formulated resins into a damaged area of an
automobile windshield.
 Person means any individual, firm partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation.
 Sidewalk Sales means a promotional sales event conducted on the sidewalk or
other hard surface along the front or side of the particular establishment in which
such business is normally conducted.
 Temporary means a business that operates for ninety (90) days or less.
 Temporary Indoor Use means a person that engages in selling goods and wares
or providing a service from any lot or premises indoors on a temporary basis.
 Temporary Outdoor Use means a person that engages in selling goods and wares
or providing a service from any lot or premises outdoors on a temporary basis, not
including sidewalk sales or Christmas tree sales.
2. License Required.
No person shall operate a Temporary Merchant Business in the City of Troy without first
obtaining a license pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. The following shall be
considered Temporary Merchant Businesses:
a. Temporary Indoor Uses;
b. Temporary Outdoor Uses;
c. Sidewalk Sales;
d. Christmas Tree Sales.
Chapter 61  Temporary Merchant Businesses
61-2
3. Application for Temporary Merchant Business License.
a. An applicant shall submit to the Clerks Office a fully completed application, on a form
furnished by the City Clerk.
b. The Application, at a minimum shall include the following information:
i. The full and complete name and current address of the applicant(s).
1. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall be
listed, and a copy of any partnership agreement shall be attached to the
application.
2. If the applicant is a privately held corporation, the name and address of each
corporate officer, member of the board of directors, and stockholder shall be
listed, and a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be attached to the
application.
3. If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, the name and address of each
corporate officer, member of the board of directors and stockholder who owns
ten (10) percent or more of the corporate stock shall be listed on the
application.
4. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the name and address of each
member, manager, or person with a membership interest shall be listed, and
the articles of organization shall be attached to the application.
ii. The complete name, permanent address, and telephone number of the proposed
licensed business.
iii. A written statement as to the applicants experience in operating similar
businesses in Troy or other communities.
iv. A concise statement as to the individual applicants past employment or business
practice including identification of other communities where the proposed licensed
was operated.
v. Information related to the businesss operation, which includes the following:
1. Requested length of license;
2. Proposed use;
3. The days and hours of operation.
vi. Any other information pertinent to the applicant and the proposed business
operation.
Chapter 61  Temporary Merchant Businesses
61-3
c. The applicant shall also attach a sketch plan, drawn to scale, which shows the
following information:
i. The parcel boundaries of the property where the proposed business will be
located.
ii. The footprint and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings and structures
on the subject property.
iii. All curb cuts, drive aisles, and parking spaces on the property.
iv. The exact location of the proposed Temporary Merchant Business, including the
exact location of any and all of the following: signage, sales, display or service
areas, staff and customer parking areas, required restroom facility, and other
activities associated with the proposed Temporary Merchant Business.
4. Licensing.
Temporary Merchant Business Licenses shall also comply with the provisions of Chapter
59 of this Code.
5. License Fees.
The fee for a Temporary Merchant Business License application is listed in Chapter 60 of
this Code.
6. Application Review and Investigation.
a. After the City Clerk has received a completed Temporary Merchant Business
application, said application shall be forwarded to the following City Departments for
review and investigation:
i. Police:
ii. Fire;
iii. Building Inspection;
iv. Planning Department;
v. Risk Management;
vi. Any additional City Department that the City Manager or his/her designee deems
necessary.
b. During regular business hours or at another mutually agreeable time, City
representatives shall be granted access onto the property to complete the necessary
application investigation.
Chapter 61  Temporary Merchant Businesses
61-4
c. The City Clerk shall be responsible for determining whether the application meets the
standards for approval of this ordinance.
7. Standards for Approval.
Each Temporary Merchant Business shall meet all of the following Standards for
Approval:
a. The proposed use is permitted as a principal use within the underlying zoning district,
as set forth in the City of Troy Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 39 of this Code. The only
exceptions are the following:
i. Christmas tree sales within the B-1, B-2 and B-3 Zoning Districts as well as
locations licensed before 1993.
ii. Mobile windshield repair within the B-2, B-3 and H-S Zoning Districts.
b. The applicant has provided written evidence that he or she owns or leases the
premises at which the applicant will operate, or the applicant has permission from the
property owner to operate temporarily on the property. Any restrictions imposed by the
property owner shall be clearly identified.
c. The location of the proposed Temporary Merchant Business does not negatively
impact public health, safety and welfare, including but not limited to traffic flow,
pedestrian circulation, and off-street parking.
d. Proposed signage complies with the provisions of Chapter 85 Signs.
e. The applicant shall maintain insurance (demonstrated with a certificate of insurance),
and shall name the City as an additional insured, for general liability insurance
coverage in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00. No cancellation or reduction in
coverage may occur during the operation of the Temporary Merchant Business.
f. The Temporary Merchant Business shall be located within 500 feet of a restroom that
is accessible to employees and customers.
8. Restrictions.
a. No license shall be issued to:
i. An applicant whose previous Temporary Merchant Business License was revoked
by the City of Troy for cause.
ii. An applicant who does not satisfy the current ordinance requirements, even if
previously granted a license.
iii. A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership qualify to
obtain a license.
Chapter 61  Temporary Merchant Businesses
61-5
iv. A corporation if any officer, manager or director or a stock owner or stockholders
owning more than five (5) percent of the stock of such corporation would not be
eligible to receive a license.
v. An applicant whose business is operated by a manager or agent, unless such
manager or agent possesses qualifications similar to those required of the
licensee.
vi. An applicant who has been convicted or found responsible for a violation of any
federal, state, or local law involving moral turpitude, fraud, theft, violence, or
controlled substances.
vii. An applicant who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does
not have a lease therefore for the full period for which the license is issued, or
does not have permission to operate at the location.
viii.An applicant who is in default to the City.
b. The license shall expire after ninety (90) consecutive days on one calendar year.
Licenses shall be renewable once per calendar year. The total operational period per
license shall not exceed one-hundred eighty (180) days per calendar year.
c. The hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 9 a.m. and 9 p.m.
d. If the applicant operates a temporary outdoor use, the operation shall be broken down
and removed entirely from the site every day. No overnight storage of any kind shall
be allowed. This requirement shall not apply to approved Christmas Tree Sales or
Sidewalk Sales.
e. Sidewalk Sales are permitted only within B-1, B-2 and B-3 Zoning Districts. Licenses
for sidewalk sales shall not be issued more than once during any consecutive thirty
(30) day period on any individual parcel or within any shopping center. Each permit
shall be valid for not more than seventy-two (72) hours. The applicant shall certify to
the City Clerk that he/she has notified all other commercial establishments within said
shopping center at the time the application is submitted. Outdoor sales areas shall be
designed in accordance with accessibility requirements of the Michigan Building Code.
Outdoor sales areas shall occur and shall occupy that portion of the sidewalk that is
immediately adjacent to the front of the business establishment. Displays shall not
extend beyond said sidewalk either into a drive or parking lot or laterally beyond the
limits of the establishment to which a license has been issued.
9. Display of License.
A Temporary Merchant Business License issued pursuant to this Chapters provisions
shall be displayed in a prominent location visible to customers or clients at all times.
Chapter 61  Temporary Merchant Businesses
61-6
10. Bond Required.
No license shall be issued until the applicant deposits a five hundred dollar ($500.00)
bond for each lot where the business will be operated. Each bond shall be retained by the
Clerks Office for a period of not less than ten (10) days after the date of expiration of the
license. Said bond shall then be returned to the applicant upon its release being approved
by the Building Inspector certifying in writing that the licensed premises to which said
bond was applicable is cleared of all left-over equipment, vehicles and debris. This clean
up shall occur within ten (10) days or City shall cause such clean up to be completed, and
shall charge costs back to the applicant. The bond shall be used first to recoup these
costs and additional amounts required shall be collected in any manner allowed by law. In
the event that any licensee fails to clear the premises, the Building Inspector may cause
the premises to be cleared and the cost thereof shall be deducted from the bond and the
balance, if any, shall be returned to the licensee.
11. Revocation and Suspension of License.
The City Manager, or his or her designee, may immediately revoke or suspend a
Temporary Merchant Business License if the applicant violates any of this Ordinances
provisions, or for other good cause. The procedure for the suspension and revocation of
the license shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 59 of this Code.
12. Violations and Penalties.
a. A violation of any section of this Chapter is a Municipal Civil Infraction subject to the
provisions of Chapter 100 of the Code of the City of Troy.
b. Each day that a violation continues is a separate Municipal Civil Infraction violation.
Sanctions for each violation of said sections shall include a fine of not more than
$500.00, costs, damages and injunctive orders as authorized by Chapter 100.
(Rev.: 11-24-2008; Enacted: 01-01-2009)
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-1
61A.1. SHORT TITLE.
This Chapter may be known and may be cited as the City of Troy Film Production Ordinance.
61A.2. PURPOSE.
This Chapter sets forth rules and regulations to govern and authorize individuals and film
companies to conduct filming activities in the City without unreasonably impacting the peace
and comfort of the residents of the community; to assure that such activities are consistent
with considerations of the public health, safety, and general welfare; to ensure the protection
of property; and to provide a streamlined process for issuing film production permits. The
requirements provided in this Chapter shall be separate and in addition to those provisions of
the City of Troy Code of Ordinances, and/or other codes adopted by reference, regarding
business regulation and licensing. Any and all fees provided in Chapter 60 are intended to
cover the cost of investigation and processing permits for filming, and for recovery of costs to
the City for use of City personnel, equipment and/or supplies as specified herein, and shall be
in addition to all other applicable licenses and/or permits.
61A.3. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
(A) Day: Any calendar day beginning at 12:00 a.m. and ending at 11:59 p.m.
(B) Base Camp: The location in the City established as the headquarters or command
center for the permittees filming activities.
(C) Film: Single media or multimedia entertainment content for distribution or exhibition to
the general public by any means and media in any digital media format, film, or
videotape, including, but not limited to, a motion picture, documentary, television series,
television miniseries, television special, interstitial television programming, long-form
television, interactive television, music videos, interactive games, video games,
commercials, internet programming, internet video, sound recording, video, digital
animation, or interactive website. The use of the words film, filming or filming
production in this Chapter shall include all types of media set out in this definition.
(D) Filming: The act(s) of undertaking, producing, or creating a film regardless of the
intended viewing audience. The term also includes the setup and dismantling of all
related equipment.
(E) News Media: The filming for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned, or on scene
television news broadcasting by reporters, photographers, or camera operators, but not
including magazine or documentary programs filmed, edited, and prepared for
commercial purposes.
(F) Personal Film: A film for private or family use, including, but not limited to, family event
filming or a film of security footage.
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-2
(G) Student Film: A film production by a student of a public or private school or college
where the production is for school or college credit and from which no profit is taken.
61A.4. PERMIT REQUIRED.
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, it is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business or activity of filming at any place within the City of Troy without a film production
permit from the City, other than in a motion picture or television studio in an appropriate zoning
district with no outside storage of filming equipment. Any person interested in filming within the
City shall complete, in full, a film production permit application that shall be submitted with the
required application fees to the City Clerk. A film production permit does not constitute or grant
permission to use or occupy property not owned, leased or controlled by the City if such
filming activity is deemed by the City of Troy to impact public safety and/or be in the public
interest.
61A.5. EXEMPTIONS.
(A) The City has chosen to exempt certain film productions from the permitting requirement
of this Ordinance for productions which are not likely to interfere in any substantial way
with the health, safety or welfare of the public. The City reserves the right to require
specific conditions, including, but not limited to, proof of insurance approved by the City,
if the City, in its sole discretion, determines those conditions are necessary to protect
the public or property even though there is no film production permit requirement. All
individuals and entities, whether required to get a film production permit or exempt,
shall comply with all other Troy Ordinances, and federal and state law.
(B) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:
1. The creation of a personal film;
2. The creation of news media;
3. The filming of motion pictures for use in a criminal investigation, civil proceeding,
or emergencies such as fires, floods, or police actions;
4. The filming of motion pictures and activities associated therewith which occur
upon commercial property which is owned or leased for more than 3 months by
the enterprise or individual conducting the filming and none of the activities are
open to view by the general public. To be eligible for this exemption, all trailers,
vans for personnel, equipment, displays, sets, and storage of other types of
equipment or materials shall not be visible from any public or private roadway
whether within the City of Troy or a neighboring community and the activities do
not interfere in any way with the public right-of-way or impact neighboring private
property. Further, this exemption shall not be construed to authorize the
violation of any laws, including the City of Troys Code of Ordinances;
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-3
5. The filming of motion pictures and activities associated therewith, which occur
upon residential property which is owned or leased for more than 3 months by
the enterprise or individual conducting the filming and none of the activities are
open to view by the general public. To be eligible for this exemption, all trailers,
vans for personnel, equipment, displays, sets, and storage of other types of
equipment or materials shall not be visible from any public or private roadway
whether within the City of Troy or a neighboring community and the activities do
not interfere in any way with the public right-of-way or impact neighboring private
property. Further, this exemption shall not be construed to authorize the
violation of any laws, including the City of Troys Code of Ordinances;
6. A film or multimedia broadcast or transmission on screen monitors of a live
performance within a live entertainment venue or for training purposes, but only if
the transmission is not filmed simultaneously for distribution by any method to
the general public;
7. Education, government, and public access and local origination programs for
cable television systems franchised within the City;
8. Filming done by a church, school or civic organization for broadcast to its
membership and/or students;
9. Filming by the City, including, but not limited to, filming of a sewer line or
preparation of promotional films, or training of employees;
10. The filming of competitive athletic events, parades, or other similar events of a
public nature, when in attendance as a member of the public and a spectator;
11. The creation of a student film, unless the filming activities utilize or adversely
impact public ways or are conducted outdoors in residential or commercial areas;
12. Local commercials (film or still photography) produced entirely on private
property for purposes of advertising local businesses and merchants, so long as
the equipment, personnel, and subject connected with the commercials do not
interfere in any way with the public right-of-way or impact neighboring private
property, or use pyrotechnics or other hazardous special effects;
13. Still photographers, who are photographing in a public area, and who do not
encroach upon the public right-of-way with equipment or personnel;
14. Films produced entirely for training of employees or personnel that are produced
within the employers property and do not utilize or adversely impact any public
ways and are not produced outdoors in residential or commercial areas; and
15. Any other activity not deemed to impact public safety and/or be in the public
interest by the City Manager or his/her designee.
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-4
61A.6. MANDATORY PRE-APPLICATION MEETING; APPLICATION.
(A) Pre-Application Meeting. Any person desiring to conduct film production activities shall
meet with the City Manager or his/her designee to communicate to the City of Troy its
intentions and to determine if it is exempt from obtaining a filming permit. Preliminary
information concerning pre-application meetings and permit procedures may be found
on the City of Troys website: www.troymi.gov, including any revisions, or at the City
Managers Office.
(B) Application. Any person determined by the City of Troy to be non-exempt from
obtaining a filming permit at a pre-application meeting shall make application to the City
Clerk on the appropriate form provided by the City Clerk. The form must be fully
completed, signed and accompanied by the required administrative fee(s) and any
other documentation required by this Chapter, including but not limited to, plans as
required under Section 61A.7, an executed hold harmless agreement, and valid
insurance certificate, before it will be processed. The permit applicant shall supply the
following information on the application:
1. Name, permanent street address, and telephone numbers of applicant, including
mobile phone and email addresses and the names, addresses, and telephone
numbers, including mobile phone numbers, of the person(s) in charge of the
location and responsible for the applicants and applicants employees conduct.
Individuals, partnerships, corporations, and limited liability companies shall be
required to submit all information designated on the official application form and
shall submit any requested documents as indicated on the form;
2. Name, address and twenty-four (24) hour telephone numbers, including mobile
phone numbers, email addresses, and local addresses of a least two (2)
persons to be contacted in the event of emergency situations;
3. Name (or working title) of the film or project, and the nature of the proposed
motion picture, television production, or photographic production;
4. Location(s), date(s), time(s), and activities of the proposed filming, and an
estimate of the maximum number of attendees expected at the filming during
each day or time. If the proposed filming involves the use of private property, the
full name and address of the property owner where the filming is to occur and a
signed affidavit from the owner granting permission for the proposed use of the
property in question shall be provided. If, in the discretion of the City Manger or
his/her designee it appears that the peace and tranquility of neighboring property
owners may be disturbed by the filming, the City may send notice of the filming
to the neighboring property owners who are within a 300-foot radius of filming
site;
5. The maximum number of individuals in the cast and crew anticipated at any one
filming site within the City;
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-5
6. The maximum number of vehicles and other equipment, including, but not limited
to, vehicles and equipment used during the filming and cast and crew private
vehicles that are anticipated at any one filming site within the City, a parking plan
as set out in Chapter 61A.7. If overnight parking and locations are needed at one
or more locations, the applicant should provide a plan for that overnight parking
as set out in Chapter 61A.7;
7. Any requests for special assistance from the City at any location, including, but
not limited to, street closure, traffic control, crowd control and emergency or
standby services;
8. A statement of intent to use animals or reptiles, chemicals, explosives, special
effects or fire, or to engage in any other hazardous activity and a description of
such use or activities with specificity;
9. Special conditions or requests by the applicant;
10. Expiration date for the permit, which is the estimated date that all filming,
restoration and clean-up will be completed. The actual expiration date of the
permit will be determined by the City;
11. A sworn statement as to the truth of the statements in the application. If the
applicant is a corporation, limited liability company or business, the application
shall be signed by one (1) principal officer of the corporation company or
business;
12. In addition to the requirements of this Chapter, any applicant who engages in
any activity that requires compliance with any federal, state, or local regulations,
including additional licenses or permits, shall present evidence of satisfactory
compliance with such regulations; and
13. Each application shall be accompanied by the administrative fee(s). Before the
issuance of a film production permit, the applicant may be required to submit a
cost deposit for City services and a cash bond, as set out in Chapter 61A.8.
14. Attachment of the valid certificates of insurance and executed hold harmless
agreement documents.
61A.7 APPLICATION  PLANS SUBMITTAL.
Each applicant for a film production permit shall digitally submit as part of its application a
detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams, where applicable, of the following:
(A) A sketch or sketches of the filming site with dimensions showing the following:
1. Traffic and parking control plans for the base camp, if any, and each location
showing traffic patterns, right-of-ways to be closed or intruded upon and any onstreet
or off-street parking locations for work trucks, vehicles to be used in the
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-6
film, crew parking, sanitary facilities, catering, and non-essential production
vehicles;
2. A list of the anticipated duration of the proposed activities and daily hours of
operation for each location;
3. A plan for cleanup and waste disposal for each location;
61A.8. FEES, COST DEPOSITS AND CASH BOND.
(A) Fees, Cost Deposit and Cash Bond. The applicant shall be required to provide
information on the application to be used to determine the amount of the administrative
fee(s), cost deposit and cash bond. Administrative fee(s), cost deposit and cash bonds,
may include the following:
1. Application Fee. A processing fee in an amount as set out in Chapter 60 to
reimburse the City for the estimated personnel costs required to evaluate the
application and establish conditions of approval. The application fees are nonrefundable.
2. Public Property Use Fee. A fee in an amount established as set out in Chapter
60 to compensate the City for the use of public property. Additional costs and
cash bonds may be required as set out in this Ordinance.
3. Hazardous Materials/Pyrotechnical Fees. A separate permit fee for use of
hazardous materials or pyrotechnics.
4. Cost Deposit for Special Conditions. Estimated costs assessed by the City
Manager or his/her designee for the implementation of special conditions as
requested by the applicant in the application. Before a film production permit is
issued, the applicant shall be required to pay in advance the approximate total
costs as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee.
5. Cost Deposit for Use of City Personnel, Equipment and Supplies. Estimated
costs assessed by the City Manager or his/her designee to provide City
personnel, whether requested by applicant/permittee or required by the City for
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, including, but not limited to,
inspections by City personnel of the filming site, the presence of stand-by
personnel before, during or after filming, and/or the setting up of equipment and
providing for traffic or crowd control. Costs shall include, but not be limited to,
employee wages including overtime, fringe benefits, supervision, administrative
overhead and the hourly cost for the use of equipment and supplies. Before a
film production permit is issued, the applicant shall be required to pay in advance
the approximate total costs as determined by the City Manager or his/her
designee.
6. Cash Bond. A cash bond shall be required prior to the issuance of a film
production permit in an amount to include the estimated cost deposit, equipment,
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-7
supplies and special conditions, and for the restoration and clean-up of any film
location(s) used by permittee. The cash bond may be waived by the City
Manager (?), or his/her designee, if an acceptable alternative method of
providing financial protection to the City of Troy is provided for damages and/or
clean up at the close of filming. After a film production permit is issued, if at any
time it is determined that additional personnel, equipment, supplies or special
conditions are needed or the City will incur additional costs not covered by the
cost deposit and cash bond, the permittee shall immediately deposit with the City
additional money as part of either its cost deposit or cash bond. Failure to do so
will result in a revocation of the film production permit. If, and only if, all of the
Citys costs for any service, administrative fee or expense have been paid in full,
the portion of the remaining cost deposit and cash bond will be returned in full as
set out in Section 8 below.
7. Additional Fees and/or Costs. This Ordinance shall not limit the Citys ability to
assess additional fees and/or costs for situations not provided for in the
Ordinance if those situations have an impact on public resources or public
safety.
8. Within sixty (60) days of the expiration of the permit or an extension of the
permit, the City Clerk or Manager or his/her designee shall send the permittee by
mail or other method agreed to in writing by the permittee and the City, a final
invoice of all of the Citys outstanding costs with credit for the cost deposit and
cash bond. The permittee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice
to submit payment for the full invoice amount to the City by cash or a check sent
to: City Clerk, City of Troy, 500 W. Big Beaver Road, Troy, Michigan 48084. In
the event the permittee fails to fully reimburse the City within the thirty (30) day
time frame, the City shall deduct the full amount of any unpaid fees or costs
amounts from the cost deposit and cash bond held on behalf of the permittee
and deposit those funds in the City accounts. Those funds shall become the
property of the City and are not refundable to the permittee, its heirs, successors
or assigns. If there are any funds remaining from the cost deposit and cash
bond after deductions by the City, that amount shall be refunded to permittee.
The procedure set out herein for deduction of monies owed to the City from
permittees cost deposit and cash bond, does not waive in any way the Citys
right to take any legal action against the permittee to collect any unpaid fees or
costs incurred by the City as a result of permittees activities. By signing the
application for film production permit, applicant/permittee is agreeing to the
deduction of the Citys cost from the cost deposit and cash bond as set out
herein.
(B) Extensions of Permit; Citys Determination of Need for Personnel Services;
Extraordinary Costs for Investigation; Waiver of Administrative Fee(s).
1. In the event that weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the control of
the permittee require that the date(s) or time(s) of the proposed filming need to
be altered, no additional fees shall be required as long as the City Clerk or
his/her designee is given at least one (1) day notice of the alteration; however,
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-8
additional fee(s) as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee and as
set out in Chapter 60 may be charged if changes or additions or extensions to
the original film production permit are requested which are not beyond the
control of the permittee. A change or addition to the original film production
permit request must be filed with the City Clerk prior to the activities proposed by
the change or addition. Failure to file for a change or addition prior to the activity
requested shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance. A request for
extension shall be filed within three (3) business days prior to the expiration of
the original permit. The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the absolute
discretion to deny a request for alteration or extension of a permit if, after
reviewing the reason for the request for alteration or extension of a permit, no
good cause for the alteration or extension exists.
2. If the City Manager or his/her designee determines that any potential danger to
the public health, safety or general welfare, or to property would be minimized by
the presence of police or fire protection at the site of the filming, the City Clerk
may grant the film production permit with the condition that the permittee pay in
advance to the City the anticipated costs of such police or fire protection or
presence.
3. For film production permits that require the City to provide personnel services to
the permittee in addition to police or fire protection, service costs shall be
imposed for the same. Such costs will be determined by the City Manager or
his/her designee for the services provided and shall be based on the actual cost
incurred by the City in providing such services. Such service costs shall include,
but not be limited to, employee wages including overtime, fringe benefits, and
supervision, administrative overhead, and the hourly costs for the use of any City
equipment and supplies.
4. For all fees set out herein, additional charges may be imposed to cover the cost
of extraordinary film production permit investigation and/or staff costs, if the City
Manager or his/her designee deems the collection of such costs is necessary to
prevent the absorption of any costs by the City and/or its taxpayers.
5. The administrative fee(s) and the property use fee may be waived by the City
Manager or his/her designee for productions conducted by a cable television
company operating under a franchise granted by the City when such productions
are not conducted on public property, do not interfere with public right-of-way,
and which involve fewer than two (2) motor vehicles. Any applicants whose
administrative fee(s) are waived still remain subject to the other provisions of this
Ordinance.
61A.9. LIABILITY PROVISIONS.
The requirements of this section are applicable whenever a permittees operation will utilize or
impact City facilities or property as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee.
(A) Liability Insurance. Before a permit is issued a certificate of insurance must be
submitted evidencing that has permittee insurance in an amount not less than one (1)
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-9
million dollars per occurrence for automobile liability and one (1) million dollars per
occurrence for general liability insurance. Cancellation of the insurance shall be
considered a material breach of the conditions of the permit, and the permit shall
become null and void unless proof of renewal of continuous coverage is immediately
provided to the City Clerk. All insurance carriers shall be licensed and admitted to do
business in the State of Michigan and acceptable to the City Manager or his/her
designee. In the event the use of pyrotechnics or any other potentially hazardous
activity is contemplated, the permittee will be required to submit evidence that it has
insurance which will cover said use or activities in an amount and form acceptable to
the City Manager or his/her designee. An endorsement to any liability policy shall name
the City of Troy, its elected and appointed officials, employees, agents, representatives,
volunteers, and others working on behalf of the City as additional insureds.
(B) Indemnification and hold harmless. To the fullest extent permitted by law, permittee
agrees to defend, pay on behalf of, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Troy, its
elected and appointed officials, employees and volunteers and others working on behalf
of the City of Troy against any and all claims, demands, suits, or loss (including all costs
connected therewith), and for any damages which may be asserted, claimed or
recovered against or from the City of Troy, its elected and appointed officials,
employees, agents, representatives, volunteers and others working on behalf of the
City of Troy. This provision includes, but is not limited to claims of personal injury
(including bodily injury or death) and/or property damage which arises out of or is in any
way connected or associated with the execution of activities by permittee set out in the
application for permit and under the provisions and/or conditions of the permit.
61A.10. INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT AND PROCESSING TIME.
(A) Upon receipt by the City Clerk, copies of the application for a permit required by this
Chapter shall be forwarded to City Administration who shall review and investigate
matters relevant to the application and within ten (10) business days of receipt thereof
shall report their findings and recommendation to the City Clerk.
(B) The Police Department and the Fire Department shall investigate each application for a
film production permit. If during the course of such investigation, the City desires
additional information to assist with determining whether or not such a permit should be
issued, the City is authorized to require the applicant to furnish such additional
information.
(C) By filing the application for a film production permit, the applicant/permittee agrees to
allow for site inspections by the City Administration for purposes of ensuring compliance
with this Chapter, all conditions of the permit, and all applicable State and Federal laws
and the City of Troys Code of Ordinances, including but not limited to, fire codes,
building codes and referenced standards.
(D) If the application satisfies the criteria of this Chapter, the City Clerk shall issue the
permit within ten (10) business days of submission of the film production permit
application.
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-10
(E) A film production permit may not be transferred or assigned to another individual or
entity.
(F) The film production permit must be posted in public view at the filming location at all
times. If posting is not possible due to the location or circumstances of the filming, the
permit shall be produced within a reasonable time upon request by any City official.
61A.11. SPECIFIC CIRCUMSTANCES.
In addition to the criteria listed in this Chapter, the City Manager or his/her designee may also
investigate the application with respect to public health, safety and welfare issues, including,
but not limited to, the following special circumstances and may impose further conditions on
the issuance of a film production permit if warranted:
(A) Hours. Filming is permitted in residentially-zoned neighborhoods between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday; 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
Saturdays, and between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sundays and legal holidays
unless the City approves filming during hours other that those set out herein.
(B) Noise. Filming activities which produce unusual noise such as gunfire, sirens, public
address systems, bull horns, or any other loud noises may be restricted to mitigate the
effects of the activity. Chapter 88, Nuisances, of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances
will be enforced by City Administration.
(C) Aircraft. Helicopter landings or filming from the air are not permitted without explicit
written permission from the City Clerk or his/her designee. The request for written
authorization shall be filed with the application, with a detailed explanation of what
activities are anticipated, when and where.
(D) Public safety personnel. Police and/or fire personnel requirements shall be determined
by those departments and any such personnel shall be at the permittees expense.
Permittee can request additional public safety employees, at its own expense with the
application. The Police Chief or his/her designee may approve the use of additional
police personnel or may require the applicant to contract with a private security firm. At
all times, all police employees approved by the Police Chief or his/her designee shall
constitute and remain City employees and shall be required to enforce all State and
Federal laws and the City of Troys Code of Ordinances. City public safety personnel
shall not be employees of the permittee at any time while assigned by the Police Chief
or the Fire Chief or their designee as public safety personnel.
(E) Rights-of-Ways. No person shall close or impose upon any right-of-way in the City
unless first obtaining permission from the City Manager or his/her designee. The
permittee must obtain permission from the City Manager or his/her designee to string
cable across streets, sidewalks or from a generator to a service point.
(F) Traffic Control and Parking. For any filming that would impair traffic flow or parking in
any manner or for any duration, the permittee shall comply with all traffic control and
parking requirements deemed necessary by the City or private security personnel,
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-11
subject to the approval of the City. The use of City police officers, in addition to being
approved and funded as described in this Chapter, shall depend on the location of
filming since the possible location sites within the City may fall within the jurisdiction of
Oakland County or the State of Michigan.
(G) Adult entertainment. No adult entertainment filming shall be conducted within the City
which depicts nudity, sexual intercourse, simulated sex acts, or other displays
prohibited by State law or the City of Troys Code of Ordinances which could be
observed by member of the general public. Applicants which have as their primary
purpose the display of such acts for distribution to an adult entertainment market or
video provider shall not be granted a permit for filming. A permit issued under this
Chapter does not authorize the production of a film that in any manner requires the use
of property owned by or under the control of the City in violation of Public Act 84 of
2008, MCL 123.1191, et.seq., which prohibits the production of films that include
obscene matter. A permit issued under this Chapter does not authorize the production
of a film on City owned property or property under the control of the City that requires
that individually identifiable records be created and maintained for every performer
pursuant to 18 U.S.C.A. 2557. Film studios engaged in adult entertainment must be
licensed in compliance with Chapter 76 of the City of Troys Code of Ordinances.
(H) Pyrotechnics and special effects. The applicant/permittee shall obtain written
permission from the Fire Chief, or his/her designee, for the use of any hazardous
materials, pyrotechnics or similar special effects. The Fire Chief or his/her designee
shall have the discretion to determine if a separate permit for these types of activities is
required under Federal or State law or the City of Troys Code of Ordinance. The
applicant/permittee is responsible for payment of any permit fees under this section.
(I) Vegetation. The City may impose restrictions on filming in areas with native vegetation,
natural areas, wetlands and similar locations.
(J) Crew size. The City may impose maximum capacity requirements for cast and crew
size for filming operations at a filming location.
(K) Refueling. The City may impose restrictions on refueling operations.
(L) Boundaries. The City may impose requirements concerning the posting of the outer
boundaries of the filming area.
(M) Uniforms/badges. The City may impose restrictions concerning the covering of police,
fire, and other uniforms and/or badges worn by actors when they are not being filmed.
(N) Logos, Insignia. The City may impose conditions and/or restrictions on the use of City
and other public agencies logos, insignias, badges, or decals for filming purposes.
(O) Acknowledgements. The City may require that the permittee properly acknowledge the
assistance of the City in the final film credits.
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-12
(P) Access. The City Manager or his/her designee may request access to behind the
scenes production of any filming activity for purposes of creating promotional videos for
the City. However, the City will honor all conditions of the production company
regarding material that may be disclosed to the public prior to release of the final film or
production.
(Q) Clean-up and Restoration. All clean-up and restoration of a film site shall be completed
on the last day of filming at that location. If not completed, the City may issue a
Municipal civil infraction citation pursuant to Chapter 100, Municipal Civil Infractions, of
the Troy Code of Ordinances and proceed to get a court order to complete the clean-up
and/or restoration and deduct the costs for the full amount of the clean-up and/or
restoration from the cash bond held by the City on behalf of the permittee. Those funds
shall be deposited in a City account and shall become the property of the City and are
not refundable to the permittee, its heirs, successors or assigns
61A.12. GRANT OR DENIAL OF PERMIT; ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES.
(A) The City Clerk, City Manager or his/her designee may deny a permit, if after
investigation, City Administration finds that the activities regulated by this Chapter or the
proposed location of such filming will not comport with the public welfare; or that it will
tend to create a nuisance; or that the character or reputation of the applicant, its
officers, or employees is one of untruthfulness and indecency, or an investigation of the
applicant, its officers, or employees indicates a failure to pay debts at previous filming
venues whether in the City or in another location, or he/she/it has failed to comply with
permit requirements, including, but not limited to, failure to restore and/or clean up
locations or failure to pay the City in full for city services or for failure to pay any other
governmental entity.
(B) The City Administration may promulgate administrative policies and procedures
governing the form, time, and location of any filming activity within the City. Even
though time frames for issuance of permits are set out in this Chapter, the City of Troy
may not always be able to comply with those time lines due to limited, public holidays or
other unanticipated events. Time limits for extensions and appeals will always apply.
Such policies and procedures shall be on file with the City Clerk and the City Managers
office for review by the public and they shall have the force and effect of law as if fully
set forth in this Chapter. In addition to any City policies and procedures, all decisions
concerning the issuance of any film production permit and/or the conditions imposed
thereon shall be made after consideration of the following factors:
1. The health and safety of the public;
2. Disruption of activities of businesses or persons within the affected area;
3. The safety of property within the City;
4. Traffic congestion at particular locations within the City; and
5. The effect on the personnel resources and/or finances of the City.
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-13
61A.13. APPEAL.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City shall have the right to a written appeal of the
approval, conditional approval, or a denial of a film production permit to the City Council. The
appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) business days after notice of the
decision is mailed or transmitted to the applicant. The City Council shall decide the appeal at
the next available regular City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
61A.14 . REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
(A) Any film production permit may be revoked under the following circumstances:
1. Where it has been determined that the permittee has violated or has failed to
comply with any of the terms or conditions of the film production permit;
2. Where it has been determined that the permittee has violated or has failed to
comply with any ordinance, resolution, or applicable regulation;
3. Where it has been determined that the film production permit was granted
pursuant to false or fraudulent information contained in the film production permit
application or verbally provided to the City;
4. Where it has subsequently been determined that filming activity will fail to meet
the criteria enumerated in this Chapter for granting a film production permit; or
5. Where it has been determined that the preservation of the public health, safety
and general welfare demand revocation of the film production permit.
(B) A notice of revocation shall be mailed to the permittee by the City Clerk, by mail, or
personally delivered, stating the grounds for revocation and advising the permittee of
the appeal rights afforded by this Chapter.
61A.15. VIOLATIONS PUNISHABLE AS MISDEMEANORS; NUISANCE PER SE.
(A) Violations of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any of the terms and conditions of
a film production permit is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to $500.00 and
costs and/or a jail term of up to ninety (90) days. It shall also be a misdemeanor to:
1. Provide false or fraudulent information to the City during the permit application
process;
2. Provide any false or fraudulent information to the City after the permit has been
issued, including, but not limited to, the possession or existence of consent or
permission from property owners when required; or
3. Failure or refusal to cease any film activities when ordered to do so by City
Administration due to violations of any City of Troy Code or Ordinance, including
this Chapter, State law or Federal law.
Chapter 61A  Film Production Ordinance
61-14
(B) Any filming or related activity conducted contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall
be and is hereby declared to be an unlawful action and a public nuisance. The City
Council may authorize the commencement of an action at law or in equity in the name
of the City of Troy in any court of competent jurisdiction against the permittee to ensure
compliance with the terms of this Chapter. All remedies prescribed herein will be
cumulative and the use of any one or more remedies by the City shall not preclude the
use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, nor
shall the Citys delay or failure to exercise any remedy result in a waiver of that remedy.
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-1
1. Legislative Findings.
The City of Troy has the authority under state and federal constitutional statutory law to
regulate Telecommunications Systems offering public or private line video, data or voice
services using or crossing a street, highway, rights-of-way or easements in the City. This
Ordinance is intended to minimize the disruption to the streets, highways, rights-of-way,
and easements and to require those who seek to construct a Telecommunications
System to cooperate in the construction of both overhead and underground lines and the
restoration of streets, highways, rights-of-way and easements. The City finds that it has
too many unsightly overhead lines and poles in some sections of the City. They are
proliferating, adversely affecting the public safety, detracting from property values and
reaching maximum safe capacity of poles and underground spaces. The City further finds
that public health, safety and welfare is better served by requiring installation of new utility
lines and wires in underground conduit wherever practical.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the granting of Licenses and Permits for
Telecommunications Systems other than cable television systems.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
3. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this
Ordinance shall be as follows:
1) City means the City of Troy, Michigan.
2) Grantee is any holder of a Telecommunications System License or Permit granted
pursuant to this ordinance.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
3) Gross Revenue shall mean all receipts collected by the Grantee for all
telecommunications and related operations and services within the corporate limits
of the City as well as any other revenue arising from operation or possession of a
Permit regardless of where billed. Gross Revenue shall also include:
a) Access charges paid to the Grantee by other carriers.
b) The leases or re-sales of lines or circuit paths to third parties.
c) All Telecommunications Service revenues charged on a flat rate basis.
d) All Telecommunications Services charged on a usage sensitive or mileage
basis.
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-2
e) All revenues from local services.
f) All revenues from authorized rental of conduit space.
g) All revenues from authorized rentals of any portion of Grantee's Systems,
including plant, facilities, or capacity leased to others.
h) All other revenues collected from Grantee's telecommunications business
pursued within the City, excluding third party billing arrangements not
related to Grantee's telecommunications business.
i) Recoveries of bad debts previously written off and revenues from the sale
or assignment of bad debts. Unrecovered bad debts charged off after
diligent, unsuccessful efforts to collect are excludible from Gross Revenues
from telecommunications business. "Gross Revenue" does not include
revenue uncollected from customers (bad debts) and sale or lease of
customer service equipment, taxes, interconnection fees paid by Grantee to
other telecommunications carriers, or other similar types of pass-through
charges for which Grantee merely acts as a collecting agent and derives no
economic benefit or "markup".
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
4) License is a written agreement granted by resolution for a Telecommunications
System to use the rights-of-way easements, highways, streets, alleys, and other
public places in the City for wires, poles, pipes, conduits or other public utility
facilities, but not to transact local business with another person.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
5) Permit is a non-exclusive, limited authorization to transact local business for the
construction, maintenance, and operation of a Telecommunications System in the
City awarded by ordinance in the form of a contract and accepted by the Grantee.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
6) Person is any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization.
7) Subscriber is any Person who contracts with the Grantee for, or is in any manner
provided Telecommunications Services.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
8) Telecommunications Services include regulated and unregulated services offering
to customers the transmission of 2-way interactive communication and associated
usage.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-3
9) Telecommunications System is a system used or to be used to provide
Telecommunications Service, including public or private line video, data or voice
service to another person, using or crossing a street, highway, rights-of-way, or
easements in the City, other than cable television service offered pursuant to a
Franchise granted under Chapter 63 of the City Code, as amended
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
4. City Approval Required.
1) No Person shall install, construct, or maintain a Telecommunications System in the
City without a telecommunications License or Permit.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2) This ordinance shall apply to any existing cable television system operating
pursuant to a Franchise awarded by the City which the Franchisee uses to transact
local business operating a Telecommunications System.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
3) Before offering or providing any Telecommunications Service, the Grantee shall
obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the
offering or provision of such Telecommunications Services from the appropriate
federal, state and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to the City, upon
the written request of the City, evidence of all such approvals, permits,
authorizations or licenses.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
4) Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as a waiver of any codes, ordinances
or regulations of the City or the City's right to require Grantee or persons utilizing
the Telecommunications Service to secure appropriate permits or authorizations
for such use. No fee or charge may be imposed upon a Grantee for any such
permit or authorization, other than the standard fees or charges generally
applicable to all persons for such permits or authorizations. Such standard fee or
charge shall not be offset against the annual License fee or Permit fee a Grantee
is required to pay to the City under Section 9 of this ordinance.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
5. Issuance.
1) The City may grant one or more Licenses and Permits for a Telecommunications
System in the City subject to this Ordinance.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2) The City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-4
Licenses and Permits for a Telecommunications System as it deems appropriate.
Additional Licenses and Permits shall not be deemed to modify, revoke, terminate
or damage any rights previously granted to any other Grantee.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
3) In the event an application is filed proposing to install facilities within a Permit
territory which overlaps in whole or in part an existing area, a copy shall be served
by the applicant by certified mail upon the current Grantee(s). Applicant shall notify
Grantee of existing overlapping territory. Proof that a copy of the application has
been served upon the current Grantee(s) shall be provided to the City. No
application for overlapping territory shall be processed until proof of service has
been furnished to the City. It is not the intent of this Ordinance to either require or
prohibit overbuilding.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
4) An application for a new, renewed, or amended Permit shall be made in such form
as the City may prescribe by resolution. A new, renewed, or amended Permit
which expands the scope of service shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
$5,000 partial prepayment of the Permit formation fee.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
6. Duration.
Any License or Permit and its rights, privileges, authority, and responsibilities shall take
effect and be in force from and after final acceptance. It shall continue in force and effect
for a period established by the License or Permit not exceeding fifteen (15) years,
provided that, within thirty (30) days after the date of the City's final acceptance of a
License or Permit, the Grantee files with the City Clerk its unconditional acceptance of the
License or Permit, all required letters of credit, and all required construction surety and
insurance certificates, and pays to the City Clerk all reasonable costs actually incurred by
the City in preparing, considering and awarding the License or Permit, including legal,
engineering, technical, publication, and other expenses, including the Permit formation
fee described in Section 9. If a Grantee fails to timely comply with this section, it shall
acquire no rights, privileges, or authority whatsoever from the City. The City Manager may
extend the term of a License or Permit for a period not exceeding one (1) year by written
agreement with a Grantee on reasonable and necessary terms.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
7. Penalty.
Violation of any of the terms of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
of up to Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars or ninety (90) days in jail or both, not excluding
(in addition to) civil damages.
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-5
8. Rate Regulation.
The rates and charges required of a Grantee to obtain a Permit or License for the
provision of Telecommunications Services and for related services (such as equipment
rental, deposits, disconnect fees, and late payment fees) shall be subject to regulation by
the City to the full extent authorized by federal or state law. Changes to rates and charges
shall only be made after notice, hearing, and other requirements of federal or state law.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
9. Permit and License Formation and Annual Fee Payments by Grantee.
1) For the reason that the streets, highways and rights-of-way or easements to be
used by Grantee in the operation of its Telecommunications System within the
boundaries of the City are valuable public properties, some of which are acquired
and maintained by the City at great expense to its taxpayers, and that the grant to
Grantee of the use of said streets, highways, rights-of-way, or easements is a
valuable property right without which Grantee would be required to invest
substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, a Grantee shall pay:
a) A formation fee (i) for Permits: $10,000.00; or (ii) for Licenses: of $
2,000.00; and
b) An annual fee equal to (i) 5% of its gross revenue for Permits, or (ii) an
amount determined as set forth in subsections (2) and (3).
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2) The fee to be charged to a Grantee under clause (ii) of subsection (1)(b) shall be
Grantee's allocated share of the following amounts:
a) The estimated actual cost, excluding acquisition costs incurred by the City,
as a consequence of permitting Grantee to occupy a portion of the public
rights-of-ways and in mediating disputes between the citizens of the City
and Grantee.
b) The estimated actual costs referred to in subsection (a) shall be calculated
every five (5) years by the City Finance Director and shall be subject to
approval by the City Council following a public hearing. The costs referred
to in subsection (a) shall be allocated among all of the Grantees based on
their per linear foot calculation (not number of lines or capacity) of the
Telecommunications Systems located upon, over, across, or under the
roads, bridges, streets, rights-of-way and easements in the City.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-6
3) The annual fee required by subsection (1)(b) may be determined using:
a) A percentage of gross revenues not exceeding five (5%) per cent for
Permits; or
b) Initially $0.40 per linear foot of underground and $0.25 per linear foot of
overhead lines, wires, cables, poles, conduits and like structures, erections
and fixtures upon, over, across, or under the roads, bridges, streets, public
rights-of-way and easements in the City for Licenses or Permits. Subject to
recalculation every five (5) years under subsection 2 (b).
4) Miscellaneous fee considerations:
a) Grantees sharing the same conduit shall each pay a full fee.
b) Grantees sending signals over existing lines owned by another
Telecommunications System for which fees are already paid are not subject
to additional fees.
c) Grantees using the same line to provide cable television service and to
provide Telecommunications Services shall be subject to both a cable
television franchise fee and all License or Permit fees set by this Chapter.
d) The City Council may in its discretion exempt from License or Permit fees a
Telecommunications System lawfully operated by a public school district or
other governmental body created by state law which does not sell
Telecommunications Services to subscribers.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
5) Grantee shall pay to the City for each quarter an amount equal to one fourth (1/4)
of the minimum annual fee, calculated on the basis of a twelve-month
compensation year. Grantee shall forward by check or money order an amount
equal to the quarterly payment by noon of the twenty-fifth day of the calendar
month immediately following the close of the calendar quarter for which the
payment is calculated. Any necessary prorations shall be made.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
6) In the event any quarterly payment is made after noon on the date due, Grantee
shall pay a late payment penalty of the greater of: (i) $100 or (ii) simple interest at
ten percent (10%) annual percentage rate of the total amount past due.
Acceptance of money under this Section shall not in any way limit or inhibit any of
the privileges or rights of the City, whether under this ordinance or otherwise.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
7) In the event the 5% of gross revenue option is utilized, Grantee shall file annually
with the City Manager, no later than ninety (90) days after the end of the Grantee's
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-7
fiscal year, a statement of revenues (for that year) attributable to the operations of
the Grantee's Telecommunications System within the City. Said statement shall be
prepared in compliance with general accepted accounting practices and auditing
standards. This statement of revenues shall present a detailed breakdown of
Gross Revenues and uncollectible accounts for the year. This statement of
revenues shall be certified by an officer of the Grantee whose statement shall
accompany the statement of revenues.
Any transactions which have the effect of circumventing payment of required fees
and/or evasion of payment of fees by non-collection or non-reporting of Gross
Revenues, bartering, or any other means which enable a Grantee to evade the
actual collection of revenues for business conducted by Grantee are prohibited.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
8) License and Permit fees shall be in addition to any other tax, charge, fee, or
payment due the City by a Grantee.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
10. New Developments.
1) Grantee may, from time to time, implement new services and developments
allowed by law. A Grantee may not provide cable television services as defined by
the U.S. Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984.
2) In addition to those matters required in a Permit, Grantees make the following
express acknowledgments:
a) That the City has the right to make reasonable amendments to this
ordinance which do not materially increase any financial, economic or
performance burden to the detriment of a Grantee during the term of the
License or Permit upon ninety (90) days notice to the Grantee, or without
notice with respect to an emergency amendment. It further recognizes and
agrees that the City shall in no way be bound to renew or extend the
License or Permit at the end of any License or Permit term.
b) That a Grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the City for any
loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of the failure of City to have the
authority to grant all or any part of a License or Permit. A Grantee must
expressly acknowledge that on accepting a License or Permit it does so
relying on its own investigation and understanding of the power and
authority of the City.
c) That acceptance of a License or Permit a Grantee acknowledges that it has
not been induced to enter into a License or Permit by any understanding or
promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of
City or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of a
License or Permit not expressed in this Ordinance.
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-8
d) That Grantee further acknowledges by the acceptance of a License or
Permit that it has carefully read its terms and conditions, and does accept
all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
3) However, if any such state or federal law or regulation shall require a Grantee to
perform any service, or shall allow a Grantee to perform any service, or shall
prohibit a Grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of the
License or Permit or of any law or regulation of the City, then as soon as possible,
a Grantee shall notify the City of the point of conflict believed to exist between
such regulation or law and the laws and regulations of the City or the License and
Permit. Notwithstanding such conflict, the Grantee shall comply with the terms of
the License or Franchise unless released by the City.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
4) If any provision of a License or Permit is held by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule, or regulation now or
hereafter in effect, or is held by such court to be modified in any way in order to
conform to the requirements of any law, rule or regulation, said provision may be
considered a separate, distinct and independent part of the License or Permit, and
such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions if
the City so determines. In the event that such law, rule, or regulation is
subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the
provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the
law, rules, or regulations said provision shall return to full force and effect and shall
be binding on the parties.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
(5) If the parties determine that a material provision of a License or Permit is affected
by action of a court or of the state or federal Government, the parties shall have
the right to modify any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be
necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of the License and Permit.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
11. Liability.
1) A Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City as set forth in the License or
Permit at all times during the life of a License or Permit and will pay all damages
and penalties which the City may be required to pay as a result of granting a
License or Permit to Grantee.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2) A Grantee shall at all times during the life of a License or Permit carry and require
its contractors and subcontractors to carry public liability, property damage,
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-9
worker's disability, and vehicle insurance in such form and amount as shall be
determined by the City as set forth in the License or Permit. All required insurance
coverage shall provide for thirty (30) day notice to the City in the event of material
alteration or cancellation of such coverage prior to the effective date of such
material alteration or cancellation. Failure of the Grantee to provide appropriate
insurance certificates to the City within sixty (60) days after the execution of a
License or Permit shall render the License or Permit null and void.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
12. General Capability.
1) The Grantee of a Permit shall allow the City to access the Telecommunications
System from any city buildings, police stations, fire stations, other public buildings,
each school licensed by the State of Michigan, and each public library within 500
feet of the Telecommunications System on fees, terms, and conditions set forth in
the Permit.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2) In the event of a state or national emergency or other urgent local community
need, a Grantee of a Permit shall, upon request of City, make available its facilities
to the City for the duration of the emergency.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
13. Conditions of Street Occupancy.
A Grantee shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the roads,
bridges, streets, rights-of-way, or easements in the City without first obtaining a
construction permit as required under Chapter 33 of the City Code, as amended, which
shall apply to the construction of a Telecommunications System.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
14. Technical and Construction Standards.
1) Each Grantee shall construct, install, and maintain its Telecommunications System
in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances,
construction standards, governmental requirements, and technical standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission or state agency.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2) In any event, the Telecommunications System shall not endanger or interfere with
the safety of persons or property within the City or other areas where the Grantee
may have equipment located.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-10
3) All working facilities, conditions, and procedures, used or occurring during
construction of the System shall comply with the standards of the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
4) Construction, installation, and maintenance of a Telecommunications System shall
be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner and in close coordination with
public and private utilities serving the City, following accepted industry construction
procedures and practices and working through existing committees and
organizations.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
5) All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and
telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and
bundled with due respect for engineering consideration.
6) A Grantee shall join the Miss Dig program.
7) When Grantee meets recognized engineering standards and the City, at its option,
requests additional linear line footage, then the Grantee shall not be subject to the
linear foot fee for such additional footage.
15. Maps, Records, and Reports.
1) A Grantee shall annually provide the City with current maps of its existing and
proposed installations in standardized format for use with the City's G.I.S. data
system unless no changes have occurred in the previously submitted map.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2) The Grantee of a Permit paying fees based on gross revenues shall annually file
with the City Clerk fifteen copies (15) of its annual income statement and a
balance sheet.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
3) A Grantee shall submit such reasonable information as may be requested by the
City with respect to its property and revenues, expenses, or operations within the
City necessary to perform its obligations under state or federal laws. All information
provided to the City shall be maintained by the City as proprietary and confidential,
to the extent permitted by law.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
4) Grantee shall submit to the City such other reasonable information or reports in
such form and at such times as the City may request.
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-11
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
5) In the event the 5% of gross revenues option is utilized, subject to the privacy
rights of Grantee, this Ordinance, and federal and state laws and regulations, a
Permit Grantee shall keep open books and records relating to the financial
operations of the Telecommunications System provided to the City. The City shall
have the right to inspect, during normal business hours, upon a two-day notice, all
books, records, maps, plans, service complaint logs, performance test result and
other like materials of the Grantee which relate to the financial operation of the
Telecommunications System. Access to the aforementioned records shall not be
denied by the Grantee on the basis that the records contain proprietary
information, provided that City maintains such information as proprietary and
confidential.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
6) a) Subject to the privacy rights of Grantee and this Ordinance and to federal
and state laws and regulations, a Permit Grantee shall keep open all nonfinancial
books and records relating to the operations of the
Telecommunications System provided to the City. Access to the
aforementioned records shall not be denied by the Grantee on the basis
that the records contain proprietary information, provided that City maintains
such information as proprietary and confidential to the extent permitted by
law.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
b) A Grantee shall allow the City to make inspections of any of the Grantee's
Telecommunications Systems within the City's boundaries at any time upon
one (1) day notice or, in case of emergency, upon demand without notice.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
7) The refusal of the Grantee to file any of the records or reports and inspections
required to be provided to the City under this section shall be deemed a material
breach, and shall subject the Grantee to all penalties and remedies, legal or
equitable, which are available to the City.
8) Any material false or misleading statement or representation knowingly made by
the Grantee in any report shall be deemed a material breach of the License or
Permit, and shall subject the Grantee to all penalties and remedies, legal or
equitable, which are available to the City.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
16. Waiver.
A Grantee agrees not to oppose intervention by the City in any suit or proceeding to
which the Grantee is a party relating to the City's Permit or License. A Grantee agrees to
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-12
abide by all provisions of this Ordinance and its License and Permit.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
17. Sale or Transfer of Licenses or Permits.
1) Neither a License, Permit nor any of Grantee's interest therein or in the facilities
shall be sold, assigned, transferred, pledged, leased, sublet, hypothecated or
mortgaged in any manner, in whole or in part, to any person or entity, nor shall title
thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein, or any property or
assets relating to a License or Permit or the facilities, pass to or vest in any person
or entity, without the prior written consent of the City, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld or delayed. Grantee shall not otherwise provide service to a
person or entity who the City contends is required to obtain a License or Permit
from the City and who lacks such License or Permit. Nothing herein shall prevent
Grantee from assigning its rights and obligations to an affiliate (defined as any
entity directly owned by Grantee or a parent entity of Grantee) or subsidiary of
Grantee upon notice to the City. Any assignment or transfer to a subsidiary or
affiliate of Grantee shall not relieve Grantee of its liability hereunder. Further,
nothing herein shall prevent or prohibit Grantee or any of its parents, subsidiaries
or affiliates, from granting a security interest in the License or Permit or the
facilities arising from a financing transaction. The grant or waiver of any one or
more of said consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or
consents, nor shall the grant of any said consent constitute a waiver of any other
rights of the City. In the event of a foreclosure proceeding pursuant to the
enforcement of a security interest granted by Grantee, or any parent or subsidiary
of Grantee, the City shall have the right to approve the purchaser of the License or
Permit and/or the facilities at a foreclosure sale, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld or unduly delayed. The prohibition against sales,
assignments, transfer and similar actions shall also fully apply to any transfer of
control of Grantee ("Control") and such transfer of Control shall also require the
prior written approval of the City which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld
or unduly delayed.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2) No License or Permit nor any part or portion of its interest in the License or Permit
may be sold, transferred or assigned until the facilities, equipment and personnel
which the Grantee has proposed in the current License or Permit application to
provide and install pursuant to the License or Permit are one hundred (100%)
percent completed and operational for a minimum period of three (3) years, except
to Grantee's parent, affiliate, or subsidiary.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
3) Any attempted transfer of the License or Permit, facilities, control or similar action
by Grantee in violation of this Section shall be ineffective and void and shall
constitute a material event of default by Grantee.
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-13
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
18. Construction and Performance Guarantee and Letter of Credit.
A Grantee shall, prior to construction and within thirty (30) days of execution of a License
or Permit, file with the City Clerk, a letter of credit or cash deposit in a reasonable amount
set by the terms of the License or Permit based upon the construction cost of the lines to
be installed upon, over, across, or under the roads, bridges, streets, rights-of-way or
easements in the City. The Grantee and the City Engineer may make arrangements for
the periodic release of the cash deposit or letter of credit in proportionate amounts as
progress is made, as provided in Chapter 33.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
19. Termination.
In addition to all other rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the City, the City
reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct remedy the right to terminate a
License or Permit and all rights and privileges of a Grantee in any of the following events
or for any of the following reasons:
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
1) A Grantee fails after thirty (30) days prior written notice to comply with any of the
provisions of the License or Permit or has, by act or omission, violated any term or
condition; or
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2) A Grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged
bankrupt; or
3) All or part of a Grantee's facilities are sold under an instrument to secure a debt
and are not redeemed by Grantee within ninety (90) days from such sale; or
4) A Grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or
relations with the City under the License or Permit; or
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
5) City condemns all of the property of a Grantee within the City by the lawful
exercise of eminent domain; or.
6) The Grantee abandons the Telecommunications System or fails to seek renewal
of its License or Permit.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-14
7) No termination, except by reason of condemnation, shall be effective unless or
until the City shall have adopted a resolution setting forth the cause and reason for
the revocation and the effective date, which resolution shall not be adopted without
thirty (30) days prior notice to Grantee and an opportunity for Grantee to be heard
on the proposed resolution.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
20. Removal.
1) Upon expiration, termination of a License or Permit, if the License or Permit is not
renewed, he Grantee may remove any underground cable from the streets which
has been installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or
other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed. Except as
otherwise provided, the Grantee shall not remove any underground cable or
conduit which requires trenching or other opening of the streets along the
extension of cable to be removed. The Grantee shall remove, at its sole cost and
expense, any underground cable or conduit by trenching or opening of the streets
along the extension or otherwise which is ordered to be removed by the City based
upon a determination, in the sole discretion of the City, that removal is required in
order to eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future utilization of
the streets for public purposes. Any order by the City to remove cable or conduit
shall be mailed to the Grantee not later than thirty (30) calendar days following the
date of expiration of the License or Permit. A Grantee shall file written notice with
the City Clerk not later than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of
expiration or termination of the License or Permit of its intention to remove cable
and a schedule for removal by location. The schedule and timing of removal shall
be subject to approval and regulation by the City. Removal shall be completed not
later than twelve (12) months following the date of expiration of the License or
Permit. Underground cable and conduit in the streets and rights-of-way which is
not removed shall be deemed abandoned and title shall be vested in the City.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
2) Upon expiration, termination or revocation of a License or Permit, if the License or
Permit is not renewed, a Grantee, at its sole expense, shall, unless relieved of the
obligation by the City, remove from the streets all above ground elements of the
Telecommunications System, including but not limited to pedestal mounted
terminal boxes, and lines attached to or suspended from poles.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
3) Grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits, Licenses,
authorizations, or other approvals and pay such fees and deposit such security as
required by applicable law or ordinance of the City, shall conduct and complete the
work of removal in compliance with all such applicable law or ordinances, and shall
restore the streets and rights-of-way to the same condition they were in before the
work of removal commenced. The work of removal shall be completed not later
than twelve (12) months from expiration, termination or revocation.
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-15
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
21. Continuity of Service.
In the event that the Grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the
Telecommunications System or the City terminates, revokes or fails to renew a Permit
within a reasonable time, a Grantee shall do everything in its power to ensure that all
Subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. In
the event of a change of Grantee, the previous Grantee shall cooperate with the new
Grantee in maintaining continuity of service to all Subscribers. In the event that
interruption of service is required by a Grantee for modification, repairs or the like, the
interruption shall be as brief as possible and at times when the impact on Subscribers is
at a minimum. Records of such interruption shall be kept by the Grantee.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
22. Acceptance of Agreement and Incorporation of Application and Ordinance by Reference.
Upon execution of a License or Permit by a Grantee, the Grantee agrees to be bound by
all of its terms and conditions and accepts unconditionally and promises to comply with
and abide by all of their terms, provisions and conditions. A Grantee also agrees to
provide all services set forth in its application and proposal, and, by its acceptance of the
License or Permit, a Grantee specifically grants and agrees that its application and
proposal is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the License or Permit.
In addition, a Grantee specifically agrees that this Ordinance of the City is incorporated by
reference and made a part of the License or Permit. In the event of a conflict between the
application and proposal of the Grantee, the Ordinance, and the License or Permit, the
Ordinance shall prevail.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of the License or Permit is
for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not render invalid nor terminate the License or Permit.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
24. Tampering and Fraudulent Connections or Sales.
1) No person, whether or not a Subscriber or user of the Telecommunications
System, may intentionally or knowingly remove or damage or cause to be
damaged any wire, cable, conduit, equipment, or apparatus of the Grantee, or to
commit any act with an intent to cause such removal or damage, or tap, tamper
with, or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit, equipment,
apparatus, or appurtenance of the Grantee with the intent to obtain a signal or
impulse from the Telecommunications System without authorization from or
Chapter 62 - Telecommunications Ordinance
62-16
compensation to the Grantee, or obtain Telecommunications Service, or sell, rent,
offer or advertise for sale, rental or use any instrument, apparatus, device or plans,
specifications, or instructions for making or assembling the same to connect to the
Grantee's Telecommunications System with intent to cheat or defraud the Grantee
of any lawful charge to which it is entitled.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
(2) The prohibitions, penalties and remedies set forth in this section are in addition to
any prohibitions, penalties, and remedies for theft of service provided by state and
federal law.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
25. Equal Application.
The provisions of this ordinance shall be imposed upon and enforced against all
Telecommunications Systems in the City requiring a License or Permit except as provided
in Section 9 (4)(d).
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
26. Compliance with Law.
All Grantees and the City shall comply with all laws, rules, regulations and orders in the
exercise and performance of their rights and obligations under this ordinance and under
any Permit or Licenses.
(Rev. 05-03-1999)
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-1
ARTICLE I  PURPOSE; NECESSITY; DEFINITIONS
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote and encourage the furnishing of a high quality
but economical cable communications service to the residents of the City and to regulate such
service in the public interest.
2. Necessity of Franchise. No person shall own or operate a Cable System, as defined herein,
except by Franchise granted by the City, which Franchise shall comply with all requirements of
this Chapter.
3. Definitions. For purposes of this Chapter, any subsequent ordinance dealing with cable
communications, any Franchise Agreement between the City and a Cable Communications
Company, and any application or proposal submitted pursuant to an RFP, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The
words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given
their common and ordinary meaning.
1. Access Cablecasting - Services provided by a cable television system on its public,
education, local government, licensed or other access channels.
2. Applicant - Person or Company submitting a proposal for the Franchise of a cable
communications system.
3. Basic Service - All subscriber services provided by the Grantee, including the delivery of
broadcast signals, covered by the regular monthly charge, if any paid by all subscribers,
excluding optional services for which a separate charge is made.
4. Cablecast - To distribute programs (both from broadcasting sources and original
programs) through the cable system by means of coaxial cable or other electrical
conductors or fiber optical transmitters.
5. Cable Communications Service - The business, in whole or in part, of receiving directly or
indirectly over the air, and amplifying or otherwise modifying signals transmitting programs
broadcast by one (1) or more signals, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital
signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or
light impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air,
and redistributing such signals by wire, cable or other means to members of the public.
6. Cable Communications System, Cable System, CATV or System - A system of coaxial
cables or other electrical conductors or fiber optical cables and equipment used or to be
used to originate or receive television or radio signals directly or indirectly off the air and to
transmit them via cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination,
receipt, transmission, and distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures, visual images,
digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of
electrical impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off
the air.
7. City - The Local Government of Troy and all the territory within its corporate limits.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-2
8. City Council - The governing body of the local unit of government.
9. Community Specific Cablecasting - Programming or channel allocation which
selectively cablecasts to individual communities to meet their unique needs or
interests. "Community" refers to any unit with common needs or interest such as
individual cities or neighborhoods, school districts or groups with common
characteristics.
10. Connection - The attachment of the drop to the first radio or television set of the
subscriber.
11. Converter - An electronic device, which converts signals to a frequency not
susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and by an
appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view all basic subscriber
signals included in the basic service delivered at designated converter dial
locations. The converter may also allow reception of additional programming
and/or services at extra cost to the subscriber.
12. Drop - The cable that connects the subscriber terminal to the nearest feeder cable
of a cable system.
13. FCC - The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.
14. Feeder - Intermediate line of Cable System that carries signals from trunk line to
drops.
15. Franchise - The rights of a Grantee to construct and operate a Cable System in the
City, subject to the City Charter, this Ordinance and the Franchise Agreement, as
provided in the Franchise Agreement.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
16. Franchise Agreement - Agreement between cable operator and the City setting
specific rights and responsibilities of each for construction and operation of Cable
System.
17. Fraud or Deceit - Shall not be limited to common law fraud and deceit but shall
include the meaning of those words under federal securities law.
18. Grantee - A person to whom a cable communications franchise has been granted.
19. Gross Revenues  Gross Revenues shall mean all revenues earned by
Grantee from the operation of Grantees System within the City and which are
attributable to or occasioned by the grant of the Franchise. Gross Revenues do
not mean, however: (1) any taxes imposed and/or assessed by law on
subscribers (including state imposed sales taxes) which Grantee is obligated to
collect and pay in full to the applicable authorities; (2) any amounts documented
as written off by Grantee as bad debt; and (3) any revenues or commissions
which relate directly to the sale of merchandise by home-shopping channel
operators over the Grantees System in the City. Gross annual revenues and
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-3
annual gross revenues shall be deemed to include revenues received by
Grantee from the sale of: (1) local advertising for carriage on Grantees System
within the City; and (2) all cable converter boxes, all remote controls for cable
equipment, if any, that Grantee elects to sell to subscribers in the City during the
term of the Franchise.
(Rev. 03-08-1996)
20. Headend - The equipment at the antenna site in a master antenna or Cable System. The
point of origination that collects all the signals (from Broadcast stations, cable stations, and
satellite stations) and sends them to the subscribers.
21. Hub - One of two or more elements in a large cable system from which trunk lines
originate, from which programming and data is sent out via trunk lines, and where
upstream messages are received and where switching is accomplished. Large Systems
have multiple hubs linked to each other and/or to master headend.
22. Installation - The connection of the system from feeder cable to the point of connection.
23. Interactive System - A two-way operations system. See also "two-way capability".
24. Interconnect - To link cable headends, so that subscribers to different Cable Systems can
see the same programming simultaneously.
25. Local Public Access - Refers to the public opportunity to use cable channels which are
dedicated to that purpose and are not under control of Grantee.
26. Local Origination - Programs produced locally, the content of which may be original or
produced elsewhere and sold or licensed to a Grantee for use.
27. Lockout Device - A device which prevents reception of one or more channels at an
individual drop.
28. Loop - A completely interactive close-circuit net connecting specified municipal,
educational, medical or commercial facilities within a System which should also have the
capacity to be interconnected to the main Cable System.
29. Pay TV - Cable channels that require an additional subscriber fee.
30. Person - An individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity as the context may
indicate.
31. Point to Point Transmission - A signaling path provided by a system to transmit signals of
any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the System.
32. Producer - A user providing input services to the Cable System for receipt by subscribers.
33. Proposal - An applicant's response to an RFP.
34. Public Access Channels - Channels which are dedicated to the public interest, according
to the following categories:
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-4
(a) community
(b) education
(c) local government
(d) health and medical
(e) other
35. Public Property - Any real property owned by the City other than a street.
36. RFP - Request by the City for a proposal from applicants for a Cable System.
37. Security System - Optional two-way service(s) offered to cable subscribers which may
alert authorities and/or subscribers of potential emergencies in the subscriber's home, or
public or private buildings.
38. Senior Citizen - Person 62 years old or older.
39. Street, Highway - The surface of and the space above and below any public street, road,
highway, freeway, land, path, public way, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive
or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by City which shall entitle Grantee
to the extent provided in the Franchise Agreement, to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing, or transmitting over, poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily
necessary and pertinent to a System.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
40. Subscriber - A person who pays an installation charge and/or monthly fee to a cable
system operator for connections to the System and for programs and services carried on
the cable.
41. Subscriber Service Drop - Same as Drop.
42. Trunk, Trunk Line - Main line of Cable System that carries signals from headend to
extremities of cable system.
43. Two-Way Capability - Ability of Cable System to conduct signals to one headend as well
as from the headend. See also Loop.
44. User - A person or organization utilizing a System channel as a producer, for purposes of
production and/or transmission of material, or as a subscriber, for purposes of receipt of
material.
ARTICLE II - SELECTION OF FRANCHISEE
4. Award of Franchise. The City Council may award a Franchise to an applicant only after a public
hearing on the application and proposal, notice of which hearing shall be published in a local
newspaper of general circulation at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the hearing. The
City Council may reject all applicants.
5. Franchise Application - Form, Contents and Fees. All proposals shall be submitted in writing and
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $6,000.00. If the City issued an RFP with respect
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-5
to the grant of a Franchise, all proposals shall contain the information called for by the RFP in the
manner prescribed by the RFP.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
A. Information contained in a Franchise application shall include such information as is
required by the City from the applicant and may include, without limitation, the following:
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
1. Information regarding the identity of the applicant.
2. Biographical data of the applicant's principal owners and proposed management,
including the experience of such persons in the cable communications field.
3. Audited financial statements for the applicant's last fiscal year together with the
applicant's most current interim financial statements, which interim statements
need not be audited but which shall be reviewed by a certified public accountant in
accordance with standards established by the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants and which interim statements shall be accompanied by the
accountant's report thereon.
4. A financing plan for the proposed System and a projection, covering the term of
the franchise, of revenue and expense in sufficient detail to permit a determination
to be made of the financial viability of the applicant's proposal.
5. A detailed description of the System and facilities proposed for the City, including
the matters to which a response is specifically required by Articles IV and V of the
Ordinance, and including a schedule of projected rates for all charges and fees to
subscribers.
6. A detailed timetable for the construction and commencement of operation of the
System, including the matters to which a response is specifically required by Article
VI of this Ordinance.
B. An RFP, if issued, shall consist of an application which may be adopted by City Council
resolution.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
C. The City shall be entitled to verify any information furnished by the applicant in response to the
RFP or in response to other requests for information regarding the applicant and the applicant's
affairs. The City may exercise such right by requiring reports from the applicant, or from third
parties having knowledge of the applicant, or by conducting such other kinds of investigation as
the City may deem proper. In such cases the applicant shall furnish the City with such written
authorization regarding release of information as may be necessary to carry out the intent and
purpose of the foregoing provisions. All of the foregoing provisions shall also be applicable to a
Grantee as well as an applicant, it being deemed to be in the public interest that the City remain
knowledgeable regarding the Grantee and the operation of the System throughout the term of the
franchise.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-6
D. No applicant, nor any person on behalf of any applicant, shall, in responding to an
RFP or in responding to any other request for information by the City or by any
officer or agency thereof, make any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to
state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light
of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading. A violation of this
provision shall constitute a fraud upon the City.
6. Criteria for Selection. The award of a Franchise to an applicant shall be based upon the
information contained in the applicant's proposal and such other relevant information as may be
obtained by the City regarding such applicants and the proposals. Such award shall be based
upon the criteria set forth below together with such other factors as the City may deem relevant.
A. The experience of the applicant in the cable communications field and the credentials of its
owners and managers.
B. The applicant's financial resources, including both present financial condition and the
availability of committed funding to finance the applicant's proposed System; and the
specificity and credibility of the applicant's projections of the revenue and expenses
attributable to the construction and operation of the System.
C. The applicant's System design including channel capacity and ability to provide a broad
range of services in conformity with the highest quality standards of the cable industry.
D. The applicant's schedule of rates and the length of time the applicant is committed to
maintain such rates.
E. The applicant's response to specific local concerns or needs, whether formulated by the
City and made known to applicants or whether ascertained by the applicant.
ARTICLE III - FRANCHISE AGREEMENT; GRANT OF FRANCHISE
7. Franchise Agreement. The Franchise Agreement shall be in such form and contain such terms
and provisions as shall be approved by the City Council. The Agreement may be adopted, and
amended, by resolution of the City Council or by any other mode of adoption or amendment
authorized or required by law.
8. Grant of Franchise. A Grantee shall be awarded a Franchise, pursuant to the provisions of
Section 4 of this Ordinance, either by resolution of the City Council or by any other means
authorized or required by law. The Grantee shall be promptly notified of the award by the City by
written notice thereof, sent by registered or certified mail, which notice shall be accompanied by
one or more copies of the Franchise Agreement.
9. Execution and Delivery of Franchise Agreement by Grantee. The Franchise Agreement shall be
properly executed and delivered to the City by the Grantee on or before fifteen days after the date
the City sends written notice of the award to the Grantee, which fifteen day period may be
extended by the City Council for good cause; provided, however, that the Franchise Agreement
shall not become effective until that specific date set forth in the Franchise Agreement.
At the time of delivery of the Franchise Agreement by the Grantee to the City, the Grantee shall
pay to the City all costs incurred by the City in the franchise process, as provided in the Franchise
Agreement. All other payments which are to be made to the City by Grantee shall similarly be
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-7
made in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Franchise Agreement.
At the time of delivery of the Franchise Agreement as provided in this Section, the Grantee shall
also deliver all other monies and all documents and instruments required by this Ordinance or by
the Franchise Agreement.
10. Execution and Delivery of Franchise Agreement by City. Upon timely receipt by the City from the
Grantee of the properly executed Franchise Agreement, together with the payment of all
applicable fees, documents and instruments as may be required in accordance with Section 9 of
this Article, the City may execute the Agreement and, upon execution thereof, shall deliver one
fully executed copy to the Grantee; provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit the City from
revoking the award of the Franchise prior to delivery of an executed copy of the Franchise
Agreement to the Grantee. In the event of any such revocation, which shall be accomplished in
the same manner as that used in granting the award, any funds and all documents and
instruments delivered by the Grantee to the City in connection with the Grantee's acceptance of
the award, shall be returned forthwith to the Grantee.
11. Term and Other Provision of Franchise Agreement.
A. The Franchise Agreement shall provide for a non-exclusive franchise for a term of not
more than fifteen years, which term shall commence as of the date set forth in the
Franchise Agreement.
B. The Franchise Agreement shall provide that throughout the term of the Franchise, the
Grantee shall pay the City Franchise fee within ninety days after the end of each fiscal
year of the Grantee. The fee shall not be less than five percent (5%) of the Grantee's
gross revenues for each year. The Grantee shall take any action with respect to any
federal or state agency which may be necessary or appropriate to make the payment and
receipt of such fees lawful. Acceptance of any payment by the City shall not be construed
as a release of or as an accord and satisfaction regarding any claim the City may have for
further and additional sums payable as a Franchise fee or for the performance of any
other obligation of the Grantee under this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement.
C. To the extent provided in the Franchise Agreement, Grantee shall undertake:
(1) that the Grantee agrees to and accepts all provisions of this Ordinance and waives
any claim that any provision hereof is unreasonable, arbitrary, invalid, or void;
(2) that the Grantee recognizes the right of the City to make amendments to this
Ordinance during the term of the Franchise to the extent provided in the Franchise
Agreement.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
12. Negotiated Provisions of Franchise Agreements. The Franchise Agreement shall contain such
further conditions or provisions as may be negotiated between the City and the Grantee except
that no such conditions or provisions shall conflict with any provision of this Ordinance or other law
as in effect on the date of the Franchise Agreement. In the case of such conflict, the provisions of
this Ordinance or other law as in effect on the date of the Franchise Agreement shall prevail over
the conflicting provisions of the Franchise Agreement.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-8
13. Rights Reserved by the City.
A. Any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be subject to the right of the City,
by resolution of the City Council, to revoke the Franchise for just cause. Just cause shall
include, without limitation:
(1) A material violation by Grantee of any provision of the Franchise agreement or this
Ordinance, or any rule, order, or determination of the City made pursuant thereto,
where such violation shall remain uncured pursuant to the terms and conditions of
the Franchise Agreement.
(2) Any attempt by Grantee to dispose of any of the facilities or property of the System
in contravention of the Franchise Agreement.
(3) The commission of any fraud or deceit upon the City.
B. Any Franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to all applicable provisions of other City
ordinances of general applicability made pursuant to the police power of the City, the City
Charter, and any amendments thereto, whether made prior to or after the inception of the
Franchise.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
C. Any Franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to the following additional rights of the
City:
(1) To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance
thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency, pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the Franchise Agreement.
(2) To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and to
prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates.
(3) To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with
the terms of the Franchise throughout the entire period thereof.
(4) To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the City Council to be
conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public.
(5) Through its appropriately designated representatives, to inspect all construction or
installation work performed subject to the provisions of the Franchise and this
Ordinance, and make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure
compliance with the terms of the Franchise, this Ordinance, and other pertinent
provisions of law.
(6) At the expiration of the term for which a Franchise is granted or upon termination
and cancellation as provided therein, to require the Grantee to remove at
Grantee's sole expense any and all portions of the System from the public ways
within the City.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-9
(7) To require grantee to safeguard and keep private all individual home subscriber
information.
14. Procedure for Termination. If the Franchise Agreement establishes procedures for the termination
or cancellation of the Franchise before the expiration of the term of the Franchise, such
procedures shall control during the term. It the Franchise Agreement does not establish such
procedures, the: (a) any termination or cancellation of the franchise prior to the expiration of the
term thereof shall be made by resolution of the City Council only after a public hearing thereon: (b)
Grantee shall be entitled to thirty days' written notice of such hearing and the notice shall specify
with reasonable particularity the grounds upon which the contemplated termination is based; and
(c) any such termination shall be subject to any requirements of higher law.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
15. Contravention of Franchise. Any breach by the Grantee of the Franchise Agreement, in addition to
constituting a breach of contract, shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. The costs of any
litigation, including attorney fees, incurred by the City to enforce this Ordinance or Franchise
granted pursuant hereto shall be reimbursed to the City by the Grantee, in respect of such
litigation or part thereof in which the City is the prevailing party.
ARTICLE IV - DESIGN OF SYSTEM
16. Channel Capacity. Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the Franchise the number of
channels specified to be initially activated in the Franchise Agreement. Grantee shall also activate
additional channel capacity as required by public access or institutional users. Grantee shall
continually upgrade the System's facilities, equipment, and service pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the Franchise Agreement.
17. Picture Quality and Technical Requirements.
A. The System shall produce a picture upon each subscriber's television screen in black and
white or color, depending upon whether color is being telecast and provided the
subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture, which is undistorted and
free form ghost images, without material degradation of color fidelity. The System shall
produce a sound which is undistorted on a properly operating standard receiver of a
subscriber.
B. The System shall transmit or distribute signals to all television and radio receivers of all
subscribers without causing cross-modulation in the cables or interfering with other
electrical or electronic systems or the reception of other television or radio receivers.
C. The System shall at all times meet not less than minimum FCC technical standards.
D. The System shall be designed for and operated on a twenty-four (24) hour a day
continuous operation basis.
E. Grantee's RFP response shall specify the procedure for initially and subsequently testing
the technical capacity of the System. Representatives of City may be present during
testing. The tests may be done annually at such times as may be determined by the City,
with notice to Grantee. All expenses for all such tests shall be paid by Grantee.
18. Two-Way Capacity. Grantee shall provide and maintain an operational two-way System (audio,
video and data impulse).
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-10
A. The Grantee will not install or permit transmission of two-way services utilizing audio, video
or digital signals without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber. This provision
is not intended to prohibit the transmission of signals useful only for the control or
measurement of the System performance, or utility meter reading.
19. Facilities. Grantee's proposal shall describe, in detail, the location of its headend, hubs,
distribution system, studios, equipment and other facilities and a plan for implementing the
construction, utilization and maintenance of those facilities including plans for accommodating
future growth and changing needs and desires of the community as determined by the City.
20. Special Channel and Access Requirements.
A. Grantee shall carry broadcast stations in accordance with FCC rules as from time to time
revised.
B. Grantee's proposal shall describe, in detail, the utilization of converters or other special
equipment which subscribers are to receive and any charge for them.
C. Grantee shall designate an emergency channel to be operated by City.
D. Grantee shall provide adequate channels for public access as provided in the Franchise
Agreement. All residential subscribers who receive all or any part of the total services
offered on the System shall also receive all public access channels at no additional
charge. These channels shall be activated upon system activation and thereafter
maintained as needed. Furthermore, to the extent expressly required by the Franchise
Agreement or by federal law: (i) Grantee shall establish rules and regulations for the use of
community access channels which shall be approved by City before implementation and
thereafter shall not be altered or amended without approval of City, and (ii) in preparing
such rules:
(1) Grantee shall provide an equal opportunity for use of access services.
(2) Grantee shall present a needs assessment of the community to be served and
provide a plan to meet those needs.
(3) Grantee shall develop a plan to allocate to the City a reasonable use of equipment
and facilities so that the City can send and receive programming fitted to its needs.
Such plan shall be approved by the City before implementation and thereafter shall
not be altered or amended without approval of the City.
(4) Grantee shall describe all equipment and facilities and any charges for their use.
(5) Grantee shall comply, at a minimum, with the requirements of the City now or
hereafter adopted or determined regarding access channels.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
E. The Franchise Agreement may describe other channel offerings and charges for the same
only to the extent permitted by federal law.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-11
21. Service to Public Buildings. Grantee's proposal shall designate all publicly owned buildings in the
City (city hall, police department, fire department, schools, library, etc.) and any buildings owned
or leased for governmental use by any state, federal or local government in the city, to which
Grantee intends to provide service. The provisions for such service shall be described in detail
and shall be provided without charge. Grantee's proposal shall include in such designation plans
for existing as well as future publicly owned buildings.
22. Interconnection.
A. Interconnection required: The Grantee shall interconnect origination and access channels
of the Cable System with any or all other systems in adjacent areas, pursuant to the terms
and conditions of the Franchise Agreement. Interconnection of systems may be done by
direct cable connection microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate method.
B. Interconnection procedure: Upon receiving the directive of the City to interconnect,
Grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected system or systems
in order that costs may be shared equitably for both construction and operation of the
interconnection link.
C. Relief: The Grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to interconnect or the
City may rescind its order to interconnect upon petition by the Grantee to the City. The City
shall grant said request if it finds that the Grantee has negotiated in good faith and has
failed to obtain an approval from the system or systems of the proposed interconnection,
or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable
increase in subscriber rates.
D. Cooperation Required: The Grantee shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation,
regional interconnection authority or City, County, State and Federal regulatory agency
which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise
provided for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the City.
23. Community Specific Cablecasting. The Franchise Agreement may describe the means and
manner of providing community specific cablecasting over the System and the time of activation
and points of delivery.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
24. Computer Services. Grantee shall design and construct a System that accommodates
interactive data communications and so that the total network transmission time is less than
one-tenth (1/10) of a second. Further, the system shall accommodate interactive
communications of point to point, point to multi-point, and multi-point to multi-point
communications between subscribers or potential subscribers.
(Rev. 7-24-95)
25. All Channels Emergency Alert. In case of any emergency or disaster, the Grantee shall make its
entire system available, without charge, to the City or to any other governmental or civil defense
agency that the City may designate. The System shall be engineered to provide an audio alert
system to allow authorized officials to override automatically the audio signals on all channels and
to transmit and report emergency information. The system shall also have the capability for visual
transmission of emergency messages.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-12
ARTICLE V - SERVICES AND PROGRAMMING,
SUBSCRIBER CONTRACTS, COMPLAINTS
26. Services and Programming. Grantee's proposal shall state the extent of its commitment to provide
for the following: a variety of origination programming; automated channels carrying information
from local sources; local access programming; a home security package (with mechanism to
decrease incidents of false alarms); access support including color broadcast studio and location
production equipment, post-production equipment, access promotion plans, use of video facilities,
plans accommodating growth of access, production centers; a system to accommodate data,
audio and video transmissions between institutions, service to public buildings; expanding distant
signal offerings as FCC rules allow; broadcast station signals in late night and early morning
hours, an FM service with individual station processing; a means for using the System during
emergencies; needs of schools and other learning institutions.
27. Local Origination and Cablecasting. To the extent permitted by federal law, the Franchise
Agreement may include information on plans for local origination, origination cablecasting,
automated channels carrying information from local sources, variety or origination programming,
review of and incorporation of the needs and reports of the City, channel allocations, estimated
programming hours, equipment, personnel and other resources committed to local origination
production.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
28. Use of Channels.
A. Charges made by Grantee to a user shall be made in strict accordance with all applicable
requirements o federal law, as amended from time to time.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
B. Advertising for any candidate for political officer or for parties sponsoring such candidates,
shall be granted only upon the basis that all such other candidates for the same office, or
other parties sponsoring such candidate (where a party itself so advertises in the first
instance) shall be provided with comparable advertising time and at a comparable rate.
29. Marketing. Grantee's proposal shall describe a marketing plan, advertising policy and means to
promote the use of the access channels only to the extent required by federal law, as amended
from time to time.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
30. Interruption of Service. Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service, Grantee shall
do so during periods of minimum use of the System. Unless such interruption is unforeseen and
immediately necessary, Grantee shall give reasonable notice thereof to subscribers. All costs
incurred in repairing the System shall be paid by Grantee, and if service is interrupted or
disconnected rebates and/or reductions in charges will be made pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the Franchise Agreement. The cause for any such interruption shall be removed,
and service restored as promptly as reasonably possible.
31. Complaints. Grantee shall maintain an office in or proximate to the City which shall be open during
all usual business hours, have a listed local telephone, and be so operated that complaints and
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-13
requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time, seven (7) days per week. For
purposes of this Section, the office which Franchisee is required to maintain in or proximate to
the City may be a Virtual office consisting of a toll-free telephone number which all subscribers in
the City may access from their homes 24 hours a day, seven days a week to register complaints
concerning the System.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
A. Notice of this information shall be provided to all new subscribers at time of subscription
and to existing subscribers annually.
B. All complaints by the City, subscribers, or other interested persons regarding the quality of
service, equipment malfunction, billing disputes, and any other matters relative to the
System, shall be investigated and responded to by a service representative of Grantee
within twenty-four (24) hours. If reasonably possible, Grantee shall promptly rectify the
cause of all valid complaints.
ARTICLE VI - CONSTRUCTION, INITIAL SERVICE AREA, LINE
EXTENSION AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
32. Initial Service Area.
A. Grantee's proposal shall clearly indicate the date by which System engineering and design
shall be completed and dates on which each stage of System construction shall be
completed.
B. The energized cable shall be extended substantially throughout the City (as determined by
the City) within eighteen (18) months after commencement of construction. All persons
along the route of the energized cable who desire them shall have individual drops
installed within the same period of time.
C. A map prepared by Grantee reflecting the areas within the City initially served by the
System along with the schedule for development of the System shall be included in
Grantee's proposal. Grantee shall provide service to all areas within the City which have at
least thirty-five (35) homes per street mile (homes, for purposes of this paragraph shall
mean a living unit or each subscriber unit; for example, multiple dwellings with 10
apartments would constitute ten (10) homes).
D. The City shall cooperate with Grantee in the development of its proposed service area by
making available to Grantee for copying all maps, data and other statistical information,
then in possession of the City, needed for the preparation of a map defining the initial
service area.
33. Construction Timetable.
A. Grantee's construction timetable as set forth in the Franchise Agreement shall reflect the
specific method and schedule of construction of the System. The plan of Grantee shall
reflect the following:
(1) Location of all facilities including studios, headends, microwave receivers and
senders and all hubs and wiring.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-14
(2) A timetable reflecting when each area within the initial service area will be served.
(3) Grantee shall provide in its timetable a construction pattern that will allow the
utilization of service to the greatest number of people in the shortest time period.
B. Within thirty (30) days after the commencement of the Franchise term, Grantee shall apply
for all necessary permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations which are required in the
conduct of its business including, but not limited to, any joint use attachment agreement,
microwave carrier licenses, or any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted
by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of Cable
Communications Systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. If after six
(6) months from the commencement of Franchise term, Grantee has not received the
permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations described in this paragraph, the City may
assess penalties pursuant to the Franchise Agreement without regard to fault for delay in
obtaining such permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations.
C. Within thirty (30 days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses, certificates and
authorization, Grantee shall give written notice thereof to the City and commence
construction and installation of the System.
D. The Grantee shall promptly notify the City of all delays known or anticipated in the
construction of the System. The City may extend the construction timetable in the event
Grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its
control.
34. Construction Standards.
A. Grantee shall not open or disturb the surface of any streets, or public property, without first
obtaining a permit from the City for which permit the City may impose a reasonable fee to
be paid by Grantee. The lines, conduits, cables and other property placed in the streets,
and public property pursuant to such permit shall be located in such part of the street or
public property as shall be determined by the City. Grantee shall, upon completion of any
work requiring the opening of any streets or public property, restore the same including the
pavement and its foundations to as good a condition as formerly and in a manner and
quality approved by the City, and shall exercise reasonable care to maintain the same
thereafter in good condition.
Such work shall be performed with diligence and due care, and if Grantee shall fail to
perform the work promptly, to remove all dirt and rubbish and to put the street or public
property back into the condition required hereby, the City shall have the right to put the
streets or public property back into such condition at the expense of Grantee. Grantee
shall, upon demand, pay to City the cost of such work done.
B. All wires, conduits, cable and other property and facilities of Grantee shall be so located,
constructed, installed and maintained as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with
the usual and customary trade, traffic, and travel upon, or other use of, the streets and
public property of the City. Grantee shall keep and maintain all of its property in good
condition, order and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or
property of any person. The City shall have the right to inspect and examine at all
reasonable times and upon reasonable notice the property owned or used, in part or in
whole, by Grantee. Grantee shall keep accurate maps and records of all of its wires,
conduits, cables and other property and facilities located, constructed and maintained in
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-15
the City. Further, Grantee shall furnish copies of such maps and records from time to time
as requested by the City without charge.
C. All wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities of Grantee shall be constructed
and installed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All wires, conduits and cables shall
be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering
considerations.
D. Grantee shall at all times comply with the following codes, rules, regulations, as amended,
and any others supplemental to or in substitution thereof:
(1) National Electric Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards);
(2) National Electrical Code, NFPA 70-1981 (National Fire Protection Association);
(3) Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction; and
(4) Applicable FCC and other applicable Federal, State and local regulations and
ordinances.
In any event, the installation, operation or maintenance of the System shall not
endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the City.
E. Whenever the City shall undertake any public improvement which affects Grantee's
equipment or facilities, the City may, with due regard to reasonable working conditions and
with reasonable notice, direct Grantee to remove or relocate its wires, conduits, cables and
other property located in streets, or public property. Grantee shall relocate or protect its
wires, conduits, cables and other property at its own expense.
F. Grantee's plans for constructing its System, and the construction of the System, shall be in
accordance with its proposal as modified by the Franchise Agreement. However, Grantee
shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
(1) Grantee shall construct underground in any area where both the electrical and
telephone lines have been installed underground.
(2) Grantee shall change from aerial to underground, at its own expense, in any area
where both the telephone and electric utilities are hereafter changed from aerial to
underground.
(3) To enable Grantee reasonable opportunity to change its wiring from aerial to
underground, and also to allow it to pre-wire all new subdivisions or new
development areas, the City shall provide Grantee with written notice of the
following (but without liability for failure to provide such notice):
(a) Any changes of which City has knowledge, or which the City may order,
regarding a change from aerial to underground of any line (telephone or
electrical) within its boundaries.
(b) Any underground trenching that may be pending.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-16
(c) New subdivisions and development. All of such subdividers or developers
shall be notified of the Franchise and the System.
(d) All ordinance changes affecting the wiring of the System.
G. Grantee shall, upon completion of any work on private property (or easements thereon),
restore the same including any and all landscape features, plantings, turf, buildings, pipes,
and wires (overhead and underground) pavements, sidewalks, foundations or other
features whatsoever, to as good a condition as existed before construction.
H. Grantee shall prior to construction make a clear video tape record of all underground
construction and other specially designated areas. Such tapes are to be preserved for
three (3) years after completion of the applicable construction.
I. Grantee shall provide adequate identification of its lines and wires, as approved by the City
Engineer, to distinguish among public utility, telecommunications and cable television
companies lines and wires occupying the right-of-way.
(7-24-1995)
35. Conditions on Use.
A. Grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas,
electric, or telephone fixture, water hydrant or main.
B. Grantee, at the request of any person holding a building moving permit and with not less
than five (5) days advance notice, shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires,
conduits and cables. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires,
conduits and cables shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Grantee
shall have the authority to require such payment in advance.
C. Grantee shall have the authority, to the extent and in the manner provided in Chapter 28 of
the Troy Tree Regulation Ordinance, Section 17(a) (the Tree-Trimming Ordinance) to
trim trees upon or overhanging any street or public property so as to prevent the branches
of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, conduit and cables of Grantee. All
trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the City and at the expense
of Grantee, subject to the Tree-Trimming Ordinance.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
ARTICLE VII - SYSTEM OPERATIONS
36. Information Availability.
A. Annual Statements. Grantee shall file with the city clerk, within 90 days after the expiration
of each of its fiscal years, a detailed revenue statement clearly showing, by service type
and billing increment, the gross annual revenues received from its System operations
within the city during the preceding year. Grantee shall not be required to have this
revenue statement audited, provided that Grantee shall be required to have this statement
certified either by, in Grantees discretion, the president or chief financial officer of Grantee
or a certified public accountant attesting in good faith to the accuracy, completeness and
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-17
veracity of the revenue figures. The City shall in any event be entitled to arrange for its
own audit of the revenue statement to the extent provided in the Franchise Agreement and
the City shall be entitled to recover the costs of that audit as provided in the Franchise
Agreement.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
B. Records and Files.
(1) Grantee shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts And records of the
business and operations under, and in connection with, its System.
(2) The City shall have the right to review (either by mail or at Grantees local office) all
records pertaining to Grantees cable service operations on five (5) working days
written notice, unless specifically exempted by the City. Such review, unless
mutually agreed upon, or judicially ordered, should occur within Grantees normal
business hours.
(3) The City shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, and independent certified
public accountant, or other business or financial expert, to review the books and
records of Grantee. If after a financial audit it is determined that Grantee has
materially underpaid amounts owed to the City, then the City may require Grantee
to reimburse the City for the actual reasonable cost of the audit.
(4) A false entry into the books and/or records of Grantee, made by Grantee, of a
material and substantial fact shall constitute a material violation of this ordinance.
(5) Grantee at the local office shall keep complete and accurate books and records of
the key aspects of its systems operation for at least the preceding three (3) years
in such a manner that all matters pertaining t the city shall be easily produced
and/or verified at the Citys request. Also, Grantee shall keep at its local office any
other applicable records and information that may be required by any other Federal
or State agency having jurisdiction over cable providers. For purposes of this
Section, the works local office refer to the place in Michigan where Grantee will
provide access to its books and records relating to its System in the City.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
C. Governmental Reports. Grantee shall provide to the City, upon request, copies of all
documents filed by Grantee with Federal or State agencies which relate to the Franchise,
unless the documents have a potential material effect upon the Franchise, in which case,
Grantee shall provide such documents to the City without request. However, unless
specifically authorized by the State, Grantee shall not be required to submit State or
Federal tax returns, or any information exempted under federal privacy laws, including
Section 631 of the Federal Cable Act.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
37. Service Contract.
A. Grantee shall file with the City a copy of the service contract to be used by Grantee prior to
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-18
entering into any such service contracts with subscribers, and Grantee shall make no
changes in the latest service contract on file without first filing the revised contract with the
City.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
B. Grantee shall have authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions
governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable Grantee
to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this Franchise and to assure an
uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers; provided, such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of the Franchise,
ordinances of the City, and laws of the State of Michigan or the United States.
C. Each subscriber shall be provided with instructions on filing complaints or otherwise
obtaining information or assistance from Grantee.
D. All items described in this Section shall be provided to each new subscriber at the time a
contract is entered or service begun and to all existing subscribers forthwith upon any
changes therein.
E. The term of a subscriber contract shall not be for more than twelve (12) months duration
unless after twelve (12) months the contract may be terminated by the subscriber at his
option at any time without penalty.
38. Subscriber Practices.
A. There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installment or outlet. If any subscriber
fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee or any other proper fee or charge when
due, Grantee may discontinue service to such subscriber; provided, however, Grantee
may not remove any of its equipment until after the later of (i) 30 days after the due date of
said delinquent fee or charge, or (ii) ten (10) days after delivery to subscriber of written
notice of the intent to disconnect. If a subscriber pays before expiration of the later of (i) or
(ii), Grantee shall not disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment in full of the
delinquent fee or charge and the payment of a reconnection charge, Grantee shall
promptly reinstate the subscriber's cable service.
B. Refunds to subscribers shall be made or determined in the following manner:
(1) If Grantee fails, upon request by a subscriber, to provide any service then being
offered, Grantee shall promptly refund all deposits or advance charges paid for the
service in question by said subscriber. This provision does not alter Grantee's
responsibility to subscribers under any separate contractual agreement or relieve
Grantee of any other liability.
(2) If any subscriber terminates any monthly service because of failure of Grantee to
render the service in accordance with the Franchise, Grantee shall refund to such
subscriber the proportionate share of the charges paid by the subscriber for the
services not received. This provision does not relief Grantee of liability established
in other provisions of the Franchise.
C. If any subscriber terminates any monthly service prior to the end of a prepaid period, a
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-19
proportionate portion of any prepaid subscriber service fee, using the number of days as a
basis, shall be refunded to the subscriber by Grantee.
39. Rates and Charges; Changes Therein and Procedures
A. Rates and Charges.
(1) Limitations on Rates. The charges made for services of the Grantee shall be made
in strict accordance with all applicable requirements of federal law, as amended
from time to time.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
(2) Adjustments to Rates. The City Council shall have the power, authority and right to
cause the Grantee's rates and charges to conform to the provisions of subsection
(1) hereof, and for this purpose it may deny or institute changes in such rates and
charges when it determines that, in the absence of such action on its part, the
Grantee's rates and charges or proposed rates and charges will not conform to
such subsection; provided, however, that the City Council shall not, in making such
determination, act in contravention of the Franchise Agreement.
B. Rate Schedule.
To the extent required by federal law, as amended from time to time, the Franchise
Agreement shall include a detailed schedule of all rates and charges applicable to the
System. There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or connection and
no charge for maintenance or repair service unless such service is required as a result of
damage caused by the subscriber. The rates and charges set forth in Grantee's proposal
shall not be exceeded during three and one half years from the date of the Franchise
Agreement or two years after completion of construction of the System, whichever first
occurs, subject only to preemption by state and federal law.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
C. Rate Changes.
The criteria and standards relating to the establishment of rate changes shall include those
certain criteria, if any, set forth in the Franchise Agreement.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
D. Procedure for Rate Changes.
To the extent required by federal law, as amended from time to time, procedure for
reviewing and establishing a proposed rate change shall be set forth in the Franchise
Agreement.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
E. No Change Required.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to require any proposed rate change initiated by Grantee.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-20
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
40. Subliminal Advertising. Grantee is expressly prohibited from transmitting any form of subliminal
advertising at any time.
41. Tampering in Fraudulent Connections or Sales. No person, whether or not a subscriber to the
Cable System, may intentionally or knowingly remove or damage or cause to be damaged any
wire, cable, conduit, equipment, or apparatus of the Grantee, or to commit any act with an intent
to cause such removal or damage, or tap, tamper with, or otherwise connect any wire or device to
a wire, cable, conduit, equipment and apparatus, or appurtenances of the licensee with the intent
to obtain a signal or impulse from the Cable System without authorization from or compensation to
the Grantee, or obtain cable television or other communications, service or sell, rent, end, offer or
advertise for sale, rental or use any instrument, apparatus, device or plans, specifications, or
instructions for making or assembling the same to connect to the Grantee's cable System with
intent to cheat or defraud the Grantee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled.
42. Landlord and Tenant Relationship.
A. The City hereby declares that this ordinance has as one of its principal objectives, the
lawful public purpose of rapidly developing and maximizing the educational, community
service, cultural and public safety potential of cable television in order to benefit all of the
residents of the City. The City further finds that the public interest and necessity require
that no owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling (nor his agent or representative be
permitted to directly or indirectly prevent any resident of such dwelling from receiving
Cable Communications Service installation, maintenance, and services from a Grantee
operating under a valid franchise issued by the City.
B. In order to provide the opportunity for the residents of any multiple unit residential dwelling
to obtain service from a Grantee, such Grantee may negotiate an agreement with the
owner of that dwelling, or failing agreement, may request that the City exercise its power
of eminent domain for the necessary public purpose of enabling the Grantee to serve
residents of that multiple unit residential dwelling. Upon request of such Grantee, the City
may commence condemnation proceedings in accordance with applicable law. In the
event of such proceeding, in preparing its good faith offer of just compensation, the City
may consider:
(1) the amount and fair market value of space occupied by the Grantee's cable and
related facilities. The fair market value of the space shall be assessed in light of the
prior use, if any, of that space, together with any evidence of non-speculative
alternative uses;
(2) the present value of any funds that the owner will reasonably expend over time in
ensuring that the Grantee conforms to all laws, regulations and reasonable
conditions necessary to assure the safety, convenient functioning, and appearance
of the multiple unit residential dwelling;
(3) the continued physical availability of other space on the premises for the
installation of alternative modes of television program reception or delivery;
(4) as an offset to the amounts set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) hereof, any increase
in the fair market value of the multiple unit residential dwelling attributable to the
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-21
availability of the Grantee's service to the property's tenants; and
(5) any other reasonable, non-speculative factors which the City may find relevant.
The requesting Grantee shall indemnify the City for all expenses and costs incurred by the
City in the condemnation proceedings as well as for the full amount of the condemnation
award made to the owner if such condemnation proceedings are completed or otherwise
settled.
C. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Ordinance or the Franchise
Agreement, Grantee shall be permitted to charge each resident of a multiple unit
residential dwelling an additional charge, above and beyond the service rate for a single
family dwelling as specified in the Franchise Agreement, solely to defray the exact
additional per-resident cost to the Grantee of compensating the owner for access to the
multiple unit residential dwelling. Any such additional charge shall be subject to the
approval of Grantor. Such additional charge shall not be included in the computation of
franchise fees due to the City pursuant to this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement.
D. Notwithstanding any other language in this Section or elsewhere in this Ordinance, the
Grantee shall not be obligated to provide service to any multiple unit residential dwelling so
long as the owner of that dwelling demands compensation from the Grantee in an amount
that is unreasonable or imposes financial or other conditions that would, in the Grantee's
reasonable business judgment, render provision of service to that dwelling uneconomic.
Should Grantee, subsequently, agree to render service to such multiple unit residential
dwelling, there shall be no installation charges to the residents of such dwelling beyond
those set forth in the Franchise Agreement. The Grantee shall not be obligated, in such
circumstances, to request the City to institute condemnation proceedings.
E. Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his agent or representative
shall penalize, charge, or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any
right of such tenant or resident or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident
who requests or receives Cable Communications Service from a company operating
under a valid and existing cable communication franchise issued by the City. Any person
convicted of violating any provision of this Section is subject to a fine of not more than
$300.00 for each offense.
F. No person shall resell, without the express written consent of both the Grantee and the
City, any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a Grantee operating under a
franchise issued by the City.
G. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a person from requiring that Cable Communications
System facilities conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to
protect safety, functioning and appearance.
H. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit a person from requiring a Grantee from agreeing to
indemnify the owner, or his agents or representatives, for damages or for liability for
physical damages caused by installation, operation, maintenance, or removal of cable
television facilities.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-22
ARTICLE VIII- CONSUMER PROTECTION
43. Customer Service.
A. Customer Service Standards. The Grantee shall maintain a local office or offices which
provide the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply, under normal
operating conditions, with the customer service standards set forth in subsections (1)
through (5) of this section. For purposes of this section, "normal operating conditions"
embrace all conditions which are within the control of the Grantee, including special
promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable
system, but excluding conditions outside the Grantee's control, such as, natural disasters,
civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and extreme weather:
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
(1) On a monthly basis, provide sufficient customer service representatives and tollfree
telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure that a
minimum of ninety percent (90%) of all calls will be answered within thirty (30)
seconds and ninety percent (90%) of all calls for service will not be required to wait
more than thirty (30) seconds after such call has been answered before being
connected to a service representative. All incoming customer service lines shall not
be simultaneously busy more than three percent (3%) of the total time the cable
office is open on any business day.
(2) Staffed emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four (24) hour
basis, including weekends and holidays.
(3) Maintenance of an office in the franchise area of the Intergovernmental Cable
Communications Authority (hereinafter "the Authority") with adequate office hours
to meet public demand. The Authority may require the Grantee to alter or extend
these hours if there is significant evidence through subscriber complaints that the
posted hours are not adequate.
(4) An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and
repairing system malfunctions on a twenty-four (24) hour basis.
(5) An installation staff, capable of furnishing standard installation to any subscriber
within seven (7) days after receipt of a request. "Standard installations" shall mean
those located up to 175 feet from where trunk and feeder cable have been
activated.
(a) Grantee shall, at its sole expense, cause all drops required to be buried to
be properly buried within fifteen (15) days of installation of service unless
conditions during such period make burial impracticable, in which case the
drop shall be buried within fifteen (15) days after physical conditions
reasonably allow for such burial. In the event of any dispute between
Grantee and the subscriber as to when conditions permit burial of the drop,
such dispute shall be resolved by the decision of the City's building official
or other official designated by the City to resolve such disputes.
(6) The Grantee shall provide written instructions and information at the time of
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-23
installation and re-installation, and at least annually thereafter, to all subscribers on
products and services, prices and options, installation and service maintenance
policies, instructions for using the system, and billing and complaint procedures.
Such instructions and information shall include the Grantee's business address,
applicable phone number, and the name of the appropriate official or department
of the Grantee to whose attention the subscriber should direct a request for
service, request for billing adjustment or complaint. Such instructions and
information shall also include the name, business address and telephone number
of the Authority's Executive Director and the title, business address and telephone
number of the designated City employee to whom the subscriber can call or write
for information regarding the terms, conditions, and provisions governing the
Grantee's franchise if the Grantee fails to respond within a reasonable period of
time to the subscriber's complaint or request for installation, service or billing
adjustment.
(a) The Grantee shall promptly furnish revised written instructions and
information to each subscriber whenever the instructions and information
previously provided have been changed.
(b) The written instructions and information provided for herein shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Authority which shall not withhold its
approval unreasonably. The Authority shall have the power to compel
changes in such material if the Authority deems the same to be misleading,
incorrect, or inadequate in any material respect, and the Grantee shall
promptly institute any changes so required by the Authority.
B. Local Office. For purposes of this Section 43, the office(s) which Grantee is required to
maintain may be a virtual office consisting of a toll-free telephone number which all
subscribers in the City may access from their homes 24 hours a day, seven days a week
to register complaints or questions concerning the Cable System.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
44. Cable Service.
A. The Grantee shall interrupt system service only with good cause and for the shortest time
possible and, except in emergency situations, only after periodic cablecasting notice of
service interruption for two (2) days prior to the anticipated interruption. Services may be
interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance and repair,
without notification, any night except Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Holidays, or the night
preceding a holiday.
B. The Grantee shall maintain a written log, or an equivalent stored in computer memory and
capable of access and reproduction in printed form, of all subscriber complaints. Such log
shall list the date and time of such complaints, identifying the subscribers and describing
the nature of the complaints and when and what actions were taken by the Grantee in
response thereto. Such log shall be kept at the Grantee's local office, reflecting the
operations to date for a period of at least three (3) years, and shall be available for public
inspection during regular business hours. The Grantee shall submit a summary of such
complaints monthly to the Authority for its review or a copy thereof if the Authority so
requests. For purposes of this Subsection 44.B, the local office which Grantee is
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-24
required to maintain may be a virtual office consisting of a toll-free telephone number
which all subscribers in the City may access from their homes 24 hours a day, seven days
a week to register complaints or questions concerning the Cable System, provided that,
upon request, Grantee shall make available for public inspection at a location in or
proximate to the City the log required to be maintained by Grantee pursuant to this
Subsection 44.B.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
C. For purposes of this section "service interruption" shall mean any loss or distortion of
picture and/or sound on one or more channels; "subscriber problem" shall mean a service
interruption affecting a single subscriber; "outage" shall mean a service interruption
affecting two or more subscribers. Under normal operating conditions as specified in
section 2.248 above, the Grantee shall maintain a sufficient repair force of competent
technicians so as to respond effectively to any subscriber problem or outage within the
following time periods, unless the applicable period is extended at the request of the
subscriber or extended pursuant to the requirements of any applicable law or regulation:
(1) Subscriber Problem: "same day" service, seven (7) days a week for all requests for
service received prior to 12:00 p.m. (noon) each day. In no event shall the
response time for notice received after 12:00 p.m. (noon) exceed twenty-four (24)
hours, including weekends and holidays, from the time Grantee receives notice of
the problem.
(2) Outage: within two (2) hours, including weekends and holidays, from the time
Grantee discovers or receives notice of the outage.
D. Upon receipt of a request for service, the Grantee shall establish a four (4) hour
appointment window with the subscriber (or adult representative of the subscriber). The
Grantee shall respond to the request for service within such established appointment
window. In the event access to the subscriber's home is not made available to the
Grantee's technician when the technician arrives during the established appointment
window, the technician shall leave written notification stating the time of arrival and
requesting that the Grantee be contacted again to establish a new appointment window. In
such case, the required response time for the request for service shall be twenty-four (24)
hours from the time the Grantee is contacted to establish the new appointment window.
(1) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Grantee's technician telephones the
subscriber's home before or during the appointment window and is advised that
the technician will not be given access to the subscriber's home during the
appointment window, then the technician shall not be obliged to travel to the
subscriber's home or to leave the written notification referred to above, and the
burden shall again be upon the subscriber (or adult representative of the
subscriber) to contact the Grantee to arrange for a new appointment window, in
which case the required response time for the request for service shall again be
twenty-four (24) hours from the time the Grantee is contacted to establish the new
appointment window.
E. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D) above, the Grantee, under the provisions
of this section 2.249 and section 2.248, shall be deemed to have responded to a request
for service, a subscriber problem, or an outage only when sufficient technicians arrive at
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-25
the service location, begin work on the request for service or remedial work, as the case
may be, and proceed diligently to complete such work.
F. No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service call unless the problem giving
rise to the service request can be demonstrated by the Grantee to have been:
(1) Caused by subscriber negligence, or
(2) Caused by malicious destruction of cable equipment, or
(3) A problem previously established as having been non-cable in origin.
G. All service personnel of the Grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who have as part
of their normal duties contact with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly
visible identification card bearing their name and photograph. The Grantee shall account
for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of the Grantee shall be clearly
identifiable by the public as such a vehicle.
45. Grantee's Billings.
A. The Grantee's bills to its subscribers shall be clear, concise and understandable and shall
be itemized as to each charge reflected thereon. The bill and any accompanying
communication from the Grantee to its subscribers, and any other communication from the
Grantee to its subscribers, shall not contain any false or misleading statement. Such other
communication referred to above shall be deemed to be a "report" under all applicable
provisions of the Franchise Agreement relating to "reports."
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
B. Grantee shall file with the City a copy of the billing form to be used by Grantee prior to
sending any such billing form to subscribers, and Grantee shall make no changes in the
latest billing form on file without first filing the revised billing form with the City.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
46. Disconnect and Downgrade Charges.
A. The Grantee shall make no charge to any subscriber on account of either complete
discontinuance of service or net downgrade of service whereby the subscriber requests a
lower tier of basic service and/or a net reduction in premium service.
B. The Grantee may only disconnect a subscriber if at least forty-five (45) days have elapsed
after the due date for payment of the subscriber's bill and the Grantee has provided at
least ten (10) days written notice to the subscriber prior to disconnection specifying the
effective date after which cable services are subject to disconnection; provided, however,
notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee may disconnect a subscriber at any time if the
Grantee in good faith and on reasonable grounds determines that the subscriber has
tampered with or abused the Grantee's equipment, or is or may be engaged in the theft of
cable services.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-26
C. The Grantee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests disconnection. No
period of notice prior to requested termination of service may be required of subscribers
by the Grantee. If the subscriber fails to specify an effective date for disconnection, the
effective date shall be deemed to be the day following the date the disconnect request is
received by the Grantee. No charge may be imposed upon the subscriber for any cable
service delivered after the effective date of the disconnect request.
47. Late Payment Charges.
A. Late payment charges imposed by the Grantee upon subscribers shall be fair and shall be
reasonably related to the Grantee's cost of administering delinquent accounts. No late
payment charge shall be imposed upon a subscriber, and a subscriber shall not be
deemed to be in arrears on a bill, unless at least forty-five (45) days have elapsed after the
due date specified on the bill; and, for purposes of this Section and the prior Section, the
due date specified on the bill shall not be earlier than the first day of the monthly period to
which the bill is attributable.
48. Notice of Programming or Channel Change.
A. The Grantee shall provide at least forty-five (45) days written notice to subscribers prior to
discontinuing any channel or programming service or to realigning any channel and shall
provide written notice of the same to the Authority no later than the Grantee's notice to
subscribers. This provision shall not preclude the right of the City, or the Authority on
behalf of the City, to contest or prohibit any such action by the Grantee if, and to the
extent, such right exists. The foregoing notice requirement shall not apply in cases in
which a programming service is discontinued because a non-affiliated provider thereof
discontinues furnishing the same to the Grantee on less than forty-five (45) days notice to
the Grantee. In any such case the Grantee shall nevertheless furnish notice to its
subscribers and the Authority promptly upon the Grantee receiving notice of the
discontinuance of the programming service from such unaffiliated provider.
49. Notice of Price Increase or Reduction of Service.
A. The Grantee shall provide at least forty-five (45) days written notice to subscribers prior to
implementing any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in subscriber services and shall
provide written notice of the same to the Authority no later than the Grantee's notice to
subscribers. The provisions of this section shall not preclude the right of the City, or the
Authority on behalf of the City, to contest or prohibit any such action by the Grantee if, and
to the extent, permitted by law.
50. Grantee's Communications.
A. Prior to or simultaneously with any communication made by the Grantee to the general
public or to the Grantee's subscribers announcing or explaining any increase in subscriber
rates or reduction in programming services, the Grantee shall furnish a copy of such
communication to the Authority. The copy of the communication required to be furnished
to the Authority hereunder shall be deemed to be a "report" under all applicable provisions
of the Franchise Agreement relating to "reports," including, without limitation, the
provisions of subsections (J) and (K) of Section 19 of the Franchise Agreement in effect as
of the effective date of this Ordinance.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-27
51. Disclosure of Information on Grantee's Costs.
A. In the event the Grantee, in any communication to the general public, to the City, to
subscribers, or to the Authority, justifies a price increase or reduction in service on the
basis of increased costs to which the Grantee has been or will be subjected, then the
Grantee, on written request of the Authority, shall promptly furnish the Authority the
underlying information on which such claim of increased costs is based in such form as
the Authority may request. The information so furnished by the Grantee to the Authority
hereunder shall also be deemed to be a "report" under all applicable provisions of the
Franchise Agreement relating to "reports," including, without limitation, the provisions of
subsections (J) and (K) of Section 19 of the Franchise Agreement in effect as of the
effective date of this Ordinance.
52. Subscriber Rebates.
A. Grantee shall provide a customer with a full-day credit or a rebate for a service outage
exceeding four hours in duration beyond the time that the customer notified Grantee of
such outage. No credit or rebate shall be required where the outage was due to matters
beyond the immediate control of Grantee, such as (by way of example and not limitation),
service outages caused by storms or other natural disasters. In no event shall the
customer incur a charge for any outage exceeding 48 hours. The credit specified herein
shall be equal to one-thirtieth of the subscriber's total monthly bill for all services and
equipment other than pay-per-view; provided, however, if such monthly bill includes a
charge for a pay-per-view program subject to such outage or significant impairment, then
the credit shall be increased by the amount of such charge.
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
B. In the event of a violation of the provisions of this Article by the Grantee which results in a
subscriber not receiving cable programming service or receiving only significantly impaired
service, the Authority may order and direct the Grantee to issue a rebate to such
subscriber in an amount determined by the Authority to provide monetary relief to the
subscriber substantially equal to the subscriber's unliquidated detriment or loss resulting
from such violation, not to exceed the subscriber's monthly bill.
C. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude a subscriber from requesting and
receiving from the Grantee a rebate greater than that provided in subsections (A) and (B)
of this section.
53. Security Fund.
A. Subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance, within ten (10) days after the award of
a new franchise or the transfer, extension or renewal of an existing franchise, the Grantee
thereunder shall furnish the Authority, on behalf of all of the Authority's member
communities, and thereafter maintain with the Authority, throughout the term of the
franchise, a cash deposit of an amount reasonably related to the requirements of this
Section as set forth in the Franchise Agreement as security for:
(1) the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of this Ordinance and the
franchise,
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-28
(2) compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency,
commission, board or department of the City having jurisdiction over its acts or
defaults under the franchise, and
(3) the payment by the Grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the City
which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the
system.
(Rev. 7-24-95)
B. Within ten (10) days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn from the
Security Fund, the Grantee shall pay to or deposit with the Authority a sum of money in the
full amount withdrawn.
C. If the Grantee fails to pay to the City any fees within the time fixed herein; or fails, after ten
(10) days written notice, to pay to the City any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay the
City within such ten (10) days, any damages, costs, or expenses which the City shall be
compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the Grantee in connection with a
franchise; or fails, after three (3) days notice of such failure, to comply with any provisions
of the franchise which the City reasonably determines can be remedied by a withdrawal
from the Security Fund, the Authority, on request of the City, may immediately withdraw
the amount thereof, with interest and any additional charges, from the Security Fund.
Upon such withdrawal, the Authority shall notify the Grantee of the amount and date
thereof and shall remit to the City the amount so withdrawn.
D. The Security Fund deposited pursuant to this section, including all interest thereon, if any,
shall be held by the Authority, for the benefit of its member communities, in the event that
the franchise is rescinded or revoked by reason of the default of the Grantee. The
Grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such Security Fund, or such portion
thereof as remains on deposit at the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided that
there is then no outstanding default on the part of the Grantee. Any interest earned by the
investment of the Security Fund shall become part of the Security Fund and unless
consumed by the payment of liquidated damages, fees or other charges under this
Ordinance, shall be returned to the Grantee at the expiration of the franchise term,
provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the Grantee.
E. The Authority shall maintain the Security Fund in a segregated account and shall not
commingle the same with any other monies of the Authority. The Authority may, but shall
not be required to, invest the Security Fund so as to earn interest thereon and shall not be
liable to the Grantee on any claim based upon the lack or insufficiency of interest earned
by such Fund.
F. Payment from the Security Fund shall not constitute a cure of any violation or any act of
non-compliance by the Grantee. The rights reserved to the City with respect to the
Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved by this
Ordinance or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with
respect to such Security Fund shall affect any other right the City may have.
G. The Security Fund provided for in this section shall not be required if the Franchise
Agreement expressly required Grantee to provide a cash security fund, letter of credit or
other security that is mutually agreeable to the City and Grantee.
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-29
(Rev. 04-08-1996)
54. Liquidated Damages.
A. The Authority may assess liquidated damages of up to one hundred ($100.00) dollars per
day against the Grantee for each day the Grantee is in violation of this Article. Such
assessment may be levied against the Security Fund specified in Section 2.258 or any
letter of credit, performance bond, or other security provided for in the Franchise
Agreement.
B. Assessment of liquidated damages shall not constitute a waiver by the City of any other
right or remedy it may have under the Franchise Agreement or applicable law, including
the right to recover from the Grantee any costs and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees, which are incurred by the City on account of the Grantee's violation of this
Article.
55. Evaluation of Violations.
A. The violation of this Ordinance by the Grantee, the Grantee's agents, employees and/or
independent contractors employed or retained by the Grantee shall be grounds for
evaluating:
(1) the Grantee's compliance with any existing Agreement and with applicable law;
and
(2) the quality of the Grantee's service and whether it has been reasonable in light of
community needs; and
(3) the technical ability of the Grantee to provide the services, facilities, and equipment
as set forth in an operator's proposal for future or renewed cable services; and
(4) the reasonableness of the Grantee's proposal to meet the future cable-related
community needs and interests of the residents and cable television consumers of
the City.
B. These evaluations shall be proper and germane for the City to consider formally when
reviewing a proposal for renewal of any Agreement to provide cable services within the
City.
56. Remedies Available.
A. If the Authority determines that the Grantee has violated this Article, the Authority may
order appropriate rebates to subscribers as provided in Section 52 and/or assess
liquidated damages against the Grantee as provided in Section 54. In addition, the City
may pursue any additional or other legal or equitable remedies available to it under the
Franchise Agreement or any applicable law.
57. Appeal Process.
A. With respect to matters affecting the City individually, and excluding matters affecting all of
the Authority's member communities equally, the Grantee may appeal any action of the
Chapter 63 - Cable Communications
63-30
Authority to the City by submitting a written appeal within twenty-one (21) days from the
date of the Authority's action to which the Grantee objects. Upon such appeal, the City
Commission shall conduct a de novo review of the action of the Authority being appealed
and shall set a hearing date within sixty (60) days of the date of receipt of the Appeal. The
Grantee may present any information, data or other evidence to the City Commission
either prior to or at the time of the hearing. Hearings shall be open to the public and
members of the public and representatives of the Authority may also present any evidence
or information pertinent to the matter appealed. The City Commission shall then determine
whether to uphold, reverse, or modify the action of the Authority. The appeal shall stay any
further action on the matter appealed until the appeal has been decided by the City
Commission.
58. [Repealed]
(04-08-1996)
Article IX - MISCELLANEOUS
59. Administrator. The City Council may appoint an Administrator who shall serve at the pleasure of
the Council and who shall be responsible for the continuing administration of the Franchise on
the part of the City. The City shall provide written notice to Grantee of the initial appointment of
the Administrator and any subsequent appointments.
60. Advisory Body. The City Council may appoint a cable communications advisory committee to
perform such duties and to have such powers as the City Council may determine. The
composition and terms of office of the members of the committee, as well as the duties and
powers of the Committee, shall be determined and established by resolution of the City Council.
61. Delegation of Authority by City. The City reserves the right to delegate from time to time any of its
rights or obligations under the Franchise to any body or organization. Any such delegation shall be
effective upon written notice thereof to Grantee. Upon receipt of such notice Grantee shall be
bound by all terms and conditions of the delegation not in conflict with the Franchise. Any such
delegation or revocation thereof, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed to be an
amendment to the Franchise or require Grantee's consent.
Chapter 64 - Gasoline Stations
64-1
7.91. Definitions.
In the interpretation of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply:
(1) "Gasoline station" shall mean any premises where flammable liquids in quantities in
excess of five hundred (500) gallons are stored. Flammable liquids shall have the
meaning set forth in the flammable liquids regulations of the State Fire Marshal as
adopted in Chapter 93 of this Code.
(2) "Place of Assembly" shall mean any public library, public or private school, playground,
park, church, hospital, children's or old people's home, auditorium or other place designed
or intended for the assembly of one hundred (100) people or more.
7.92. Application for Building Permit.
Every application for a building permit for the alteration of construction of any gasoline station
shall be accompanied by a drawing in duplicate to a scale of not less than 1/8 inch to a foot,
showing the location of the gasoline station and any driveways, pumps, air hoses or other
improvements or appurtenances contemplated. Such application shall show in detail the type of
materials to be used in the construction contemplated. The application shall also be accompanied
by duplicate copies of a map clearly showing the distance from any point on the premises at which
flammable liquids are to be stored or used, to any place of public assembly located within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any portion of said premises and shall show the nature of any other land
uses within such area. The application for the building permit shall be filed with the Building
Inspector who shall furnish one copy thereof together with the required maps and drawings to the
Fire Chief. The Fire Chief and the Building Inspector shall investigate such application and shall,
within ten (10) days after filing such application, report their findings and recommendations
thereon to the City Council, which report and recommendation shall be filed with the City Clerk for
presentation to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Provided only that
applications for "Private Gasoline Filling Station" and the findings and recommendations of the
Fire Chief and the Building Inspector in the pursuance thereof, shall be filed with the City
Manager, and he shall grant the application only when he shall find that the erection or alteration
of said gasoline filling station will not by reason of traffic conditions or fire explosion hazards
impair the public safety.
(Rev. 07-23-1979)
7.93. City Council Findings.
When any such application for erection or alteration of a gasoline station shall be presented to the
City Council it shall investigate the same, consider the reports and recommendations by the
Building Inspector and Fire Chief and such other evidence as it deems necessary in the premises
and shall grant the application when it shall find that the erection or alteration of such gasoline
station will not, by reason of traffic conditions or fire or explosion hazards, imperil the public safety.
(Rev. 07-23-1979)
Chapter 64 - Gasoline Stations
64-2
7.94. Neighbor's Consent.
The City Council shall not be obliged to grant any application for a permit to construct or alter any
gasoline station unless there shall be filed with it prior to the granting of such permit the written
consent of sixty (60%) percent or more of the property owners owning property, all or any part of
which is within a radius of four hundred (400) feet of any part of the premises where the
construction or alteration of the gasoline station is proposed, provided, that the filing of such
written consents shall be unnecessary in any case where less than eighty (80%) percent of the
buildings, all or any part of which are located within a radius of four hundred (400) feet of any part
of the site of the proposed gasoline station, are used for residential purposes.
(Rev. 07-23-1979)
7.95. Licenses Required.
(Repealed 12-02-02)
Chapter 65  Taxicabs, Limousines and Drivers
65-1
65.0 DEFINITIONS
A. "Cruising" means the driving of a taxicab or limousine on the streets, alleys or public places of the
City of Troy in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire.
B. Limo carrier of passengers means a person who, either directly or through any device or
arrangement, holds himself or herself out to the public as willing to transport, by limousine, from place
to place over the public highways of this state.
C. Limousine means a self-propelled motor vehicle used in the carrying of passengers with or without
the baggage of the passengers for hire upon a public highway of this state with a seating capacity of
15 passengers or less, including the driver. Limousine does not include a self-propelled motor vehicle
having a seating capacity of 15 passengers or less that is used by or on behalf of an employer to
transport its employees to and from their place of employment.
D. Limousine stand means a fixed area in the road right-of-way, which is set aside for limousines to
stand or wait for passengers.
E. Taxicab means a licensed public motor vehicle for hire which is designated and constructed to seat
not more than 10 persons and which is operated as a common carrier on call or demand.
F. Taxicab stand means a fixed area in the road right-of-way, which is set aside for taxicabs to stand or
wait for passengers.
G. "Taximeter" means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab, which measures mechanically
the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based.
65.100 TAXICAB VEHICLE PERMITS
65.101 Taxicab Vehicle Permit Required
No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him to be operated as a vehicle for
hire upon the streets of the City of Troy without having first obtained a Taxicab Vehicle Permit pursuant
to the provision of this Chapter. Any operator of a taxicab that picks up passengers in the City of Troy
for a destination, either within or outside the City of Troy municipal boundaries, shall comply with the
provisions of this Chapter. Taxicabs not possessing a City of Troy Taxicab Vehicle Permit may deliver
their fares or passengers to destinations within the City. Taxicabs possessing a City of Troy Taxicab
Vehicle Permit may deliver their fares or passengers to destinations throughout the City or may call for
and pick up passengers within the City in response to a direct request.
65.102 Taxicab Vehicle Permit Application
A Taxicab Vehicle Permit application shall be filed with the City Clerk, on forms provided by the City of
Troy and said application shall be verified under notarized oath. The City Clerk shall submit the
application to the Police Department for an investigation. The application shall require the following
items:
A. Applicants personal identification information
B. The amounts of any unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transaction or acts giving rise to said judgments
C. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers
D. A concise history of the applicants employment
E. The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant, and the location of
proposed depots and terminals
Chapter 65  Taxicabs, Limousines and Drivers
65-2
F. Vehicle license plate and identification numbers
G. The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the
applicant
H. Proof of fleet vehicle insurance
I. Hours of operation
J. Any other information as the City Clerk may require
65.103 Taxicab Vehicle Permit Application  Police Investigation
The investigation shall consist of a review and follow up on information in the Taxicab Vehicle Permit
application and all required documents, and a satisfactory evaluation of the Taxicab Inspection Report
provided to the applicant by the City Clerk for each vehicle.
If the Police Department approves the application and it conforms to the provisions of this Chapter, the
City Clerk shall issue a vehicle permit for each vehicle.
If the Police Department rejects the application, the applicant may request a personal appearance before
the City Council to offer evidence why his application should be reconsidered.
65.104 Taxicab Vehicle Permit Fees
Taxicab Vehicle Permit fees shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 59 of this Code and the fee
therefore shall be as specified in Chapter 60 of this Code.
65.105 Taxicab Vehicle Permit
There shall be issued to each authorized taxicab under this Chapter one Taxicab Vehicle Permit with the
words Permitted Taxicab No._________, Troy, Michigan" and the year of issuance. Such vehicle permit
shall be firmly affixed to the rear of the vehicle in such a position as to be plainly visible at all times.
65.106 Taxicab Vehicle Liability Insurance Required
No Taxicab Vehicle Permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect
a liability insurance policy for each vehicle authorized in the amount not less than $100,000.00 for bodily
injury to any one person, $300,000.00 for injuries to more than one person, and $50,000.00 for property
damage resulting from any one accident; $300,000.00 in a combined single limit policy. Said insurance
shall insure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property
proximately caused by negligence of a holder, his servants or agents. Said insurance documents shall be
filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be from an insurance company licensed and admitted to do
business in the State of Michigan and acceptable to the City of Troy.
Said insurance shall remain in full force as long as the Taxicab Vehicle Permit is in effect. If said
insurance is cancelled for any reason, the Taxicab Vehicle Permit(s) issued to that carrier shall be
considered revoked without any further action by the City of Troy.
65.107 Condition of Vehicles
All vehicles issued a Taxicab Vehicle Permit under this Chapter shall be kept in good repair, in good
mechanical order, and in a good clean and sanitary condition. The Police Department shall have the right
to examine or cause to be examined all vehicles issued a Taxicab Vehicle Permit vehicles for the purpose
of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this section.
65.108 Solicitations and Cruising
No taxicab driver shall solicit passengers upon the streets and highways of the City of Troy, except the
driver of a permitted taxicab while sitting in the driver's seat of his vehicle. No driver of a taxicab or
limousine shall seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his taxicab to and fro on the
street, or do any so-called "cruising".
Chapter 65  Taxicabs, Limousines and Drivers
65-3
65.109 Taxicab Stands
The City Council shall have power, by resolution, to locate and designate special taxicab stands and the
number of taxicabs permitted therein at one time. The Council may require that no taxicabs may be
parked on the streets of the City of Troy except at a designated stand.
65.110 Passenger Refusing to Pay Legal Fare
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the
same, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined with intent to defraud the
person from whom it is hired for the value of such service.
65.111 Taximeter Required
All taxicabs operated under the authority of this Chapter shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in
front of the passengers, visible to them at all time, day and night, and after sundown the face of the
taximeter shall be illuminated. Said taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard
design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a flexible
and permanently attached driving mechanism. It shall be sealed at all points and connections, which, if
manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall have thereon a flag to
denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed; and it shall be the duty of the driver to
throw the flag of such taximeter into a non-recording position at the termination of each trip. Any officer of
the Police Department is hereby authorized, either on complaint of any person or without such complaint,
to inspect any meter, and, upon discovering of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the person operating said
taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon, said taxicab shall be kept off the streets and highways of the City
of Troy until the taximeter is repaired and in the required working condition.
65.112 Fare Rates
A printed schedule of rates shall be conspicuously posted in each taxicab. The fare rates established by
an owner shall be the same for every taxi registered according to this Chapter. The operators or drivers of
taxicabs shall at any time, charge no greater fare than that shown on the posted rate schedule. No
charge shall be made for time lost for inefficiency of the taxicab driver, or time consumed by premature
response to a call, or for traffic delays. No charge shall be made for extra passengers. No other or
additional charges shall be permitted except that a charge may be made for a call when a person calling
for a taxicab fails to make use of the same.
65.200 TAXICAB DRIVER PERMITS
65.201 Driver's License Endorsements Required
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the City of Troy, and no person who owns or
controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven, and no taxicab permitted by the City of Troy shall be so
driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of said taxicab shall have first obtained, and shall have then
in force, a valid Chauffeurs License issued by the State of Michigan.
65.202 Taxicab Driver Permit Required
No person shall operate a taxicab as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the City of Troy without
having first obtained a Taxicab Driver Permit pursuant to the provision of this Chapter. Any operator of
a taxicab that picks up passengers in the City of Troy for a destination, either within or outside of the
City of Troy municipal boundaries, shall comply with the provisions in this Chapter. Taxicab Drivers not
issued a Taxicab Driver Permit in the City of Troy may deliver their fares or passengers to destinations
within the City. Taxicabs possessing a City of Troy Taxicab Driver Permit may deliver their fares or
passengers to destinations throughout the City or may call for and pick up passengers within the City in
response to a direct request.
Chapter 65  Taxicabs, Limousines and Drivers
65-4
65.203 Taxicab Driver Permit Application
A Taxicab Driver Permit application shall be filed with the City Clerk, on forms provided by the City of
Troy and said application shall be verified under notarized oath. The City Clerk shall submit the
application to the Police Department for an investigation. The application shall require the following
items:
A. Applicants personal identification information
B. The presentation of the drivers valid State of Michigan chauffeurs license, and a
photocopy of the original
C. The amounts of any unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transaction or acts giving rise to said judgments
D. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers
E. A concise history of the applicants employment
F. The name, address and telephone number of the taxicab company for whom the driver
will be driving
G. Applicants fingerprints shall be taken by the Troy Police Department, for which there
shall be a fee paid to the City of Troy, such fee shall be established by City Council
Resolution
H. Any other information as the City Clerk may require
65.204 Taxicab Driver Permit Application  Police Investigation
The investigation shall consist of a review and follow up on information in the Taxicab Driver Permit
application and all required documents. A report of such investigation, and a copy of the traffic and
police records of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the
Chief of Police or designee.
The Chief of Police or designee shall, upon consideration of the Taxicab Driver Permit application and the
reports attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may
request a personal appearance before the City Council to offer evidence why his application should be
reconsidered.
65.205 Taxicab Driver Permit Issuance
If it is found that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform public transportation and to conform to the
provisions of this Chapter, and upon approval of the application and payment of a driver permit fee, the
City Clerk shall issue a Taxicab Driver Permit containing the name, address, age, signature and
photograph of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under said driver permit and the date of
issuance. Such driver permit shall be in effect for the remainder of the permit year. Otherwise, the
application shall be denied.
65.206 Taxicab Driver Permit Fees
Taxicab Driver permit fees shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 59 of this Code and the fee
therefore shall be as specified in Chapter 60 of this Code.
65.207 Taxicab Driver Permit Display
Every driver permitted under this Chapter shall post his Taxicab Driver Permit in such a place as to be in
full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab.
65.208 Taxicab Driver Permit Suspensions and Revocation
The Police Department may immediately revoke the Taxicab Driver Permit upon the applicants violation
of any provisions of this ordinance or for other good cause.
Chapter 65  Taxicabs, Limousines and Drivers
65-5
If the Police Department revokes a Taxicab Driver Permit, the applicant may appeal that decision by
submitting a written letter to the Chief of Police within 72 hours of the date of notification of the revocation.
This letter shall state the reasons why the applicant feels that the Taxicab Driver Permit should be
reinstated, and shall attach any evidence in support of the reasons. Within 48 hours of receiving such a
letter, the Chief of Police will either confirm or reverse the challenged action concerning the Taxicab
Driver Permit.
The suspension and revocation of Taxicab Driver and Taxicab Vehicle Permits shall be subject to the
provisions of Chapter 59 of this Code. No Taxicab Driver or Vehicle Permits shall be suspended for a
period of longer than ten (10) days or more often than once in ninety-days (90), but this shall not be
deemed a limitation on the power of revocation specified in Chapter 59.
In addition to the grounds specified for suspension and revocation of permits in Chapter 59 of this Code,
a permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be suspended or revoked if the holder has
discontinued operation of a permitted taxicab for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
65.300 LIMOUSINE VEHICLE PERMITS
65.301 Limousine Vehicle Permit Required
No person shall operate or permit a limousine owned or controlled by him to be operated as a vehicle for
hire upon the streets of the City of Troy without having first obtained a Limousine Vehicle Permit pursuant
to the provision of this Chapter. Any operator of a limousine that picks up passengers in the City of Troy
for a destination, either within or outside the City of Troy municipal boundaries, shall comply with the
provisions of this Chapter. Limousines not possessing a City of Troy Limousine Vehicle Permit may
deliver their fares or passengers to destinations within the City. Limousines possessing a City of Troy
Limousine Vehicle Permit may deliver their fares or passengers to destinations throughout the City or
may call for and pick up passengers within the City in response to a direct request.
65.302 Limousine Vehicle Permit Application
A Limousine Vehicle Permit application shall be filed with the City Clerk, on forms provided by the City
of Troy and said application shall be verified under notarized oath. The City Clerk shall submit the
application to the Police Department for an investigation. The application shall require the following
items:
A. Applicants personal identification information
B. The amounts of any unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transaction or acts giving rise to said judgments
C. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers
D. A concise history of the applicants employment
E. The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant, and the location of
proposed depots and terminals
F. Vehicle license plate and identification numbers
G. The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the
applicant
H. The Certificate of Authority issued by the State of Michigan Transportation Department,
as required by Section 257.1907 of the Michigan Compiled Laws (the Limousine
Transportation Act)
I. Proof of insurance in amounts equal to those required by Section 257.1913 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws (The Limousine Transportation Act)
J. Copies of annual vehicle inspection papers for all vehicles registered, as required by
section 257.1919 of the Michigan Compiled Laws (the Limousine Transportation Act).
The City may require further inspection if it so deems necessary
Chapter 65  Taxicabs, Limousines and Drivers
65-6
K. Hours of operation
L. Any other information as the City Clerk may require
65.303 Limousine Vehicle Permit Application  Police Investigation
The investigation shall consist of a review and follow up on information in the Limousine Vehicle Permit
application and all required documents. If necessary, the Police Department may require further safety
inspections, in addition to any safety inspections done in compliance with the Limousine Transportation
Act.
If the Police Department approves the application and it conforms to the provisions of this Chapter, the
City Clerk shall issue a limousine Vehicle Permit for each vehicle.
If the Police Department rejects the application, the applicant may request a personal appearance before
the City Council to offer evidence why his application should be reconsidered.
65.304 Limousine Vehicle Permit Fees
Limousine Vehicle permit fees shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 59 of this Code and the fee
therefore shall be as specified in Chapter 60 of this Code.
65.305 Limousine Vehicle Permit
There shall be issued to each authorized limousine under this Chapter one Limousine Vehicle Permit with
the words "Permitted Limousine No._________, Troy, Michigan" and the year of issuance. Such
Limousine Vehicle Permit shall be firmly affixed to the rear of the vehicle in such a position as to be plainly
visible at all times.
65.306 Limousine Vehicle Liability Insurance Required
Limousine vehicle permit holders shall carry insurance equal to that required by Section 257.1913, of
Michigan Compiled Laws (the Limousine Transportation Act).
Said insurance shall remain in full force as long as the Limousine Vehicle Permit is in effect. If said
insurance is cancelled for any reason, the Limousine Vehicle Permit(s) issued to that carrier shall be
considered revoked without any further action by the City of Troy.
65.307 Condition of Vehicles
All vehicles issued a Limousine Vehicle Permit under this Chapter shall be kept in good repair, in good
mechanical order, and in a good clean and sanitary condition. The Police Department shall have the right
to examine or cause to be examined all vehicles issued a Limousine Vehicle Permit for the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this section.
65.308 Solicitations and Cruising
No limousine driver shall solicit passengers upon the streets and highways of the City of Troy, except the
driver of a permitted limousine while sitting in the driver's seat of his vehicle. No driver of a limousine shall
seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his limousine to and fro on the street, or do any
so-called "cruising".
65.309 Limousine Stands
The City Council shall have power, by resolution, to locate and designate special limousine stands and
the number of limousines permitted therein at one time. The Council may require that no limousines may
be parked on the streets of the City of Troy except at a designated stand.
Chapter 65  Taxicabs, Limousines and Drivers
65-7
65.310 Passenger Refusing to Pay Legal Fare
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any limousine after having hired the
same and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined with intent to defraud the
person from whom it is hired for the value of such service.
65.400 LIMSOUSINE DRIVER PERMITS
65.401 Driver's License Endorsements Required
No person shall operate a limousine for hire upon the streets of the City of Troy, and no person who owns
or controls a limousine shall permit it to be so driven, and no limousine permitted by the City of Troy shall
be so driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of said limousine shall have first obtained, and shall
have then in force, a valid Chauffeurs License issued by the State of Michigan.
65.402 Limousine Driver Permit Required
No person shall operate a limousine as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the City of Troy without
having first obtained a Limousine Driver Permit pursuant to the provision of this Chapter. Any operator
of a limousine that picks up passengers in the City of Troy for a destination, either within or without the
City of Troy, shall comply with the provisions in this Chapter. Limousine Drivers not possessing a City
of Troy Limousine Driver Permit may deliver their fares or passengers to destinations within the City.
Limousines possessing a City of Troy Limousine Driver Permit may deliver their fares or passengers to
destinations throughout the City or may call for and pick up passengers within the City in response to a
direct request.
65.403 Limousine Driver Permit Application
A Limousine Driver Permit application shall be filed with the City Clerk, on forms provided by the City of
Troy and said application shall be verified under notarized oath. The City Clerk shall submit the
application to the Police Department for an investigation. The application shall require the following
items:
A. Applicants personal identification information
B. The presentation of the drivers valid State of Michigan chauffeurs license, and a
photocopy of the original
C. The amounts of any unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transaction or acts giving rise to said judgments
D. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers
E. A concise history of the applicants employment The name, address and telephone
number of the limousine company for whom the driver will be driving
F. Applicants fingerprints shall be taken by the Troy Police Department, for which there
shall be a fee paid to the City of Troy, such fee shall be established by City Council
Resolution.
G. Any other information as the City Clerk may require
65.404 Limousine Driver Permit Application  Police Investigation
The investigation shall consist of a review and follow up on information in the Limousine Driver Permit
application and all required documents. A report of such investigation, and a copy of the traffic and
police records of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the
Chief of Police or designee.
The Chief of Police or designee shall, upon consideration of the Limousine Driver Permit application and
the reports attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant
may request a personal appearance before the City Council to offer evidence why his application should
be reconsidered.
Chapter 65  Taxicabs, Limousines and Drivers
65-8
65.405 Limousine Driver Permit Issuance
If it is found that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform public transportation and to conform to the
provisions of this Chapter, and upon approval of the application and payment of a driver permit fee, the
City Clerk shall issue a Limousine Driver Permit containing the name, address, age, signature and
photograph of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under said driver permit and the date of
issuance. Such Limousine Driver Permit shall be in effect for the remainder of the permit year. Otherwise,
the application shall be denied.
65.406 Limousine Driver Fees
Limousine Driver permit fees shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 59 of this Code and the fee
therefore shall be as specified in Chapter 60 of this Code.
65.407 Limousine Driver Permit Display
Every driver permitted under this Chapter shall post his Limousine Driver Permit in such a place as to be
in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a limousine.
65.408 Limousine Driver Permit Suspensions and Revocation
The Police Department may immediately revoke the Limousine Driver Permit upon the applicants
violation of any provisions of this ordinance or for other good cause.
If the Police Department revokes a Limousine Driver Permit, the applicant may appeal that decision by
submitting a written letter to the Chief of Police within 72 hours of the date of notification of the revocation.
This letter shall state the reasons why the applicant feels that the Limousine Driver Permit should be
reinstated, and shall attach any evidence in support of the reasons. Within 48 hours of receiving such a
letter, the Chief of Police will either confirm or reverse the challenged action concerning the Limousine
Driver Permit.
The suspension and revocation of Limousine Driver and Limousine Vehicle Permits shall be subject to the
provisions of Chapter 59 of this Code. No Limousine Driver or Vehicle Permits shall be suspended for a
period of longer than ten (10) days or more often than once in ninety-days (90), but this shall not be
deemed a limitation on the power of revocation specified in Chapter 59.
In addition to the grounds specified for suspension and revocation of permits in Chapter 59 of this Code,
a permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be suspended or revoked if the holder has
discontinued operation of a permitted limousine for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
65.500 AUTHORITY
65.501 Police Authority
Any police officer of the City of Troy shall have the power to stop any taxicab or limousine operating
within the City of Troy to determine whether the vehicle is being operated in compliance with this
Chapter.
65.502 Fraudulent Application or Use of Permits
No person shall submit a fraudulent application for a permit, or use any Taxicab Vehicle or Limousine
Vehicle Permit and/or Taxicab or Limousine Driver Permit for purposes other than those specified in this
Chapter, including, but not limited to, attaching a City of Troy Taxicab or Limousine Vehicle Permit to a
non-permitted vehicle, or use of another persons Taxicab or Limousine Driver Permit by a non-permitted
driver.
Chapter 65  Taxicabs, Limousines and Drivers
65-9
65.503 Violations and Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter, upon conviction, in addition to any
penalties provided herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500
and/or 90 days in jail.
(Rewritten: 12-04-06)
Chapter 66 - Motor Vehicle Races
66-1
Chapter 66-Motor Vehicle Races of the Code of the City of Troy is repealed by the Council of
the City of Troy, Oakland County Michigan, at a Regular Meeting of the City Council held at City
Hall, 500 W. Big Beaver, Troy, MI on the 6th day of February, 2017 and is effective ten (10) days
from the date hereof or upon publication, whichever shall later occur.
(Effective 2/16/2017)
Chapter 67 - Dances and Dance Halls
67-1
7.141. Definitions.
In the interpretation of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply:
(1) "Public Dance Halls" shall mean any place enclosed or unenclosed, building, or
that portion of any building which is primarily used for public dances or balls; where
the public may gain admission with or without payment of a fee.
(2) "Operator" shall mean any operator, proprietor, lessee, manager or employee of
any public dance hall.
(3) "Special Dance" shall mean any dance or ball conducted or sponsored by any
person in a rented or leased building, hall or other location approved by the Police
Department.
(4) "Municipal Dance" shall mean any dance or ball which is sponsored by the Board
of Education or the Department of Parks and Recreation of the City of Troy and
conducted in a building owned or leased by the City of Troy or the Board of
Education.
7.142. License Required.
No person shall conduct or sponsor any public dance or ball for hire without first being duly
licensed as hereinafter required; provided, however, that the provisions of this Chapter
shall not apply to Municipal Dances, dances or balls conducted by a religious or fraternal
organization in a hall which is owned or leased and operated by such organization and
such dance or ball is not open to the public. Further, that this Chapter shall not apply to
private receptions.
7.143. Operator's Duty.
No operator, as defined herein, shall allow or permit the use of any public dance hall
unless a license for such use shall have been obtained from the City Council of the City of
Troy.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
7.144. Application.
(1) Every person or operator desiring to obtain a license as required by this Chapter
shall file a written application at least thirty (30) days prior to the date on which
license is desired on forms approved by the Police Chief and the City Clerk of the
City of Troy, together with the license fee as hereinafter provided. The application
shall include the following information:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of each person, co-partnerships,
firm, corporation, society, club, association, or organization conducting said
public dance hall, public dance or public ball.
(b) Location of the public dance hall, or place where dance or ball is to be
conducted.
Chapter 67 - Dances and Dance Halls
67-2
(c) Name to be used by applicant.
(d) Any other information required by the Police Chief or City Clerk to aid in
determining the moral character of the applicant.
(2) All applicants must be at least twenty-one (2l) years of age and shall not have
been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude for a period of two
(2) years prior to the application.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
7.145. Inspection.
Before any public dance hall license or any license for any dance shall be issued, the
Police Chief and City Clerk shall cause an inspection of the place to be licensed or where
dance is to be held. Upon full compliance with all pertinent rules and regulations of the
Police Department, Building Department and the Fire Department relating to the safety,
health, convenience, comfort and morals of the public, the City Clerk, through authority of
the City Council, may issue a license for the place to be used as a public dance hall or for
a public dance or ball.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
7.146. Requirements.
Each license shall:
(1) At all times open each and every portion of the licensed premises for the
inspection of the Police Department and/or other City departments for the purpose
of enforcing any of the provisions of this Code relating to the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the public.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
(2) At all times display the license granted hereunder in a conspicuous place near the
entrance to the licensed establishment.
(3) Provide separate and adequate dressing rooms for male, and female entertainers
where entertainment is provided.
(4) At all times provide adequate lighting in every part of the licensed premises; and
provide at least one sanitary drinking fountain for each two thousand (2,000)
square feet of floor space or fraction thereof, provided only that no such
establishment shall have less than two (2) drinking fountains.
(5) Provide a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of unobstructed dance
space, which shall be plainly indicated by floor markings.
(6) All plumbing in dance halls, shall meet the minimum requirements of the
Plumbing Code of the City of Troy. All rooms housing sanitary facilities shall be
equipped with sanitary towels of a type or types acceptable to the Building
Chapter 67 - Dances and Dance Halls
67-3
Department of the City of Troy. Sanitary drinking fountains shall not be located
within the toilet rooms.
7.147. Prohibitions.
No licensee, by himself, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent or employee, shall:
(1) Show any motion picture nor use any stage or movable scenery without first
obtaining the approval of the Fire Department, nor present any entertainment,
talent or amateur show without approval of the Police Department.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
(2) Permit any indecent, immoral or profane language or indecent, immoral or
disorderly conduct.
(3) Permit the licensed premises to become a resort for thieves, prostitutes or other
disorderly persons.
(4) Permit immoral, vulgar, lewd, obscene, improper or freak dancing.
(5) Permit smoking in the area designated for dancing.
(6) Permit gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling paraphernalia on
the premises.
(7) Permit overcrowding in the area designated for dancing. For the purposes of this
Chapter, overcrowding shall mean any number of persons in excess of the
maximum approved by the Fire Department.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
(8) Permit the employees to dance with the patrons.
(9) Permit the intoxicated persons to dance or loiter on the premises.
(10) Employ a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years, nor shall any person
be permitted to participate in any talent or amateur show or other entertainment
who is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(11) Permit any person under the age of seventeen (17) years to be upon the premises.
(12) Permit the possession or use of any alcoholic liquor on the premises, including all
front yards, side yards, back yards and parking areas, nor shall the licensed
premises be accessible in any way with any place where alcoholic liquor is kept,
sold, distributed or given away. This prohibition shall not apply while a Michigan
Liquor Control Commission special license is in effect at the licensed premises.
(13) Permit dancing on the licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 7:30
A.M., without having first obtained a special permit from the Police Chief and City
Clerk. Application for such special permit shall be filed with the City Clerk at least
Chapter 67 - Dances and Dance Halls
67-4
seven (7) days in advance of the date of such dance. No such permit shall be
issued less than thirty (30) days subsequent to any special permit issued
immediately prior thereto.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
7.148. License Fees.
License fees shall be in accordance with Chapter 60, Fees and Bonds of the City of
Troy Code of Ordinances.
(Rev. 03-17-03)
7.149. Neighbors Consent.
(1) No license to operate a public dance hall shall be issued until the applicant for such
license has filed a petition signed by at least fifty-one per cent (51%) of the
persons living or doing business within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of any
proposed location or any part thereof.
(2) There shall be attached to said petition an affidavit signed by the party circulating
said petition, which affidavit shall be in the following form:
State of Michigan, County of Oakland, ss: The undersigned, first being duly sworn,
deposes and says that the signatures upon the foregoing petition were obtained by
him (or her): that the signatures are the signatures of the persons purporting to
sign the same: and that he (or she) verily believes that the signers of such petition
are persons living or doing business within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of
any proposed location or any part thereof.
Subscribed and sworn to before me this day of ,
20 .
Notary Public,
Oakland County Michigan
My Commission expires:
(3) No license shall be granted until the City Council shall have referred the petition to
the City Clerk and the Council shall have secured from the City Clerk a certificate
certifying that an investigation has been made of the said petition and that the said
petition contains the signatures of fifty-one per cent (51%) of persons living or
doing business within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the proposed new
location.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
Chapter 68 - Amusements and Recreation Places
68-1
1. a) License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any place of amusement
or recreation, amusement or recreation devices, including without being in
limitation of the foregoing the operation of roller skating rinks, carnivals, circuses,
swimming pools, swimming beaches or places where swimming may occur, picnic
grounds, groves, yards, and the like, pool rooms, billiard rooms, amusement parks
or sites, auction houses or sites, indoor or outdoor theaters, amusement devices,
games, tent shows or any exhibitions, mechanical or animal rides, and including
the lending or rental of amusement devices or equipment for gain or profit, or
premises licensed for on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages in conjunction
with an entertainment permit issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission,
without first having obtained a license therefor.
(Rev. 02-08-1993)
b) Applications.
Applications for licenses under this Chapter shall state the name and address of
the applicant, the nature of the proposed business or activity, the proposed
location thereof, a description of a proposed method of operation and of the
activity or device contemplated, the names of the owner or owners of the said
premises, whether said owners be legal or equitable owners thereof, lessees and
the places of residence or business of each, together with any drawings, sketches,
or other specifications required by the Clerk, and such other information as shall
be reasonable and necessary to fully acquaint the City Clerk with the exact nature
of the activity or device.
No license shall be issued except upon certification of the Chief of Police, the Fire
Chief and the Building Inspector. The fees for licenses issued hereunder shall be
as specified in Chapter 60 of this Code.
(Rev. 06-16-1997)
c) Order - Crowding.
The audience of any amusement show, or theatrical must be orderly and quiet at
all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such amusement, show
or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.
It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any such
amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other
risks.
(Rev. 05-19-1980)
Chapter 68 - Amusements and Recreation Places
68-2
d) Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Fire Marshal to see that every
exhibition, amusement, theatrical or other public show or amusement is inspected
by a member of the Police and of the Fire Department, and to insure conformity
with the previous concerning such amusements.
The licensee, his agent or employee shall at all times open every portion of any
licensed establishment for inspection by the Police Department for the purpose of
enforcing any of the provisions of this ordinance.
e) Duties of the Licensee.
The following regulations shall, where applicable, govern all amusement licenses
within the City of Troy. No licensee or his agent or employee shall:
i) Permit any disorderly conduct or the use of any immoral, profane, or
indecent language or conduct offensive to public decency.
ii) Suffer nor allow, in or upon the licensed premises, the annoying, molesting,
or accosting and soliciting, for immoral purposes of any patrons or
employees by other patrons and employees.
iii) Permit any immoral, vulgar, suggestive, improper, or freak dancing by an
agent or employee.
iv) Allow or permit any person to smoke or hold a lighted cigar, cigarette, or
pipe on the dance floor while dancing is permitted.
v) Fail to provide separate and adequate dressing rooms for male and female
entertainers, if entertainment is provided.
vi) Permit or allow any patron to take any active part in any entertainment;
except that patrons may engage or participate in group or community
singing.
vii) Permit overcrowding of the dance floor, nor provide less than two hundred
square feet of dance space. Such dance space shall be plainly indicated by
floor markings and shall be kept free of tables, chairs or any other obstacles
during the time that dancing is permitted.
viii) Permit the sale or service of any alcoholic beverage to any intoxicated
person, or permit such person to dance, loiter or be employed on the
licensed premises.
ix) Permit employees, including entertainers, to eat, drink, solicit drinks or
otherwise mingle with the patrons. Entertainers under eighteen (18) years of
age shall not be permitted to remain in that portion of the licensed premises
Chapter 68 - Amusements and Recreation Places
68-3
that is open to the public excepting during periods of actual performance or
when accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or spouse over eighteen
(18) years of age.
x) Permit or be engaged in any illegal act or occupation on or beyond his
licensed premises.
xi) Permit or allow gambling or the use, possession, or presence of gambling
apparatus or paraphernalia. Only those mechanical amusement devices
which have been approved in accordance with Chapter 68 of the Troy City
Code shall be permitted.
xii) A licensee with an approved amusement license shall keep a record of
each person employed as a dancer or other entertainer on an Entertainers
Record Book which shall be kept on file on the premises and shall be open
for inspection at all times by members of the Police Department.
xiii) It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee to require or
accept any consideration, be it money, ticket, token, or other thing of value,
in return for which any patron at a licensed establishment shall be privileged
to leave such establishment in company with any employee or entertainer.
xiv) It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee to permit any
person employed as a dancer or entertainer to perform a secondary service
at that licensed premise including but not limited to selling cigarettes,
photographing patrons, waiting tables, bartending, or checking coats and
hats.
(Rev. 05-19-1980)
xv) It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee to employ any
person as a dancer or entertainer who has a record of conviction for an
offense involving gambling, narcotics, prostitution, pandering or any other
offense involving moral turpitude, or a violation of any provisions of this
article, within the preceding three (3) years.
f) Other Regulations Where Dancing and/or Entertainment is Permitted.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to make other reasonable regulations
governing the maintenance and operation of any establishment regulated by this
ordinance where dancing and/or entertainment is permitted.
(g) Accountability of Licensee.
Any licensee is hereby made responsible and accountable for a violation of this
ordinance by any of his agents or servants, whether or not such violation is
committed with his knowledge. The licensee and his agents or servants shall not
allow patrons to do or commit any of the acts prohibited by this ordinance.
Chapter 68 - Amusements and Recreation Places
68-4
h) Indecent Shows.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to present, exhibit, conduct
or take part in any indecent show, theatrical, play, motion picture, exhibition or
other form of public amusement or show.
(Rev. 05-19-1980)
i) Requirements of Licensee.
No license shall be issued to an applicant who has a record of a conviction for an
offense involving gambling, narcotics, prostitution, pandering or any other offense
involving moral turpitude, or a violation of any provision of this article, within the
preceding three (3) years.
j) Severability.
If any provisions or clause of this ordinance or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other ordinance
provisions or clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented without the
invalid provision, clause or application, and to this end the provisions and clauses
of this ordinance are declared to be severable.
7.172 Applications.
Applications for licenses under this Chapter shall state the name and address of
the applicant, the nature of the proposed business or activity, the proposed
location thereof, a description of a proposed method of operation and of the
activity or device contemplated, the names of the owner or owners of the said
premises, whether said owners be legal or equitable owners thereof, lessees and
the places of residence or business of each, together with any drawing, sketches
or other specifications required by the Clerk, and such other information as shall
be reasonable and necessary to fully acquaint the City Clerk with the exact nature
of the activity or device. No license shall be issued except upon certification of the
Chief of Police, the Fire Chief and the Building Inspector. All licenses, except those
for auctions of less than one week, must be approved by resolution of the City
Council. The fees for licenses issued hereunder shall be as specified in Chapter
60 of this Code.
(Rev. 09-30-1974)
7.173 Sanitary Facilities.
When the activity licensed is carried on within a building, the area that this activity
is carried on shall be properly ventilated so as to supply all occupants with 1,200
feet of fresh air per hour, supplied with sufficient private conveniences so that
there shall be at least one (1) women's toilet for each 3,000 square feet of floor
space or fraction thereof, and at least one (1) men's toilet and one (1) urinal to
each 6,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof, both of which
conveniences shall at all times be kept in good, clean, and sanitary condition, and
Chapter 68 - Amusements and Recreation Places
68-5
shall also contain at least one (1) wash stand in each of the men's and women's
toilets for each 6,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof, the same to be
provided with sanitary towels, and all of the aforesaid sanitary facilities shall at all
times be kept in good, satisfactory working condition. There shall be at least one
(1) sanitary drinking fountain for each 6,000 square feet of floor space or fraction
thereof, which drinking fountain shall be plainly visible and all persons shall have
reasonable access thereto; and all such premises shall be supplied with or
equipped with at least one (1) adequate emergency exit, in addition to the main
entrance, which exit shall be marked in red letters - "Exit", and such other fire and
safety precautions taken and equipment installations made as shall be required by
the Police and Fire Departments of said City. All building, stairs, and exits shall be
free at all times from rubbish and inflammable material and shall also at all times
be maintained in a safe and passable condition. In the event such licensed activity
shall be carried on outdoors, said outdoor premises shall contain such sanitary and
safety facilities as shall be prescribed by the Police and Fire Departments of the
City of Troy and the State or Oakland County Health Department.
(Rev. 01-26-1981)
7.174 Endurance Contests.
It shall be unlawful within the city limits of the City of Troy to hold, conduct, aid,
abet or participate in any speed or endurance contests or in any other activity
which would endanger or tend to endanger the life, limb or health of any contestant
or spectator, except by and with the express permission of the City Council of the
City of Troy.
(Rev. 09-30-1974)
7.175 Noise Control.
All musical devices, radios, mechanical pianos, phonographs, orchestras, or any
other noise-producing device, including without being in limitation of the foregoing
any public address system, so called, which may be operated in connection with
the business of any licensee shall be housed within an enclosed building and so
operated so as not be become a nuisance and so as not to disturb the peace and
dignity of the people of the City of Troy. No such device shall be permitted on the
outside of any building or in any other place in which it is so located so as to
transmit the sound of any such device over and onto any premises other than
those occupied and used by the licensee.
7.176 Illegal Activity.
No illegal enterprise shall be harbored, maintained, endured or permitted nor shall
the same be participated in within the limits of the City nor shall gambling or games
of chance be therein held, maintained or permitted.
Chapter 68 - Amusements and Recreation Places
68-6
7.177 Operate on Premises; Inspection.
All such businesses or activities contemplated herein and all devices and animals
and persons used in connection with said businesses shall be confined strictly to
the premises used and operated by such licensee and described in the permit or
the application submitted. No such activity shall be conducted or permitted to be
conducted by a licensee on any public street, alley or highway, including all right of
ways therewith included. All licensees shall at all times permit and assist City
employees in the inspection of all such premises used in the conduct of activities
contemplated in this Chapter, and each applicant for a license or permit hereunder
shall agree to permit the free and unencumbered inspection of all portions of the
licensee's premises by employees of the City of Troy at such times and
frequencies as the City shall in its discretion determine.
7.178 Exemptions.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any municipal activity of the sort
contemplated herein or where such activity is conducted in private homes, on a
non-profit basis, or by any society or organization where the attendance is
restricted to members of the society or organization, private home and invited
guests, and where the organization or society does not engage in such activity as
a business or commercial enterprise.
Chapter 68 - Amusements and Recreation Places
68-7
POOLS AND BEACHES
7.181 Pools and Beaches.
Swimming pools, beaches, or other places for swimming, wading, or bathing
licensed hereunder shall observe all reasonable precautions to protect the users
thereof from injury or accident. Convenient means of ingress and egress shall be
provided and the depth of water and any irregularities of the bottom shall be clearly
indicated. Safety appliances such as lifebuoys, lifebooks, bamboo poles, ropes,
and equipment, including first aid kits, shall be provided and made readily
accessible. A sufficient number of qualified attendants and guards shall be on duty
when the swimming or bathing place is in use, which attendants and guards shall
be capable swimmers, competent in and trained in lifesaving methods and artificial
resuscitation. No such place shall be used or maintained by any person, firm,
corporation, or agents, employees or subcontractors thereof where the water
contains sewage, waste or other contaminating or polluting ingredients rendering
the water hazardous to health, and the construction, operation, and maintenance
of any such swimming or bathing place shall at all times comply with all the state
laws, rules, regulations, and any other requirements of the Department of Health of
the State of Michigan.
7.182 Health of Patrons.
No person having any skin eruptions, abrasions, sore or infected eyes, a cold,
nasal or ear discharge, or any communicable disease shall be permitted to use a
swimming or bathing place, and the licensee hereunder shall post suitable
placards embodying such personal regulations and instructions in a conspicuous
place for all users to see.
7.183 Telephone.
All pools and beaches licensed hereunder shall at all times maintain in working
condition at least one (1) telephone connected in such a manner as to make
possible the use thereof in the telephone service network of the Michigan Bell
Telephone Company in order that there might be telephonic communication at all
times between the licensed premises and other users of the telephone system
operated by the Michigan Bell Telephone Company.
Chapter 69 - Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
69-1
1. Registration of Precious Metal and Gem Dealers
a. Registration. A dealer in precious metal, gems and items must be registered by
the City prior to conducting business in the City of Troy. All employees and/or
agents of the dealer must also be registered with the City prior to conducting
business. Any new employees and agents must be registered within 24 hours of
the time of hire.
b. All applications for a certificate of registration shall be reviewed by the City of
Troy to determine compliance with Public Act 95 of 1981, MCLA 445.481, et.
seq., as amended, and the Troy Code of Ordinances.
c. This section does not require registration for an internet drop-off store that is in
compliance with Ordinance and State law provisions governing internet drop-off
stores.
d. This section does not require registration for a person that is engaged in the
sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of precious items for himself or herself.
1.1 Definitions as used in this section:
(a) "Agent or employee" means a person who, for compensation or valuable
consideration is employed either directly or indirectly by a dealer.
(b) "Dealer" means any person, corporation, partnership, or association, which, in
whole or in part, engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent
transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public within this state.
(c) "Gold" means elemental gold having an atomic weight of 196.967 and the
chemical element symbol of Au, whether found by itself or in combination with its
alloys or any other metal.
(d) Internet drop-off store means a person, corporation, or firm that contracts with
other persons, corporations, or firms to offer its precious items for sale,
purchase, consignment, or trade through means of an internet website and
meets the conditions described in section 1.6.
(e) "Jewelry" means an ornamental item made of a material that includes a precious
gem.
(f) Local governmental unit means the City of Troy.
(g) "Local police agency" means the police agency of the City of Troy.
(h) "Platinum" means elemental platinum having an atomic weight of 195.09 and the
chemical element symbol of Pt, whether found by itself or in combination with its
alloys or any other metal.
Chapter 69 - Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
69-2
(i) Precious gem means a diamond, alexandrite, ruby, sapphire, opal,
amethyst, emerald, aquamarine, morganite, garnet, jadeite, topaz, tourmaline,
turquoise, or pearl.
(j) "Precious item" means jewelry, a precious gem, or an item containing gold, silver,
or platinum. Precious item does not include the following:
(i) Coins, commemorative medals, and tokens struck by, or in behalf of, a
government or private mint.
(ii) Bullion bars and discs of the type traded by banks and commodity
exchanges.
(iii) Items at the time they are purchased directly from a dealer registered under
this act, a manufacturer, or a wholesaler who purchased them directly from
a manufacturer.
(iv) Industrial machinery or equipment.
(v) An item being returned to or exchanged at the dealer where the item was
purchased and which is accompanied by a valid sales receipt.
(vi) An item which is received for alteration, redesign, or repair in a manner that
does not substantially change its use and returned directly to the customer.
(vii) An item which does not have a jeweler's identifying mark or a serial mark
and which the dealer purchases for less than $5.00.
(viii) Scrap metal which contains incidental traces of gold, silver, or platinum
which are recoverable as a by-product.
(ix) Jewelry which a customer trades for other jewelry having a greater value,
and which difference in value is paid by the customer.
(k) "Silver" means elemental silver having an atomic weight of 107.869 and the
chemical element symbol of Ag, whether found by itself or in combination with its
alloys or any other metal.
1.2 Administration of Ordinance.
The Chief of Police for the City of Troy or his or her designee shall be responsible for reviewing all
applications for a certificate of registration.
1.3 Application by a Dealer
(a) A dealer who applies for a certificate of registration shall submit the following information
on the form provided:
(i) His or her name, home address, phone number, driver's license number, date of
birth, and right thumb print (print to be affixed to the application by the police
department). Applications for more than one establishment shall be made on
separate application forms.
(ii) The name, address, telephone number, and hours of the dealer's business. If the
dealer's business is a corporation, an updated copy of the Articles of Incorporation
or a valid certified copy of the assumed name certificate from the Clerk of Oakland
County must be provided.
Chapter 69 - Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
69-3
(iii) The name, address, date of birth and right thumb print of each employee or agent
of the dealer.
(b) The dealer shall also submit a signed statement indicating that he or she has read and
understands the provisions of Act No. 95 of the Public Acts of 1981, as provided to him or
her by the Police Department, and further that said dealer has informed his or her agents
or employees, and will immediately inform all new agents or employees, as to the
provisions of said Public Act 95 of 1981.
(c) The dealer shall submit a signed statement that neither he or she, nor any of his or her
agents or employees has been convicted of a felony under Act No. 95 of the Public Acts of
1981, or under section 535 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, within
the five year period preceding the date of the application, or convicted of a misdemeanor
under said laws within a one year period preceding the date of this application.
(d) The dealer shall submit proof of proper zoning or other special exception permits as
required by the Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Commission of the City of Troy.
(e) The dealer shall pay a fee for each licensed establishment in the City of Troy. License
fees shall be in accordance with Chapter 60, Fees and Bonds of the City of Troy Code
of Ordinances.
(f) If dealer has satisfied the criteria as set forth in this Ordinance and State Law,
then a certificate of registration shall be issued.
(g) The dealer shall post the certificate of registration in a conspicuous place in the
dealers place of business.
(h) Within ten days of any name or address change, dealer shall notify the Troy
Police Department of the change.
1.4. Records of Transactions.
(a) A dealer shall maintain a record of each transaction on record forms, with the
information as set forth in subsection (h). Each record shall be legibly written in
ink in the English language. Each record shall be filled out In quadruplicate by
the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer. One copy of the record shall be
given to the customer; one copy shall be retained by the dealer pursuant to
subsection (g); and one copy shall be provided to the Troy police department.
Additionally, dealer shall provide an electronic record to the City of Troy Police
Department, as set out in subsection (e).
(b) At the time the dealer receives or purchases a precious item, the dealer or the
agent or employee of the dealer shall insure that the following information is
recorded accurately on a record of transaction form:
(i) The dealer certificate of registration number.
Chapter 69 - Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
69-4
(ii) A general description of the precious item or precious items received or
purchased, including the type of metal or precious gem. In the case of
watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the
number of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters
and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description.
(iii) The name, date of birth, drivers license number or State of Michigan
personal identification card number, and street and house number of the
customer, together with a legible imprint of the right thumb of the
customer, or if that is not possible, of the left thumb or a finger of the
customer. However, the thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on
the record of transaction form retained by the dealer. The thumbprint or
fingerprint shall be made available to the Troy Police Department
employees and agents and any sheriffs department or any other police
agency if there is a police investigation involving a precious item or items
that are described on the record of transaction. After a period of one (1)
year from the date of the transaction, if a police investigation concerning a
precious item or items described on the record of transaction has not
occurred, the dealer, the Troy Police Department and any other police
agencies with a copy of a record of transaction shall destroy and not keep
a permanent record of the transaction. A dealer who goes out of business
or changes his or her business address to another jurisdiction either within
or out of the State of Michigan shall transmit the records of all
transactions made by the dealer within one (1) year before his or her
closing or moving to the Troy Police Department.
(iv) The price to be paid by the dealer for the precious item or precious items.
(v) The form of payment made to the customer; check, money order, bank
draft, direct deposit or cash. If the payment if by check, money order,
bank draft or direct deposit, the dealer shall indicate the number of the
check, money order, bank draft or direct deposit.
(vi) The customers signature.
(b) The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively, commencing
with the number 1 and the calendar year.
(c) Within 48 hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item, the dealer shall
submit an electronic record of the transaction to the Troy Police Department, as
set forth in subsection (d) below. If the customer resides outside of Troy, as
stated in the record of transaction form, dealer shall send a copy of the record of
transaction form to the police agency of the city, village or township in which the
customer resides, or if that city, village or township does not have a police
agency, to the sheriffs department of the county in which the customer resides.
The record of transaction forms received by the Troy Police Department or any
other agency under this subsection shall not be open to inspection by the
general public. The Troy Police Department shall be responsible for insuring the
confidentiality of the records of transaction forms which it holds and insure that
the record of transaction forms are used only for the purpose for which they were
received.
Chapter 69 - Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
69-5
(d) The dealer must also transmit an electronic record of each transaction on an
electronic fill in type form that will be provided to each dealer. This record must
include all information that is required on the paper record of transaction form set
forth in sub-paragraph (g). This electronic transmission shall be submitted to the
Troy Police Department or its designee within 48 hours after dealer receives or
purchases a precious item. This transmission shall be made by means of a
modem or similar device, and received in a format that allows the data to be
entered into the Troy Police Department computerized system or another law
enforcement records system, such as CLEMIS. All dealers shall have the
equipment, programs and/or capacity for the required electronic transmissions
installed and approved by Troy, and this shall happen as soon as possible, so
that electronic transmissions will be received for all transactions occurring on or
before May 1, 2013. The City of Troy will not accept any hard copy paper forms
for transactions occurring on or after May 1, 2013 unless the Troy Police Chief or
his designee requires a paper submittal, and such directive will be made in
writing.
(e) The dealers record of transaction forms and each precious item received by the
dealer shall be available for inspection by the Oakland County Prosecuting
Attorney, the Troy City Attorney, the Troy Police Department, the Oakland
County Sheriffs Department and any other sheriffs department or police agency
of the local governmental unit in which the customer resides, and the Michigan
State Police. This accessibility shall be at all times during the ordinary business
hours of the dealer. As a condition of doing business, a dealer is considered to
have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection.
(f) A paper copy of each record of transaction form shall be retained by the dealer
for not less than one (1) year after the transaction to which the record pertains.
(g) The form of the paper record of transaction shall have an 8-  by 11 inch size
and shall be as follows:
Record of Transaction
Dealer Certification #__________________ #____________________________
(Printed on form) (Transaction # printed on form)
(1)Description of Property: _____________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
(2)________________________ 20___ (3) __________________________________
(Date) (Name of Dealer/Employee/Agent)
(4)_____________________________ ____________________________________
(Name of Customer) (Date of Birth-Customer)
Chapter 69 - Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
69-6
_______________________________ _____________________________________
(Customers Drivers License or (Customers Street Address)
Michigan Personal ID Number)
_____________________________________
(City, State and Zip Code)
_____________________________________
(County of Residency)
(5)______________________________ _____________________________________
(Price Paid) (Name of police Agency of City, Village, or
Township where Customer Resides)
(6) ____________________________
(Number of Check, Bank Draft
Money Order or Direct Deposit)
Thumbprint or Fingerprint _____________________________________
(Signature of Customer)
(h) As used in this section, customer means the person from whom the dealer, or
agent or employee of the dealer receives or purchases a precious item.
1.5 Retention Period of Precious Items.
A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer for nine (9)
calendar days after it was received, without any form of alteration other than that
required to make an accurate appraisal of its value.
1.6. Internet Drop Off Store Regulations.
In order to be exempt from obtaining a certificate of registration from the City of Troy,
an Internet Drop-Off Store doing business in the City must comply with the following
provisions:
(a) Has a fixed place of business within this state except that he or she exclusively
transacts all purchases or sales by means of the internet and the purchases and
sales are not physically transacted on the premises of that fixed place of
business.
(b) Has the personal property or other valuable thing available on a website for
viewing by photograph, if available, by the general public at no charge, which
website shall be searchable by zip code or state, or both. The website viewing
shall include, as applicable, serial number, make, model, and other unique
identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters appearing on the personal property
or other valuable thing.
Chapter 69 - Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
69-7
(c) Maintains records of the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of the personal
property or other valuable thing for at least 2 years, which records shall contain a
description, including a photograph, if available, and, if applicable, serial number,
make, model, and other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters
appearing on the personal property or other valuable thing.
(d) Provide the Troy Police Department with any name under which it conducts
business on the website and provide the Troy Police Department access to the
business premises at any time during normal business hours for purposes of
inspection.
(e) Within 24 hours after a request from the Troy Police Department or any other
police agency with an electronic copy of the seller's or consignor's name,
address, telephone number, driver license number and issuing state, the buyer's
name and address if applicable, and a description of the personal property or
other valuable thing as described in subdivision (c). The information shall be
provided in a format acceptable to the local police agency but shall at least be in
a legible format and in the English language.
(f) Provide that payment for the personal property or other valuable thing is
executed by means of check or other electronic payment system, so long as the
payment is not made in cash. No payment shall be provided to the seller until the
item is sold.
(g) Immediately remove the personal property or other valuable thing from the
website if the local police agency determines that the personal property or other
valuable thing is stolen.
1.7 Prohibited Conduct.
A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer shall not:
(a) Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person who is less than
18 years of age or any person known by the dealer or agent or employee of the
dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen property within the
preceding 5 years, whether that person is acting in his or her own behalf or as
the agent of another.
(b) Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person unless
that person presents a valid drivers license or a valid State of Michigan
personal identification card.
1.8. Registration Revocation.
Any dealer, or agent or employee of a dealer who is convicted of any misdemeanor
pursuant to this Chapter or a similar ordinance in another local unit of government or of
a misdemeanor or felony under Public Act No. 95 of 181, MCLA 445.481, et. seq., as
Chapter 69 - Miscellaneous Licensed Businesses
69-8
amended (Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act) or Section 535 of Public Act No. 328
of 1931, MCLA 750.535, as amended of the Michigan Penal Code or of a similar statute
or ordinance of the State of Michigan or any other State statute or local ordinance, shall
not be permitted to operate as a dealer within the City of Troy for a period of five (5)
years and his or her registration shall be immediately revoked.
1.9 Penalty
A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer who knowingly fails to make entry of any
material matter in his or her record as required by this Ordinance or State law is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of $500,
or both.
(Rev. 03-28-2013)
Chapter 70 - Self-Service Laundries and Dry Clean Establishments
70-1
7.225. Self-Service Laundries Defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, a self-service laundry shall be deemed to be any place of
business available to the general public for the purpose of washing, dry cleaning, drying, ironing
or extracting moisture from garments, linens, rugs, blankets and other commonly laundered
articles, through the use of coin-operated machines or devices operated by the patrons of such
business.
7.226. Licenses Required.
No person shall operate or maintain any self-service laundry without first obtaining a license
therefor. Licenses shall be issued only if the requirements under Section 7.227 are complied
with. License fees shall be in accordance with Chapter 60, Fees and Bonds of the City of Troy
Code of Ordinances.
(Rev. 03-17-03)
7.227. General Requirements as to Machines and Other Equipment.
All self-service laundries shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) All provisions of building, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, health and fire codes,
rules or regulations applicable to self-service laundries shall be observed.
(b) The water heating or softening system shall be installed and maintained so as to be
inaccessible to the general public.
(c) Washers shall be installed and maintained so that such moving parts and electrical
components thereof, as need not be accessible to the operator thereof in the usual and
customary operation of such machines, shall not be readily accessible to the general
public.
(d) Dryers shall be installed and maintained so that the backs and tops thereof shall not be
readily accessible to the general public.
(e) All dryers installed or maintained in a self-service laundry shall be designed so as to be
inoperable when the door thereof is open, and all such dryers shall be capable of having
their doors opened from the interior thereof upon the application of outward pressure
against such doors.
(f) All automatic washers or combination washer-extractor units installed in any location
after November 30th, 1965, shall be so manufactured or equipped that:
1. The doors or lids thereto cannot be opened during any portion of the operating
cycle of such machine; or
2. So that if the door or lid thereto is opened during any portion of the operating
cycle thereof such machine will be automatically caused to cease operating.
However, this subsection (f) shall be deemed to have been complied with if such
machines are equipped with a device, mechanism or means readily accessible to
the user thereof, whereby the operation of such machine may be stopped, which
Chapter 70 - Self-Service Laundries and Dry Clean Establishments
70-2
such device, mechanism or means shall be identified by an appropriate label or
sign prominently displayed upon such machine.
(g) Separate extractor machines shall be securely anchored to the floor and shall be
manufactured or equipped so that the doors thereof cannot be opened during any
portion of the operating cycle thereof.
(h) The minimum level of illumination in self-service laundries shall be not less than fifteen
foot candles throughout the entire area accessible to the public, measured at a height of
four feet above the floor. All switches for control of illumination shall not be accessible
to the public. All self-service laundries shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition, and shall be so installed and maintained that the area
therein accessible to the general public shall be reasonably visible to the exterior
thereof, either by direct or indirect view.
(i) An appropriate refuse receptacle shall be furnished in all self-service laundries for the
convenient use of the patrons thereof.
(j) All self-service laundries shall be prohibited from having amusement devices or
mechanical music devices commonly known as juke boxes; PROVIDED, that this shall
not prohibit the placing of AM or FM radios for the enjoyment of the patrons;
PROVIDED, that the controls thereof shall not be accessible to the public.
(k) All self-service laundries shall be required to have an adult person in attendance during
all hours of operation.
(l) Self-service laundries and dry-cleaning establishments as defined herein shall not be
open or operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
Chapter 71 - Auto Wash - Motor Vehicle Laundry
71-1
7.301. Definition.
An AUTO WASH or MOTOR VEHICLE LAUNDRY is hereby defined as to be a business
establishment in which the principal operation of such business is the cleaning and washing of
motor vehicles of any type or description, including, but not limited to, such business where the
facilities are provided for coin-operated or self-service washing or cleaning of motor vehicles.
7.302. Application for Building Permit.
No building permit shall be issued, nor shall any existing building be used or be permitted to be
used for the purpose of operating an auto wash until application for a permit shall first be made to
the Building Inspector. At the time of making application, there shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector, plans, specifications and plot plan which shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) All buildings to be used in connection with the auto wash shall be located at least forty (40)
feet away from any right-of-way line.
(b) Buildings must be constructed so as to be enclosed on two (2) sides and have doors on
the front and rear of each stall, capable of being locked.
(c) All land used for service drives and parking areas in connection with auto washes is to be
paved and have adequate drainage provided and be approved by the City Engineer.
(d) Construction of auto wash buildings shall not be permitted if said construction shall require
standing or parking on public right-of-ways in connection with the operation of the auto
wash.
(e) All lighting used in connection with auto washes shall be shaded so as not to project upon
or become a nuisance to adjacent properties.
7.303. Licenses Required and Procedure for Obtaining License.
No person shall operate, maintain or engage in the auto wash or motor vehicle laundry business
without first obtaining a license therefore as herein provided. Licenses shall be issued in
accordance with Chapters 59 and 60 of this Code and upon compliance by the applicant with the
following requirements:
(1) Applications shall be accompanied by a brief written statement of the method of operation
of such business.
(2) Applications shall be submitted by the City Clerk to the Building Inspector for certification
that the proposed use is not prohibited by Title V of this Code, or any other regulations of
the City.
(3) Payment of an annual license fee shall be in accordance with Chapter 60, Fees and
Bonds of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
(Rev. 03-17-03)
Chapter 71 - Auto Wash - Motor Vehicle Laundry
71-2
7.304. Duties of Owner or Licensee.
It shall be the duty of the owner, operator or licensee of any auto wash or motor laundry to:
(1) Keep the premises of such business in a neat and clean condition free of debris and litter
of all types and kinds.
(2) Prevent excessive noise, rowdiness or loitering and to maintain peace, order and safety on
the premises.
(3) Provide an attendant to be on duty and on the premises at all times that such auto wash is
in operation. At all other times, the building or buildings must be locked and safely
secured.
(4) Operate any auto wash only within the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
7.305. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and his representatives to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter, and it shall likewise be the duty of all police officers of the City to assist in the
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.
Chapter 72 - Renting and Leasing Motorcycles
72-1
7.201. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of renting or leasing
motorcycles or motor driven cycles without first having obtained a license to operate such
business.
A. "Motorcycle" means every motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of a
rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor, and includes every motor driven cycle, including
every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five (5) maximum
brake horsepower, and every bicycle with motor attached.
B. "Person" means every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
7.203. Application for License.
Application for a license shall be made to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City
Clerk and shall set forth the following information:
A. If the applicant is an individual, the name and address of the individual; if the
applicant is a partnership, the names, residential and business addresses of each
partner; if the applicant is a corporation, the State in which incorporated, whether
authorized to do business in the State of Michigan and the names, residential and
business addresses of all officers and directors.
B. The location of the proposed business and the number of motorcycles and/or
motor driven cycles that will be maintained on the premises for rental purposes.
C. A plot plan of the premises upon which shall be indicated the location and size of
all structures and the location of access and exit ways to public streets.
D. Such other information as may be required by the City Clerk in order to process
the license application.
(Rev. 02-27-1967)
7.204. License Fees.
The annual license fee for each location from which motorcycles and motor driven cycles
are rented shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), and the annual license fee for each
motorcycle and motor driven cycle to be rented or leased shall be Ten Dollars ($10.00).
All licenses shall expire on December 31, following the issuance thereof.
(Rev. 02-27-1967)
Chapter 72 - Renting and Leasing Motorcycles
72-2
7.205. Insurance Required.
The licensee shall submit proof that he carries a "motor vehicle liability policy" of the same
type and coverage as that outlined in Section 520 of Act 300, Public Acts of 1949 as
amended, for each motorcycle or motor driven cycle so rented or leased and such
insurance shall be kept in full force and effect at all times when licensed.
7.206. Distance Requirement.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of renting motorcycles or motor driven cycles
within One Thousand (1,000) feet of any residential building or any residential zoning
district. This requirement may be waived if the applicant for license secures in writing the
consent of eighty (80) percent of the persons residing or doing business on property within
One Thousand (1,000) feet of the applicant's proposed location.
(Rev. 02-27-1967)
7.207. Examination of Premises, Plot Plan and Application.
Upon receipt of the license application and accompanying documents, the City Clerk shall
refer same to the City Manager, who shall cause the application, plot plan and premises to
be examined and make written report thereon to the City Council. The application shall
also be submitted to the Police Chief who shall, upon consideration of the application,
approve or reject the application by written report to the City Manager. If the application is
rejected by the Police Chief, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the
City Council to offer evidence why the application should be reconsidered.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
7.208. Issuance of License.
If the City Council shall determine that the provisions of this ordinance have been complied
with by the applicant, the City Council shall direct the City Clerk to issue the license subject
to such proper and reasonable conditions as the City Council may impose.
If the application is rejected by the City Council, the applicant shall be notified in writing to
this effect, and shall be given an opportunity to be heard by the City Council, either in
person or by his attorney, and present evidence pertaining to the application, whereupon
the City Council shall take final action upon the application. In addition to the requirements
of this section, the applicant shall comply with applicable provisions of Chapter 59 and
Chapter 60 of Title VII of the Code of the City of Troy.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
7.209. Renewal of License.
Applications for renewal of licenses shall be made, and processed in the same manner as
hereinbefore provided for original applications, except that a plan shall not be required.
Applications for renewal of licenses accompanied by a plot plan shall also be required
when licensees desire to increase the number of motorcycles or motor driven vehicles
permitted in the existing license or desire to expand, relocate or otherwise modify or
change the existing structures or premises from which the licensee is then operating.
Chapter 72 - Renting and Leasing Motorcycles
72-3
7.210. Duties of Licensee and Employees.
Licensees and employees and agents of licensees shall:
A. Maintain records of vehicle rental indicating the name, date of birth, address,
driver's license number, vehicle registration number of the vehicle rented or leased,
the date and hour of the rental and time of its return. Any one vehicle shall not be
rented to more than one person at any one time.
B. Rent vehicles only to persons who possess and exhibit a valid motor vehicle
operator's license.
C. Rent a vehicle to a person under eighteen (18) years of age only if a parent or
legal guardian of such person acknowledges in writing in the presence of the
licensee, his agents or employees that the applicant has permission of such
parent or legal guardian to rent a vehicle and that such parent or guardian
assumes full responsibility for all acts or actions of the applicant in use of the
vehicle so rented or leased.
D. Provide crash helmets of a type approved by the Police Department for use by
persons renting vehicles, and any passengers.
E. Maintain all vehicles in a safe manner and provide each with all equipment
required by law including windshields.
F. Keep all vehicles stored within a building structure when not in use.
(Rev. 02-27-1967)
G. Explain the operation of the vehicle being rented and rent vehicles only after being
satisfied that the person to whom the vehicle is being rented is competent to
operate such vehicle with safety.
H. Not permit vehicle motors to be running on the premises except for necessary use
in connection with ingress to and egress from the premises; or when necessary, in
order to repair or maintain a vehicle, and then only when the vehicle is within a
building structure.
I. Maintain the licensed premises in a clean and sanitary condition and control the
actions of patrons so as to prevent any loud, boisterous or improper conduct upon
the premises.
J. Keep each vehicle equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant
operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke.
K. Permit rental and return of vehicles only between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 8:00
P.M. There shall be no renting out of vehicles between the hours of 8:00 P.M. and
8:00 A.M.
Chapter 72 - Renting and Leasing Motorcycles
72-4
L. Have only the number of motorcycles on the premises as provided for in the
application.
(Rev. 02-27-1967)
7.211. Duties of Persons Renting Vehicles.
Any person to whom a motorcycle or motor driven cycle is rented shall:
A. Not rent, sublease or otherwise authorize or permit the use or operation of the
vehicle by any other person.
B. Not carry any passenger unless the vehicle is designed and equipped to carry a
passenger.
C. Wear a crash helmet while operating the vehicle.
D. Return the vehicle to the rental agency not later than 8:00 P.M. on the day on
which the vehicle is rented unless the rental contract provides for use of the vehicle
until at least 8:00 A.M. of the following day.
(Rev. 02-27-1967)
7.212. Revocation or Suspension of License.
Licenses issued pursuant to this ordinance may be suspended or revoked pursuant to the
applicable provisions of Chapter 59 of the Code.
(Rev. 02-27-1967)
7.213. Penalty.
Any person who violates or aids or abets in the violation of any provision of this ordinance
or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the City or County jail for
not more than ninety (90) days, or be both so fined and so imprisoned, in the discretion of
the Court.
7.214. Separability.
If any sentence, sub-sentence, section, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for
any reason held invalid by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
(Rev. 02-27-1967)
Chapter 73 - Drive-In Restaurant
73-1
1. Definition.
A Drive-In Restaurant, within the meaning of this Chapter shall be deemed to be any
restaurant designed to permit or facilitate the serving of meals, sandwiches, ice cream,
beverages, or other food, served directly to, or permitted to be consumed by, patrons in
automobiles or other vehicles parked on the premises, or permitted to be consumed by
patrons elsewhere on the site, outside the main building.
(Rev. 07-28-1969)
2. License Required.
No person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall operate a Drive-In Restaurant without having
first obtained a license therefor.
3. License Application, Procedure for Obtaining and Renewal.
3.1. Drive-In Restaurants shall pay an initial license fee of twenty-five (25) dollars and an annual
renewal license fee of twenty-five (25) dollars. A change of ownerships will require payment of the
initial fee of twenty-five dollars by the new owners. Every license hereunder shall be limited to the
location for which such license was issued. Licenses shall be non-transferable. No portion of an
annual license fee shall be rebated.
(Rev.03-26-1979)
3.2. Applications for original licenses and for renewal of licenses shall be made upon forms provided
by the City Clerk, and shall be accompanied by the required license fee. All such applications
shall be referred to the City Manager, who shall cause an investigation to be made to ascertain
whether the establishment in question complies with the requirements of this Code. The City
Manager shall report the results of the investigation to the City Council, and the City Council may
authorize the issuance or renewal of a license, as the case may be, if it finds that the applicant's
establishment complies with the requirements of this Chapter, and that the applicant and its
officers are of good moral character, and are capable of operating the proposed Drive-In
Restaurant in a manner consistent with the public health, safety and good morals.
(Rev.03-26-1979)
3.3. Drive-In Restaurant licenses shall expire on December 31st of the year of issuance. All
applications for renewal of such licenses shall be filed with the City Clerk not later than December
1st.
(Rev. 09-18-1967)
3.4. All licenses and renewals shall be issued subject to the requirements of Chapters 46, 59 and 60,
and other applicable Chapters of the City Code and State Statutes, except as otherwise provided
herein.
Chapter 73 - Drive-In Restaurant
73-2
3.5. A license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 59 of the Code.
4. Hours of Operation.
All Drive-In Restaurants within the City of Troy shall operate only between the hours of 5:00 A.M.
and midnight.
5. Screening, Lighting, Parking, Entrances and Exits.
Screening of the premises, lighting, off-street parking, entrance and exit standards and other
zoning requirements shall be complied with in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 39 of the
City Code.
6. Duties of Owner, Licensee, and Operator.
It shall be the duty of the owner, licensee or operator of a Drive-In Restaurant or any person in
charge of such restaurant to:
6.1 Keep the premises whereon said restaurant is located, together with the parking area and that
portion of any public street or streets adjoining said Drive-In Restaurant, free from all rubbish,
waste products, garbage and debris, including napkins, straws, paper cups and plates, and other
waste material, at all times.
6.2. Provide a sufficient number of suitable containers to hold all waste material until the same is
removed from the premises. Such containers shall be of metal construction or other approved
material with self-closing, reach-in type cover.
6.3. Maintain quiet and good order upon the premises.
6.4 Not permit loitering or disorderly or immoral conduct.
6.5 Not cause or permit to be caused any noise or other nuisance upon the premises whereby the
quiet or good order of the premises or neighborhood are disturbed.
7. Loud Speakers, Shows and Exhibits, Banned.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, licensee, or operator of any Drive-Inn Restaurant to operate, or
permit to be operated, any loud speakers, or make or permit to be made, any other loud noise, or
permit any show or exhibit on the premises occupied by said Drive-In Restaurant; provided,
however, the owner, licensee, or operator of such restaurant may use a public address system
solely for the purpose of giving instructions to employees on the premises, or taking orders from
customers, but in a manner which shall not be loud enough to cause any disturbance to persons
not on the premises of such Drive-In Restaurant.
(Rev. 09-18-1967)
Chapter 73 - Drive-In Restaurant
73-3
8. Rubbish Removal.
In addition to the other penalties provided in this Code, the owner, licensee, or operator of any
Drive-In Restaurant may be charged with the cost of cleaning up or removing debris found on the
premises or highways adjacent to said premises, or such debris on other adjacent land caused to
be there by the Drive-In Restaurant operation. Any enforcement officer shall have the right to
cause such debris to be cleaned up and removed from the premises and shall certify the cost of
said cleaning and removal to the City Manager. The cost of such cleaning and removal may be
charged to the owner, licensee or operator of the Drive-In Restaurant.
9. Horns and Loud Noises.
It shall be unlawful for any patron of a Drive-In Restaurant while parking on or adjacent to the
premises thereof, or for any other person while on the premises of such restaurant, to race the
motor of any vehicle, to suddenly start or stop any vehicle, or to make or cause to be made, any
other loud or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbances or to blow or cause to be blown any
vehicle horn or other sound making device.
10. Intoxicating Beverages, Banned.
It shall be unlawful for any patron or other person on the premises of a Drive-In Restaurant,
whether in or out of an automobile, to drink any alcoholic beverage, or to have in his possession
any open bottle, can, or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage.
11. Congregating, Loitering, Cruising, Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any number of persons to congregate for any time whatsoever at any
location on the premises of a Drive-In Restaurant other than in the restaurant building, or in a
legally parked motor vehicle. Any persons so congregating shall be deemed guilty of loitering. No
person shall drive a motor vehicle onto the premises of a Drive-In Restaurant and then from said
premises without parking such motor vehicle and seeking service, unless there is no unoccupied
parking space available on said premises. It shall be the duty of the licensee to post on the
premises in a conspicuous location near all entrances and exits one or more signs bearing the
following legend:
(Rev. 09-18-1967)
CRUISING AND GATHERING OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE UNLAWFUL
12. This Chapter shall be enforced by the Chief Building Inspector and the Police Chief, or their
authorized representatives.
(Rev.03-26-1979)
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-1
1. General Provisions.
It is hereby determined that regulation of all types of solicitation and peddling are
sufficiently connected to the City's interest in preventing crime and protecting citizens'
quiet enjoyment and peace. It is also determined that a significant connection among
evening solicitation, evidence of nighttime crime, and disruption of citizens' quiet
enjoyment and peace exists to limit all types of solicitation according to the following
schedule: October 1st through March 31st the hours are 9:00 AM until 6:00 PM; April 1st
through September 30th the hours are 9:00 AM until 8:00 PM. It is further determined
that the City has no other less restrictive means available to achieve its objectives. It is
further determined that a ban on solicitation outside the aforementioned hours leaves
ample alternative channels of communication open to solicitors in the City.
(Rev. 04/14/2014)
2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them:
(a) "Solicit" and "solicitation" shall mean the request of money, credit, property,
financial assistance or other thing of value by telephone, personal interview, or
otherwise on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property,
financial assistance or other thing of value, or any part thereof, will be used for a
charitable (not including religious or political), educational, or philanthropic
purpose. The said words shall also mean the placing of canisters for the receipt
of money in business establishments or other public places. The said words shall
also mean and include the sale or offer to sell any article, tag, ticket, emblem,
publication, advertisement, subscription, or other thing, whether of value or not,
on the pleas or representation that such money, credit, property, financial
assistance, or other thing of value, or any part thereof, whether received by the
solicitor or purchased by the buyer, will be used for a charitable, educational or
philanthropic purpose.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(b) "Peddler" or Peddle or Peddling shall mean any person traveling by foot,
wagon, automotive vehicle or other conveyance, from place to place, from house
to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods,
wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products
or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales and
delivering articles to purchasers, or who takes or attempts to take orders for sale
of goods, wares and merchandise, books or magazines, personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance
payments on such sales or not. Any person who solicits orders and as a
separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or
design to evade the provisions of this Chapter, shall be deemed a peddler. The
word "peddler" shall include the words, "hawker", "huckster" and "canvasser".
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-2
The word "peddler" shall not include agents of utility companies or firms
franchised by referendum of the electorate of the City of Troy or agents of such
firms governed by franchise ordinance(s) enacted by the City Council of the City
of Troy following an affirmative advisory vote on the question by said electorate.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(c) "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association or joint stock association, society, organization or league, and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative
thereof.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(d) "City Clerk" shall mean the individual employed as City Clerk of the City of Troy,
or his/her authorized deputy.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
3. Permit or License Required; Exception.
No person shall solicit or peddle for any cause whatsoever, except as otherwise provided
in this Chapter, within the City of Troy, without a permit or license from the City Clerk,
authorizing such solicitation or peddling. Provided, however, that the provisions of this
Chapter shall not apply to solicitations conducted exclusively within the membership of an
organization by its own officers and members.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
4. Solicitation Application; Contents.
Applications for permits for solicitation shall be filed with the City Clerk upon forms
furnished by the City Clerk. The application shall contain the following information, or in
lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason why such information cannot be
furnished. Such applications for solicitation permits shall be sworn to and filed with the
City Clerk at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the time when the permit is desired:
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of the person applying for the permit and
the address of the applicants headquarters, if applicable.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(b) If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant and
the principal officers and managers.
(c) The purposes for which such solicitation is to be made and the use or disposition
to be made of any receipts therefrom.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-3
(d) The names and addresses of the person, or persons, who will be in direct charge
of conducting the solicitations.
(e) An outline of the method, or methods, to be used in conducting the solicitations.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(f) The time when such solicitation shall be made, giving the proposed dates for the
beginning and ending of such solicitations and the hours of the days thereof.
(g) Such other information as may be required by the City Clerk for him/her to
determine the kind or character of the proposed solicitation and whether such
solicitation is in the interest of, and not inimical to, the public welfare.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(h) In the event that information otherwise available to the City Clerk is deemed by him
to be sufficient to permit him/her to make a determination pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter, the City Clerk may authorize a license application which
does not contain all or any part of the information required under this Section.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
5. Filing False Application.
It is a violation of this Chapter for any person to knowingly file or cause to be filed an
application containing one or more false statements.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
6. Solicitation Application; Standards.
The City Clerk shall authorize the solicitation permit required by this Chapter whenever
he/she shall find the following facts to exist:
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(a) That the applicant is a person who is, as a matter of fact, engaged in charitable,
educational, or philanthropic activity, or engaged in raising funds for distribution to
such persons or organizations.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(b) That the net proceeds derived from the solicitation authorized under the permit
shall be used substantially for charitable, educational, or philanthropic purposes.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(c) That the net proceeds over reasonable expenses, derived from the solicitations
authorized under the permit shall be used exclusively for charitable, educational, or
philanthropic purposes.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-4
(d) That all of the proceeds derived from the solicitations authorized by the permit will
be distributed to the charity or organization.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(e) That the proceeds of the solicitations authorized by the permit will not be divided or
in any manner shared with any person or organization other than the applicant for
the permit or the organization for whose benefit the solicitation is made.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(f) The applicant has not been convicted of a felony involving an element of force,
violence, weapons, theft, fraud, or dishonesty.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(g) The applicant has not been convicted of home invasion or breaking and entering.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(h) The applicant has not been convicted of a misdemeanor offense involving theft
or dishonesty within the past 10 years preceding the application.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(i) The applicant has not been or been convicted of a crime involving peddling or
soliciting within the past year.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(j) The applicant has not had a solicitation or peddler license suspended or revoked
in any jurisdiction within the past year.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(k) The employer, corporation or entity that the individual applicant is affiliated with
has not had more than three (3) violations of this Chapter issued to any of its
employees, contractors, volunteers, agents or representatives within the past
year.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
7. Peddler License Required.
No person shall be a peddler without first obtaining a license. No such license shall be
granted except upon certification of the City Clerk.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
8. Peddling license application.
The applicant shall furnish the following information on an application form provided by
the City Clerk:
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-5
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(a) Name and physical description of applicant;
(Rev. 04/14/2014)
(b) Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
(c) Applicants Drivers license number;
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(d) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
(e) If working for a company, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship between Applicant and any
employer;
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(f) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the
sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are
located at the time said application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery;
(g) A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to
the date of the filing of the application, which shall be 2" x 2" showing the head
and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(h) The fingerprints of the applicant;
A statement as to whether or not an applicant has been convicted of any felony, or
any misdemeanor or Municipal Ordinance violation.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
9. Peddler License Fees.
The fees for a peddler's license shall be as specified in Chapter 60 of this Code. No fee
for a peddler's license shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon
interstate commerce. In any case, where a license fee is believed by a licensee or
applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, he may
apply to the City Manager for an adjustment of the fees so that it shall not be
discriminatory, unreasonable, or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be
made before, at or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license fee.
The applicant shall, by affidavit, and supporting testimony, show his method of business
and gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as
the City Manager may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such
undue burden on such commerce. The City Manager shall then conduct an
investigation, comparing the applicant's business with other businesses of like nature
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-6
and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee fixed for
the peddler's license is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to the applicant's
business and shall fix as the license fee for the applicant, an amount that is fair,
reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or, if the fee has already been paid, shall order a
refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged,
the City Manager shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross
sales, or any other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with
that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not
exceed the fee as prescribed by Chapter 60 of this Code. Should the City Manager
determine the gross sales measure of the fee to be the fair basis, he may require the
applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the City
of Troy or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross sales
and pay the amount of fee therefor, provided that no additional fee during any one
license year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the
annual license fee as prescribed in Chapter 60 of this Code.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
10. Peddler Application; Standards.
The City Clerk shall authorize the peddler license required by this Chapter whenever
he/she shall find the following facts to exist:
(a) The applicant has not been convicted of a felony involving an element of force,
violence, weapons, theft, fraud, or dishonesty.
(b) The applicant has not been convicted of home invasion or breaking and entering.
(c) The applicant has not been convicted of a misdemeanor offense involving theft
or dishonesty within the past 10 years preceding the application.
(d) The applicant has not been or been convicted of a crime involving peddling or
soliciting within the past three (3) years.
(e) The applicant has not had a solicitation or peddler license suspended or revoked
in any jurisdiction within the past three (3) years.
(f) The employer, corporation or entity that the individual applicant is affiliated with
has not had more than three (3) violations of this Chapter issued to any of its
employees, contractors, volunteers, agents or representatives within the past
year.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
11. Denial of Permit or License.
In the event the City Clerk denies a solicitation permit or peddler license, he/she shall
notify the applicant of the denial in writing and shall specify the reason(s) for the denial.
In the event of a denial, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager
as set forth in this Chapter. Any written appeal request must be submitted to the City
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-7
Manager within fourteen (14) days of the date on the denial notice sent by the City
Clerk. The City Manager shall review all appeal materials within 10 days and send a
written determination to the applicant.
The City Manager may also request information from representatives of the Police
Department, the City Clerk, the Zoning Administrator, the Building Official, the Fire
Chief, City Treasurer, Code Enforcement, the applicant or other interested parties, or
any other individual who may have information relevant to the denial of the license. The
City Manager may accept written documentation or hear statements and consider other
evidence offered which is relevant to the denial.
The City Managers determination is the Citys final decision. Failure of an applicant to
timely meet the filing deadlines as set out in this Chapter waives any right to contest the
denial of the application.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
12. Permits or Licenses.
Solicitation permits and peddler licenses issued under this Chapter shall bear the name
and address of the person soliciting or peddling. The peddler license shall also have a
copy of the photo submitted with the application. All permits and licenses shall contain
the date issued, the dates within which the permit or license holder may solicit or
peddle, and a statement that the permit or license does not constitute an endorsement
by the City of the purpose, person or group conducting the solicitation or peddling. All
permits and licenses shall be signed by the City Clerk and sealed with the official seal
of the City of Troy.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
13. Requirement to Carry License or Permit on Person.
A copy of the permit or license must be carried by each solicitor or peddler. Solicitation
or peddling without a valid permit or license or a copy of the permit or license or any
violation of this Chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $500, 90 days
in jail, or both.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
14. Expiration.
A permit or license shall not be issued for a period exceeding one calendar year.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
15. Nontransferable.
Any permit or license approved and issued under this Chapter shall be nontransferable.
However this shall not prevent any permittee from using a number of solicitors and
representatives, but each solicitor and representative shall carry a facsimile copy of
such permit while engaged in solicitation.
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-8
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
16. Misrepresentation of Endorsement by City.
No person shall represent that the granting of a permit or license under this Chapter is
an endorsement by the City of the particular organization involved, and any such
representation is hereby declared to be a misrepresentation of fact and will result in a
revocation of the license or permit.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
17. Suspension and Revocation of Permit and/or License.
If, upon receipt of written information or upon his/her own investigation, the City Clerk
has reason to believe that any officer, agent or representative of a licensee or permittee
is or has misrepresented the facts or made untrue statements, either with words or by
implication, with regard to solicitations or peddling or the purposes thereof, or has made
untrue statements in the application, or that in any other way the solicitations or
peddling has been conducted, including a failure to carry a copy of the permit or license
in violation of any part of this Chapter and not in conformity with the intent and purpose
of this Chapter, then the City Clerk shall immediately suspend such permit.
If the City Clerk determines that the solicitation or peddling is being conducted in a
manner inimical to the protection of the public health, safety or welfare of the citizens of
the City of Troy, or constitutes harassing, intimidating, threatening, or disruptive
conduct, or in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or of any statute of the
State of Michigan, or any other Ordinance of the City of Troy, then the City Clerk may
suspend the permit or license.
It shall also be a violation serving as grounds for suspension of a license or permit if
any permittee or licensee or his/her representatives enters upon property which is
posted as prohibiting solicitors, and/or enters upon property registered on the Citys Do-
Not-Knock Registry.
It shall also be a basis for suspension of said permit or license when the permittee or
licensee fails to leave a premises when asked by an owner or occupant to do so.
If the City Clerk determines that it is necessary to suspend a permit or license under
this Section, he/she will do so by providing written notice to the permittee or licensee. If
the permittee or licensee wishes to challenge the decision made by the City Clerk, then
the permittee or licensee must file a written appeal to the City Manager within 14 days
of being suspended. If the permittee or licensee does not appeal the City Clerks
decision within 14 days, the permit or license will be revoked.
Upon receipt of a written appeal, the City Manager will review any and all information
surrounding the suspension, and make a written determination within 10 days. After
reviewing all pertinent information, the City Manager may overrule the suspension, limit
the timeframe for the suspension, revoke the permit or license, or make any other
determination under the circumstances.
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-9
The City Managers determination is the Citys final decision. Failure of the permittee or
licensee to timely meet the filing deadlines as set out in this Section waives any right to
contest the suspension and ultimate revocation of the permit or license.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
18. Fixed Stands Prohibited.
No licensee or permittee shall stop or remain in any one place upon any street, alley or
public place, longer than necessary to make a sale to a customer wishing to buy. Any
peddler using a vehicle, when stopped, shall place his vehicle parallel to and within
twelve (12) inches of the curb and shall depart from such place as soon as he has
completed sales with customers actually present.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
19. Practices prohibited.
No solicitor or peddler shall shout or cry out his goods or merchandise, nor blow any
horns, ring any bell or use any other similar device to attract the attention of the public.
No solicitor or peddler shall go in or upon private residences in the City of Troy, where
there is a "No Solicitation" sign, a Do-Not-Knock window cling, or its equivalent, or
whose address is at that time on the Do-Not-Knock Registry.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
20. Prohibited Areas.
No peddler, in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise shall operate or maintain any
stand, vehicle, store or place of business on or near to any highway in such a manner
that the customers or traders with such person occupy or congregate within the limits of
any street, lane, highway, or public place within the City. No peddler shall be permitted
to use the streets, alleys, lanes or public places of the City for the service of customers
or for the transaction of business, or to use any stands, stores or other places of
business in any manner that shall require the customer, when transacting said
business, to stand within the limits of the streets, highways, alleys or public places of
the City. No peddler or solicitor shall enter onto property which has posted a "No
Solicitation" sign, a Do-Not-Knock window cling, or its equivalent, or whose address is
at that time on the Do-Not-Knock Registry.
This Section does not prohibit a solicitation permittee, who is seeking contributions on
behalf of a charitable organization, from standing in the roadway (other than a limited
access highway), if the permittee has been granted a valid solicitation permit from the
City of Troy, and is in compliance with Public Act 112 of 2017, MCL 257.676b.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
21. Hours of Peddling and Solicitation.
No peddling or solicitation, as defined by this Chapter, may be conducted in residential
areas before 9:00 AM and after 6:00 PM from October 1st through March 31st, and after
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-10
8:00 PM from April 1st through September 30th. No peddling or solicitation, as defined
by this Chapter, may be conducted in commercially or otherwise zoned district except
during the normal business hours of the establishment in which the peddling is taking
place. If said establishment is not otherwise open for business, there shall be no
peddling before 9:00 AM and after 6:00 PM from October 1st through March 31st, and
after 8:00 PM from April 1st through September 30th. In all other areas of the City,
peddling and solicitation shall be prohibited before 9:00 AM and after 6:00 PM from
October 1st through March 31st, and after 8:00 PM April 1st through September 30th.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
22. Establishment of Do-Not-Knock Registry
The City Clerk shall establish and maintain a Do-Not-Knock Registry for the City of
Troy. Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment, or other dwelling within the City may request that the City place and
maintain his or her residence, house, apartment, or dwelling on the Do-Not-Knock
Registry by submitting a written request on a form supplied by the City Clerk. The
written request shall contain the following:
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(a) The name of the person completing the form.
(Rev. 04/14/2014)
(b) The complete address of the residence, house, apartment, or dwelling to be
placed on the registry.
(Rev. 04/14/2014)
(c) The date the form was completed.
(Rev. 04/14/2014)
(d) A statement that solicitors and/or peddlers shall not knock, ring the doorbell, or
otherwise physically call at his or her residence, house, apartment, or dwelling.
(Rev. 04/14/2014)
(e) Any other information reasonably required by the City to verify the identity of the
person completing the form as a lawful occupant and possessor of the
residence, house, apartment, or dwelling.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
The City Clerk may provide removable Do-Not Knock window clings, upon request, to any
person who is registered on the Do-Not-Knock Registry. The Do-Not-Knock window cling is not
required to be displayed on the residence, house, apartment, or other dwelling unit, but is
optional to anyone registered on the Do-Not Knock Registry.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-11
23. Re-registering on the Do-Not-Knock Registry
Every person who requests to be placed on the City of Troys Do-Not-Knock Registry
shall be required to re-register his or her residence, house, apartment, or dwelling every
five (5) years. The City Clerk shall remove from the Registry any residence, house,
apartment, or dwelling that is not re-registered.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
24. Removal from Do-Not-Knock Registry
Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house, apartment, or
other dwelling within the City may request that the City delete his or her Do-Not-Knock
Registration by submitting a written request on a form supplied by the City Clerk. The
written request shall contain the following:
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(a) The name of the person completing the form.
(Rev. 04/14/2014)
(b) The complete address of the residence, house, apartment, or dwelling to be
deleted from the Registry.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(c) The date the form was completed.
(Rev. 04/14/2014)
(d) A statement that his or her residence, house, apartment, or dwelling shall be
deleted from the Do-Not-Knock Registry.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(e) Any other information reasonably required by the City to verify the identity of the
person completing the form as a lawful occupant and possessor of the
residence, house, apartment, or dwelling.
(Rev. 04/14/2014)
25. After requesting placement on the Do-Not-Knock Registry, an owner or occupant of a
residence, house, apartment, or other dwelling will remain on the registry until one of
the following occurs:
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(a) The City Clerk receives a written request by the owner or occupant to remove the
residence, house, apartment, or dwelling from the Registry pursuant to Section
24.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
Chapter 74 - Solicitations
74-12
(b) The City receives written notice that that person who submitted the request to
have the residence, house, apartment, notice, or dwelling added to the Registry
is no longer a lawful possessor or occupant of the premises. The City Clerk will
use internal controls, as available, to identify the sale of a property, and remove
the address from the Registry.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
(c) The expiration of five (5) calendar years, expiring on December 31 of the fifth full
calendar year, from the date the form is submitted under Section 22.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
26. Copies of Do-Not-Knock Registry
The City Clerk shall provide a copy of the then-current Do-Not-Knock Registry to each
person issued a peddler's license or door-to-door solicitation permit. A copy of the Do-
Not-Knock Registry shall also be available for public inspection in the City Clerk's office
during regular business hours.
(Rev. 12/17/2018; Effective 12/27/2018)
The failure to add a residence, house, apartment, or other dwelling to the Do-Not-Knock
registry, or to remove a residence, house, apartment, or other dwelling from the
registry, shall not be grounds for any claim against the City.
(Rev. 04/14/2014)
Chapter 75 - Pet Shops
75-1
Chapter 75-Pet Shops of the Code of the City of Troy is repealed by the Council of the
City of Troy, Oakland County Michigan, at a Regular Meeting of the City Council held at
City Hall, 500 W. Big Beaver, Troy, MI on the 28th day of March 2011 and is effective
ten (10) days from the date hereof or upon publication, whichever shall occur later.
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-1
I. Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to regulate adult use businesses, to promote
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations for adult use businesses. The provisions of this Chapter
have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of
any communicative materials, including adult materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of
this section to restrict or deny access by adults to adult materials protected by the Constitution of
the United States or the Michigan Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of adult use businesses to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of
this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
II. Definitions. For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Adult Arcade. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion
picture projectors, slide projectors, compact discs or similar machines, or other image producing
machines, (whether coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrically, internet or
mechanically controlled), for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or 
specified anatomical areas.
Adult Book Store, Adult Novelty or Retail Store or Adult Video Store.
A. An establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers any one or
more of the following for sale, rental, or viewing at the site, for any form of consideration:
1. Books, computer diskettes, tapes or hard drives, magazines, periodicals or other printed
material, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproduction, slides or other
visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; and/or
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities; and/or
3. Items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia depicting, displaying, advertising or
packaged as specified sexual activities or depicting or describing specified anatomical
areas.
B. For purposes of this section, principal business purpose means:
1. The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or interior floor
space; or
2. The receipt of a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from; or
3. The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures to the
promotion of the sale, rental or viewing, of books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, film, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or
other visual representations, items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia which are
characterized by the depiction, description display, advertising or packaging of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the
offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing specified sexual
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-2
activities or specified anatomical areas, and still be categorized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty or retail store or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not
serve to exempt such establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store, so long as the establishment falls within the definition of
an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store as set forth above.
Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, club, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which
features one or more of the following:
A. Person(s) who appears nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
B. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical
areas or by specified sexual activities;
C. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Motel. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:
A. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons
with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
compact discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
which advertises the availability of this adult type of material by means of a sign, visible
from the public right of way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including but
not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; and/or
B. Permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing sexually explicit activities or
displaying specified anatomical areas, including transmission over the World Wide Web;
and/or
C. Offers a sleeping room for rent for intervals of time less than ten (10) hours; and/or
D. Allows a tenant or occupant to sub rent a sleeping room for intervals of less than ten (10)
hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater. A commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, compact discs, slides of specified sexual activities or depictions or descriptions of
specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which, for
any form or consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live
performances which are characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities. This definition does not include a theater which features occasional
live nude performances with serious literary, artistic, or political value and that have no adverse
secondary effects.
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-3
Adult Use Business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty or retail store, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude
modeling studio and/or a sexual encounter establishments and any business determined by the
Planning Director to be an adult use, due to the activities of the business which involve
characteristic of adult uses, such as nudity, semi-nudity, exposure of specified anatomical
areas and/or specified sexual activities. The definition of adult use business shall not include
an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional
person licensed by the State engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
Employee. A person who works or performs in and/or for an adult use business, regardless of
whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said
business.
Entertainer. A person who performs some type of activity or pose with the intent of allowing
others to witness that activity or pose.
Entertainment. A performance of some type of activity, including, but not limited to, singing,
dancing, acting, mime, comedy, recitations, demonstrations, magic tricks, modeling, posing,
exhibition, with or without inanimate objects or animals, with the intent of allowing others to
witness that activity in live or reproduced format.
Escort. A person who, for consideration in any form, agrees or offers to act as a companion,
guide, or date for another person, (or who agrees to privately perform as an entertainer),
including but not limited to, the modeling of lingerie, the removal of clothing, and the performance
of a dance or skit. Under this definition, privately shall mean a performance for an individual
and that individuals guests.
Escort Agency. A person or business that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises the furnishing
of escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or any other form of
consideration.
Establishment. In regard to an adult use business, means and includes any of the following:
A. A new business;
B. An existing business, whether or not an adult use business, that has been converted to or
which adds as a component any adult use business;
C. An adult use business that adds a different or expanded adult use business activity to any
other existing adult use business;
or
D. A relocated adult use business.
Licensee. The individual listed as an applicant on the application for an adult use business
license, or a person in whose name a license to operate an adult use business has been issued.
Licensing Officer. The Clerk of the City of Troy or his/her designee.
Manager. An operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by an adult use business to act as
a manager or supervisor of employees, or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the adult
use business.
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-4
Nude Modeling Studio. Any place where a person appears in a state of nudity or displays
specified anatomical areas, and is provided money or any form of consideration to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other
persons. This includes modeling studios that provide for nude modeling on an occasional basis,
but it does not include modeling studio whose primary function is to provide art classes as part of
a college, university or educational institution and which is certified by the State of Michigan.
Nudity or State of Nudity.
A. The exposure of human male or female genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or the areola
or nipple of the female breast; and/or
B. A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover human male or female genitals,
pubic area, buttocks, anus or the areola or nipple of the female breast.
Operator. Includes the owner, licensee, manager, or person in charge of any premises.
Peep Booth. An adult motion picture theater with a viewing room or cubical of less than one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space.
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
association or other entity.
Premises or Licensed Premises. Any premises that requires an adult use license and that is
classified as an adult use business.
Principal Owner. Any person owning, directly or beneficially: a) ten percent (10%) or more of a
corporations equity securities; b) ten percent (10%) or more of the membership interests in a
limited liability company; or c) in the case of any other entity, ten percent (10%) or more of the
ownership interests in the entity.
Private Room. A room in a hotel/motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed, a bathtub, a shower,
a toilet and/or a sink in the room or adjacent room, and is used primarily for lodging.
Semi-Nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region,
and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
Sexual Encounter Establishment. A business or commercial establishment that as one of its
primary business purposes, offers a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate,
associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or any activities when one or more or the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity and/or permits patrons to display or be filmed or photographed performing sexually
explicit activities or displaying specified anatomical areas for recording or transmission over
the World Wide Web or any other media, for any form of consideration. A hotel/motel will not be
classified as a sexual encounter establishment, by virtue of the fact that it offers private rooms for
rent.
Specified Anatomical Areas.
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus
or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and/or
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-5
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
Specified Criminal Acts: Sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, criminal sexual conduct,
rape, crimes classified as sexual crimes by the State of Michigan or any other state; or crimes
connected with another adult use business, including but not limited to, the distribution of
obscenity, prostitution and/or pandering.
Significant or Substantial Portion. Means thirty (30) percent or more of the term modified by such
phrase.
Specified Sexual Activities.
A. The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus
or female breasts: and/or
B. Sex acts, actual or simulated, including but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation or
sodomy; and/or
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; and/or
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
and/or
E. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in subsections (A) through (D) of this definition.
Tip. Any money or other consideration given by a patron or patrons agent to an entertainer. A tip
includes, but is not limited to, money, fees, service charges, gifts, salary, donations, stipends,
contribution, offer of service, performance of service, payment or any other consideration.
Transfer of Ownership or Control of an Adult Use Business.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business; and/or
B. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business,
whether by sale, exchange or similar means; and/or
C. The establishment of a trust, management arrangement, gift or
other similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the
business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon
the death of a person possessing the ownership or control.
III. Location of Business. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated an adult use
business in any location in the City except as provided in Troys Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 39,
Article XXII, Section 22.30.08 of the Code of Ordinances.
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-6
IV. License Required; Application Fee; Investigation Fee; License Fee.
A. No person shall conduct an adult use business without first having obtained an annual
adult business license for each separate place of business in the City.
B. Applicants for a new adult use business license shall pay an application fee and an
investigation fee as set by Chapter 60 of the ordinances of the City of Troy. An existing
adult use business shall pay an annual license fee as set by Chapter 60 of the
ordinances of the City of Troy.
C. In the event an application or a application for a license renewal for an adult use business
license is withdrawn or denied, the application fee, investigation fee and /or license fee
shall not be refunded to the applicant. Fees are not transferable.
V. License Application.
A. All applicants for an adult use business license shall file an application for such license
with the City Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk. Each principal owner and all
managers and employees shall be named on the application form.
B. The completed application shall contain the following information and/or shall be
accompanied by the following documents:
1. If the applicant is:
a. An individual: the individual shall state his or her legal name and any aliases
and shall submit satisfactory proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18)
years of age.
b. A partnership: the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of
all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of
the partnership agreement, if any.
c. A corporation: the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its
incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the
statutes of the State of Michigan, or in the case of a foreign corporation,
evidence that it is currently authorized to do business in the State of Michigan,
the names and titles of all officers, directors and principal owners, and the
name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process.
d. A limited liability company: the limited liability company shall state its complete
name, the date of filing of the articles of organization and operating
agreement, and the names of all managers and members.
2. Whether the applicant or any other individual required to be listed on the application
currently holds or has previously held an adult use business license or currently works or
has previously worked for an adult use business, adult entertainment or sexually oriented
business; whether that business is or was licensed in another state, city or county; and
whether that business license was ever denied, suspended or revoked. The name and
location of the adult use business, the reason the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked, and the date of the denial, suspension or revocation must be provided on the
application.
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-7
3. The location of the proposed adult use business, including a legal description of the
property, street address and telephone number(s).
4. Proof of the applicants right to possession of the premises where the adult use business
is proposed to be located.
5. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and any other individual listed
on the application.
6. A photocopy of the drivers license or other government issued identification for the
individuals listed in Article V and/or Article VI of this Chapter.
7. A floor plan of the proposed premises that specifies the location and dimensions of any
employees station(s) and demonstrates that there is an unobstructed view from at least
one of the employees stations of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose, excluding the restrooms. The proposed floor plan shall
designate the use of each room or area in the premises and designate those rooms or
other areas of the premises where patrons are not permitted. The proposed floor plan
need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designate scale or drawn
with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
(6) inches. The diagram shall designate the place where the license will be conspicuously
posted and the location of any proposed stage.
8. A current certified drawing prepared, within thirty (30) days prior to the application, by a
land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any adult use
business within one thousand (1,000) feet measured from the nearest lot line on a
straight-line basis, and depicting the property line of any church, school, childcare facility,
public park, residential zoning district or any parcel used for residential purposes, whether
zoned residential or not, within five hundred (500) feet from the nearest lot line to the
nearest lot line on a straight-line basis.
9. Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed in Article V and/or Article VI of
this Chapter have been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in
Article VII. 1.8. of this Chapter, including the nature of the specified criminal act and the
date and place of conviction.
10. Photographs (passport size or approximately two [2] inches by two [2] inches) and
fingerprints of all principal owners and each manager, general partner, and, in the case of
a corporate applicant, the president of the corporation.
C. If the applicant is an individual, he/she shall sign the application for a license. If the
applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by the president or vicepresident
and attested to by the secretary or assistant secretary. If the applicant is a
general partnership, the application shall be signed by a general partner. If the applicant
is a limited liability corporation, the application shall be signed by the manager.
D. If an omission or error is discovered by the City Clerk, he/she shall promptly notify the
applicant and returned the application for completion or correction. The City Clerk shall
not be required to take any further action. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days to
properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall
be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to property
complete the application. Any application rejected due to an omission or error shall be refiled
only when the omission or error has been remedied. For the purposes of this
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-8
Chapter, the official application date is the date the City Clerk accepts an application that
is complete for filing.
E. Applicants for a license under this Chapter shall have a continuing duty to promptly
supplement application information required by this section in the event that said
information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to
comply with this continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change, by
supplementing the application on file with the City Clerk, shall be grounds for the
suspension, revocation or denial of an adult business license.
VI. Investigation.
On receipt of a properly completed application and the payment of the application and
investigation fees, the City Clerk shall submit the documentation to the Chief of Police, or his/her
designee. The Troy Police Department shall investigate the background of each individual
applicant, manager, employee, independent contractors, other than building and trade
contractors, that act as entertainers, waitress and/or have any contact with patrons in any other
way, partners of a partnership, president, vice-president, secretary and treasurer of a
corporation, or other officers and the holders of stock of a corporation. Each applicant shall pay a
non-refundable and non-transferable investigation fee at the time the application if filed for each
person who will be investigated. Fees under this section shall be set by resolution of City
Council. The report of the Troy Police Department shall be referred to the City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall transmit a request to the Planning Director for a report determining whether
or not the proposed location of the adult use business complies with the locational requirements
of this Chapter and the Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Director shall issue a report within five
(5) business days of the transmittal of the request for a report from the City Clerk. Except as set
out in Article VII. D. of this Chapter, if the Planning Director fails to issue the report, as required,
the City Clerk shall presume that the proposed location of the adult use business complies with
the Code of Ordinances.
VII. Approval/ Denial of License.
A. The application of any applicant shall be approved or denied by the City Clerk within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the application is officially filed with the City Clerk. The
City Clerk shall deny a license if one or more of the following criteria apply:
1. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years of age;
2. The applicant has made a false statement upon the application or have given
false information in connection with an application;
3. The applicant or any holder of any class of stock, or a director, officer, partner or
principal of the applicant has had an adult use business license revoked or
suspended anywhere within the State of Michigan or any other state in the United
States within one (1) year prior to the application;
4. The applicant has operated an adult use business which has determined to be a
public nuisance in the State of Michigan or any state, county or the city or any
other governmental subdivision in the United States within one (1) year prior to the
application;
5. A corporation applicant is not in good standing or is not authorized to do business
in the State of Michigan;
6. The applicant is overdue in the payment of City taxes, fees, fines or penalties
assessed against him, her or it or imposed against him, her or it in relation to an
adult use business;
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-9
7. The applicant has not obtained the required sales tax license;
8. The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the five (5)
year period prior to the date the application if filed with the City Clerk.
B. In the event the City Clerk denies a license, he/she shall notify the applicant in writing by
first class mail to the address on the application of the denial and the reasons for the
denial. The applicant shall have the right to a hearing before the City Manager as set
forth in Article X.C. of this Chapter. A written request for a hearing shall be made to the
City Manager within ten (10) days of the date of denial of the license by the City Clerk. A
hearing shall be held within fourteen (14) days from the date a timely request for a
hearing is received by the City Manager.
1. At the hearing, the City Manager may require the presence of representatives of
the Police Department, the City Clerk, the Planning Director, the Building and
Zoning Director, City Treasurer, Code Enforcement, the applicant or other
interested parties, or any other individual who may have information relevant to
the denial of the license. The City Manager may accept written documentation or
hear statements and consider other evidence offered which is relevant to the
denial of the license application by the City Clerk.
a. If the City Manager determines that the applicant is ineligible for a license under this
Chapter, he/she shall notify the applicant in writing at the address on the application
within two (2) days after the hearing is concludes that the City Clerks denial of the
application is upheld and state the reason(s) therefore.
b. The City Managers decision shall be final and may be appealed to the Oakland County
Circuit Court in accordance with the State law. Failure of an applicant to timely follow the
filing deadlines for an appeal as set out in this Chapter constitutes a waiver of any right
the applicant may otherwise have to contest the denial of the application.
C. Except as set out in Article VII.D., if any city official or department fails to render a timely
decision pursuant to the terms of this Chapter, that city official or department shall be
deemed to have approved or consented to the issuance of the requested license.
D. A deadline date for rendering a decision under this Chapter may only be excused and
extended for events beyond the control of the decision maker, such as, the death or a
sudden serious illness of a spouse, parent, child or sibling; an excused serious illness of
the decision maker, or other highly personal issue. It shall be the decision of the City
Manager as to whether this paragraph applies to a specific situation. In rendering that
decision, the City Manager shall only implement an extension under this paragraph if
there is no other city official that is qualified to rendering the required decision. The City
Managers only power after making a decision under this paragraph is to grant an
extension to the decision maker for no more than seven (7) days. Only one (1) extension
shall be granted under this paragraph. If the City Manager is the decision maker for which
an extension is required, it shall be the duty of the Assistant City Manager for Economic
Development Services to grant or deny an extension to the City Manager under this
subsection.
VIII. Term of License.
All licenses granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be for a term or one (1) year. Said term shall
commence on January 1st of each year and terminate on December 31st of the same year.
Applications for a license filed at any other time during the year shall be treated the same as if
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-10
they were filed January 1st of that year and shall terminate on December 31st of the same year.
There shall be a license fee for each year a license is in effect. No prorating of fees shall be
permitted.
IX. License Renewal; License Fee.
The renewal of an existing license granted pursuant to this Chapter requires payment of the
annual licensing fee set by resolution of City Council and filing of a renewal application with the
City Clerk not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of expiration. The City Clerk may
waive, for good cause shown, this filing time requirement.
X. Suspension or Revocation of License.
A. The City Manager may suspend a license for a period not to exceed six (6) months or
revoke any license granted pursuant to this Chapter upon a finding of any of the
following:
1. Repeated disturbances of the public peace within the licensed establishment or
upon any parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, access ways or grounds within the
neighborhood of the licensed establishment involving patrons, employees or the
licensee;
2. Except as authorized by a valid license issued by the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission, the licensee or any employee have offered for sale or knowingly
allowed to be consumed or possessed on the licensed premises, or on any
parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, access ways or grounds immediately
adjacent to the licensed premises, alcoholic liquor, including, but not limited to,
any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, beverages, liquids or compounds,
or marijuana, narcotics, controlled substances or other dangerous drugs.
3. The licensee or manager is not on the licensed premises at all times that
entertainment of any nature, live or otherwise, is being provided;
4. Entertainment was offered at the licensed establishment during hours prohibited
by Article XIII. of this Chapter.
5. The licensee, a manager or an employee has allowed or has done nothing to
prevent patrons from engaging in a public display or indecency in violation of
State law or the Troy Code of Ordinances; or has allowed or done nothing to
prevent any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation; or
has allowed or done nothing to prevent patrons or employees in engaging in acts
of prostitution or negotiate for acts of prostitution, within the licensed premises or
on any parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, access ways or grounds immediately
adjacent to the licensed establishment, when licensee, manager or employee
knew or should have known such displays or acts were taking place;
6. The licensee or manager made a false statement or gave false information in
connection with an application for a license or a renewal of a license;
7. The licensee, manager, or an employee violated or permitted a violation of any
provision of this Chapter, including the standard of conduct set forth in Article XIV
of this Chapter.
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-11
8. The licensee, manager or an employee of the licensed establishment is under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
9. The licensee, in the case of a corporation, is not in good standing or is not
authorized to do business in the State;
10. The licensee, manager or an employee knowingly operated the facility, part of the
facility or allowed any adult activities in the facility of the adult use business during
a period of time when the adult use business was suspended or revoked;
11. The licensee is delinquent to the city, county or state for any taxes or fees past
due;
12. A licensee(s), manager, employee or independent contractor as set out in Article
VI has been convicted of a specified criminal act.
B. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the city from taking any other enforcement action
provided for by the Troy Code of Ordinances, the laws of the State, or the laws of the
United States.
C. A licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Manager if the City seeks to
suspend or revoke his/her or its license based on a violation of this Chapter. The
procedure for suspending or revoking a license is as follows:
1. When there is probable cause to believe that a licensee, a manager or an
employee has violated or permitted a violation of this Chapter to occur in or near
the licensed establishment, the Police Department, the City Clerk, the Director of
Building and Zoning, the Planning Director, the City Treasurer, Code
Enforcement, or any other city department, may file a written complaint with the
City Manager setting forth the circumstances of the violation.
2. The City Manager shall provide a copy of the complaint to the licensee, together
with notice to appear before the City Manager for the purpose of a hearing on a
specified date to show cause why the adult use business license should not be
suspended or revoked.
3. At the hearing, the City Manager may require the presence of representatives of
the Police Department, the City Clerk, the Planning Director, the Building and
Zoning Director, the City Treasurer, Code Enforcement, the owner, occupant,
applicant or other interested parties, or any other individual who may have
information relevant to the violation alleged in the complaint. The City Manager
may accept written documentation or hear statements and consider other
evidence offered which is relevant to the allegations in the complaint. The City
Manager shall make findings of fact from the statements and evidence presented
as to whether or not the alleged violation occurred. If the City Manager
determines, based on a preponderance of evidence, that a violation has occurred,
within twenty (20) days after the hearing, the City Manager shall issue a written
summary based on the finding of facts. The written summary issued by the City
Manager shall order the suspension or revocation of the adult use business
license. A copy of the written summary and order shall be served in person on the
licensee or mailed by first class mail to his/her or its last known address.
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-12
4. The City Manager shall have the power to administer oaths, issue appearance
notices, and when necessary, grant continuances. Appearance notices may be
issued to require the presence of persons and production of papers, books and
records necessary to make a determination concerning the allegations in a
complaint.
5. The written summary and order of the City Manager shall be a final decision and
may be appealed to the Oakland County Circuit Court in accordance with State
law. Failure of an applicant to timely appeal the City Managers order of
suspension or revocation constitutes a waiver by licensee of his/her or its right to
contest the suspension or revocation of the adult use business license.
6. In such cases where specified criminal acts are in issue, the provisions of the
Michigan Penal Code, Chapter 750, MCL 750.1, et. seq. shall control.
D. In the event of suspension, revocation or cessation of an adult use business, no portion
of the license fee, application fee or investigation fee shall be refunded.
E. When the City Manager revokes an adult use business license, the revocation shall
continue for a one (1) year period. The licensee shall not be issued an adult use business
license for one (1) year from the date the revocation became effective.
XI. Display; Transferability; Change of Ownership.
A. Any adult use business license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be prominently
displayed at all times on the premises for which the license was issued in accordance
with Article V. B.7. of this Chapter.
B. Licenses issued under this Chapter shall not be transferable except as provided herein.
Any transfer of ownership or control by a licensee holding an adult use business license
shall result in termination of the license unless such licensee, within thirty (30) days prior
to any such transfer files a written notice of such transfer accompanied by the application
fee and an investigation fee as required by Article IV this Chapter. Any such transfer shall
be reported on forms provided by the City Clerk and shall require the names of all new
principal owners and any information as required by Article V of this Chapter. Approval or
denial by the City Clerk of such transfer shall be based on the same terms as provided for
in this Chapter for the approval or denial of an adult use business license.
C. When a license has been issued to a husband and wife or to general or limited partners,
the death of a spouse or partner shall not require the surviving spouse or partner to
obtain a new license. All rights and privileges granted under the original license shall
continue in full force and effect as to such survivors for the balance of the license period.
D. Each license issued under this Chapter is separate and distinct, and no person shall
exercise any of the privileges granted under any license other than that which he/she
holds. A separate license shall be issued for each specific adult use business and each
geographical location.
XII. Manager; Change of Manager.
A. A registered manager shall be on the premises of an adult use business at all times that
entertainment, live or otherwise, is being provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to
work as a manager of an adult use business without first registering with the City Clerk.
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-13
The registration form shall require the applicant to provide his/her legal name and any
aliases, home address, telephone numbers and satisfactory proof that he/she is eighteen
(18) years of age.
B. In the event a licensee changes the manager or any employees of an adult use business,
the licensee shall report such change and register the new manger or any employees on
forms provided by the City Clerk within ten (10) days of such change. Any new
employees or manager shall pay the investigation fee approved by resolution of City
Council and shall be subject to approval or denial in accordance with the provisions of
Article VII of this Chapter.
XIII. Hours of Operation.
It shall be unlawful for an adult use business to be open for business or for the licensee,
manager or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons on the licensed premises from twelve
oclock (12:00) midnight until eight (8:00) A.M.
XIV. Standard of Conduct.
A. The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by employees of any adult use
business that offers, conducts or maintains live entertainment:
1. Clothing: No employee or entertainer mingling with the patrons or serving food or
beverages shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to
view any specified anatomical area.
2. Touching, Caressing, Fondling: No employee or entertainer shall encourage or knowingly
permit any person on the premises to touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus
or genitals of any employee, entertainer or any other person. Touching, caressing or
fondling of any part of an employee or entertainer by a patron shall be strictly prohibited.
3. Simulation of Specified Areas: No employee or entertainer shall wear or use any device
or covering exposed to view, which simulates the breasts, genitals, anus, pubic hair or
any portion thereof.
4. Performance Standards:
a. No employee or entertainer shall be in such attire, costume or clothing so
as to expose any portion of a specified anatomical area except on a stage
at least eighteen (18) inches above the immediate floor level and removed
at least six (6) feet from the nearest patron or behind a solid, uninterrupted
physical barrier which completely separates the employee or entertainer
from any patrons. This barrier must be a minimum of one-fourth (1/4) inch
thick and have no openings between the employee or entertainer and any
patrons. The stage shall be fixed and immovable.
b. No employee or entertainer shall perform any obscene acts or obscene
acts that simulate specified sexual activities or perform any prohibited
activities described in this Chapter.
5. Use of Inanimate Objects or Animals: No employee or entertainer shall use artificial
devices or inanimate objects and/or animals to depict any of the prohibited activities
described in this Chapter.
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-14
6. Menu: There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in every area offering
entertainment a list of food and beverage prices.
7. Alcohol and Liquor: No adult use business shall serve or engage in the sale of alcoholic
beverages, including, but not limited to, any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor,
beverages, liquids and compounds. The sale or service of alcohol at an adult use
business shall be controlled by the Michigan Liquor Control Code, M.C.L. 436.1101, et.
seq., as amended.
8. Consumption of Alcohol: It shall be unlawful to permit the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in any adult use business except in relation to a liquor license granted and in
compliance with the Michigan Liquor Control Code, M.C.L. 436.1101, et. seq., as
amended.
9. Tips: Any tips for employees or entertainers shall be placed by a patron into a tip box
which is permanently affixed in the adult use business and no tip may be handed directly
to an employee or entertainer. A licensee that desires to provide for such tips form its
patrons shall establish one or more containers to receive tips.
10. Tip Boxes: An adult use business that provides tip boxes shall conspicuously display in
the common area of the premises one or more signs in letters at least one (1) inch high to
read as follows:
EMPLOYEE AND ENTERTAINMENT TIPPING IS REGULATED BY
THE CITY Any tips are to be placed in tip boxes and not handed directly
to the employees or entertainers. Any physical contact between the
patron and the employee or entertainer is prohibited by law. Violators
face maximum penalties of $500 and/or 90 days in jail.
11. Outside Visibility: No entertainment occurring on the premises shall be visible at any time
from outside of the premises.
B. Any licensee who offers, conducts, or maintains live entertainment or an adult arcade
which exhibits in a peep booth, a film, videocassette, compact disc, or other video
reproduction, shall comply with the following requirements in addition to those set forth in
this Chapter:
1. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is
on duty and situated in each managers station at all times that any patron is present
inside the premises.
2. It is the duty of the licensee and managers of the premises to ensure that any doors
to public areas on the premises remain unlocked during business hours.
3. The interior of the premise shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from an employees station of every area of the premises to which
any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may
not contain video reproduction equipment or other forms of entertainment. If the
premises has two (2) or more employees stations, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area
of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
Chapter 76  Adult Business Use Licensing
76-15
restrooms, from at least one of the employees stations. The view required in this
Article must be by direct line of sight from the employees station.
4. No alteration to the configuration of an adult use business may be made without the
prior written approval of the Building and Zoning Director.
5. It shall be the duty of the licensee, and it shall also be the duty of any agents,
managers and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area
specified in Article XIV. B.3. of this Chapter remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, drapes, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times or
any person intentionally blocking said view and to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted in the license application filed pursuant to this Chapter.
6. No peep booth may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.
7. Peep booths must be separated from other peep booths by a solid, non-opaque,
uninterrupted physical divider which is a minimum of one-fourth (1/4) inch thick and
serves to prevent physical contact or visibility between patrons.
XV. Age Restrictions.
Admission to an adult use business is restricted to persons of the age of eighteen (18) years of
age or older.
XVI. Right of Entry.
The filing of an application for an adult use business license shall constitute consent of the
applicant and licensee and his/her or its agents, managers and/or employees to permit the citys
Police Department, Building Department, Planning Department or any other department or agent
of the city to conduct routine inspections of any licensed adult use business during the hours the
establishment is conducting business.
(07-09-2007)
Chapter 77  Smoking Lounges
77-1
1. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in this Chapter.
a. Smoking Lounge means an establishment, which, as one of its principal
business purposes, is dedicated to the smoking of tobacco products or other
legal substances on its premises. The term Smoking Lounge includes, but is
not limited to: cigar lounges, hookah cafs, tobacco lounges, tobacco clubs or
tobacco bars.
(Corrected: 08-20-2007)
b. Principal Business Purpose means:
i. The dedication of more than 50 percent of its interior floor space for the
smoking of tobacco products or other legal substances at the
establishment; or
ii. The receipt of more than 35 percent of its revenues from one or both of
the following:
1. The smoking of tobacco products or other legal substances to be
consumed at the establishment or;
2. The renting or furnishing of smoking paraphernalia including but not
limited to: rolling papers, pipes, hookahs or narghiles to be used at the
establishment
iii. The dedication of more than 35 percent of its advertising expenditures to
the advertising of smoking tobacco products or other legal substances at
the establishment.
(Corrected: 08-20-2007)
c. Tobacco Products mean cigars, cigarettes, or non-cigarette smoking
tobacco.
d. Other Legal Substances include clove cigarettes, kreteks, herbal cigarettes,
and any other legal substance that can be consumed by smoking.
2. License Required
No person shall operate a Smoking Lounge in the City of Troy without first obtaining a
smoking lounge license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
3. Application for Smoking Lounge License
a. An applicant shall submit to the City Clerk a fully completed application, on a
form that is prepared and furnished by the City Clerk.
Chapter 77  Smoking Lounges
77-2
b. The application shall include at least the following information:
i. The full and complete name and current address of the applicant(s).
1. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner
shall be listed, and a copy of any partnership agreement shall be
attached to the application.
2. If the applicant is a privately held corporation, the name and address of
each corporate officer, member of board of directors, and stockholder
shall be listed, and a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be
attached to the application.
3. If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, the name and address of
each corporate officer, each member of the board of directors and
each stockholder who owns ten (10) percent or more of the corporate
stock shall be listed on the application.
4. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the name and address of
each member, manager and assignee of a membership interest shall
be listed, and the articles of organization shall be attached to the
application.
ii. The complete name, address, and telephone number of the proposed
licensed business;
iii. Written statement as to the applicants experience in operating similar
businesses;
iv. A concise statement as to the individual applicants past employment;
v. Any other information pertinent to the applicant and the operation of the
proposed licensed business.
c. An applicant shall attach to the completed application a floor plan, drawn to
scale, showing the interior of the proposed business, and uses of the
proposed spaces.
4. Licensing
Smoking Lounge Licenses shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 59 of this Code.
5. License Fees
The fee for a Smoking Lounge License shall be as specified in Chapter 60 of this Code.
Chapter 77  Smoking Lounges
77-3
6. Investigation
a. After the City Clerk has received a completed application, it shall be, at a
minimum, forwarded to the following City Departments for review and
investigation:
i. Police
ii. Fire
iii. Building Inspection
b. During City business hours or at another mutually agreeable time, the
applicant shall allow the representatives of the above referenced City
Departments onto the property and into the proposed licensed premises to
complete an investigation.
c. If all of the above listed City Departments approve the application, and it
conforms to the provisions of this Chapter, the City Clerk shall issue a
Smoking Lounge License to the applicant.
7. Reasons for Denial
a. Requirements for Applicants. A license may be denied as a result of one or
more of the following factors:
i. An individual applicant, who has previously received a Smoking Lounge
License, has had the license revoked for cause, as defined in Chapter 59
of this Code.
ii. If the applicant is a co-partnership, and any of the members of the copartnership
fail to qualify to obtain a Smoking Lounge License.
iii. A corporation if any officer, manager or director or a stock owner or
stockholders owning in the aggregate more than ten (10) percent of the
stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license or
related permit hereunder for any reason.
iv. If the applicant proposes to hire a manager or agent to handle the
business operations, and the proposed manager or agent does not
possesses the same qualifications as those required of the licensee.
v. If any of the individuals who are required to be identified on the
application, as set forth in section 3 above, have been convicted or found
responsible for a violation of any federal, state, or local law involving moral
turpitude, dishonesty, fraud, violence, controlled substances, the sale,
distribution, or furnishing of tobacco, or the sale, distribution, or furnishing
of alcoholic liquors.
vi. If an applicant does not own the premises for which a Smoking Lounge
License is sought or does not have a lease or other right of exclusive
Chapter 77  Smoking Lounges
77-4
possession of the premises proposed for the business for the full period
for which the license is issued.
b. Requirement for the Proposed Licensed Premises. Smoking Lounge License
shall not be issued if there are any violation(s) of the applicable building,
electrical, mechanical, plumbing, or fire prevention codes, applicable zoning
regulations, or applicable public health regulations, unless such violation can
be remedied within a stated period of time as determined by the Fire
Department or Building Department.
c. Location. No license shall be issued to a business located within 500 feet
(500), from the nearest lot line to the nearest lot line, on a straight line basis,
of a school.
8. Display of Smoking Lounge License
A Smoking Lounge License issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be
prominently displayed near the entrance of the licensed premises.
9. Transferability; Change of Ownership
a. Licenses issued under this Chapter shall not be transferable except as
provided herein. There shall be no transfer of any State of Michigan
Exemption Permit under the Dr. Ron Davis Act of 2009 (MCL 333.12601, et.
seq., as amended from another jurisdiction into the City of Troy. Existing
Exemption Permits that have already been issued for businesses in the City
of Troy can be transferred only upon the City Clerks approval of a smokers
lounge license application for the prospective transferee. This approval or
denial shall be based on the same procedure and terms as set forth in this
Chapter.
b. Each license issued under this Chapter is separate and distinct, and no
person shall exercise any of the privileges granted under any license other
than that which he/she holds. A separate license shall be issued for each
specific smoking lounge business within the City of Troy.
(Rev. 05-13-2013)
10. Manager; Change of Manager
At least one registered manager who has been identified on the application for a
Smokers Lounge License shall be on the premises at all times that the business is
open. It shall be unlawful for any person not identified on the Smokers Lounge license
application to work as a manager of a smoking lounge business unless the proposed
manager or operator has submitted a registration form with the individuals legal name
and any aliases, home address, telephone numbers, date of birth, and drivers license
number, and is determined qualified to serve as a manager by the Troy City Clerk, using
the criteria as set forth in this Ordinance. All managers must be over the age of twentyone
(21) years old. The licensee shall be responsible for notifying the City of any
Chapter 77  Smoking Lounges
77-5
proposed change in management and insuring that the proposed new manager has
obtained the required approval before working or serving as a manager of the licensed
establishment.
(Rev. 05-13-2013)
11. Hours of Operation
It shall be unlawful for a smoking lounge business to be open for business or for the
licensee, manager or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons to enter into the
licensed premises between midnight (12:00 am) of each day until eight am (8:00 am)
the next day. All individuals except employees of the smoking lounge business shall be
required to leave or be removed from the building by (12:30 a.m.). Only a maximum of
three (3) employees shall remain on the premises after 12:30 am and each shall carry
proof of employment at the licensed establishment, such as an identification badge. The
manager and/or employees shall provide proof of such employment when requested to
do so by a member of the Troy Police Department or Troy Fire Department.
(Rev. 05-13-2013)
12. Age Restrictions
No one shall be allowed on the premises of a smoking lounge business unless the
individual is the age of eighteen (18) years of age or older. The manager and/or
employees shall ensure that identifications of individuals on the premises have been
checked to determine that every individual is over the age of eighteen (18) years of age
or older before entry into the premises. The manager and/or employees shall secure
exit doors to ensure that no one has or is attempting to gain secret entry into the
premises.
(Rev. 05-13-2013)
13. Parking Restrictions
The manager and/or employees shall require patrons to leave the parking lot of the
smoking lounge business by 12:30 a.m. The manager and/or employees shall insure
that patrons of the smoking lounge business are not parking in adjacent or neighboring
parking lots or in residential areas that are not part of the parking area provided to the
licensed premises.
(Rev. 05-13-2013)
14. Standard of Conduct.
a. The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by managers and
employees of any smokers lounge business:
i. Alcohol and Liquor: No manager, employee, volunteer, or representative
of the licensee shall serve or engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages on
Chapter 77  Smoking Lounges
77-6
the premises, including, but not limited to: any spirituous, vinous, malt or
fermented liquor, beverages, liquids and compounds.
ii. Consumption of alcohol: It shall be unlawful to permit the consumption of
alcoholic beverages in any smoking lounge business. The licensees
manager and/or employees shall immediately remove any person who
opens or consumes alcoholic beverages on the premises.
iii. Controlled Substances: It shall be unlawful to permit the use, sale or
presence of controlled substances (as defined under MCL 333.7212, et.
seq, of the Public Health Code as amended, or a rule promulgated under
that Act or Code), on the licensed premises. The manager and/or
employees shall immediately remove any person possessing, distributing,
selling, consuming and/or using controlled substances on the licensed
premises.
iv. There shall be no live entertainment in a licensed establishment.
v. It is the duty of the licensee to ensure that at least one manager is on duty
and on the premises at all times that persons are on the licensed
premises, and that the manager is visible to any patron who is present on
the premises.
vi. It is the duty of the licensee and managers of the premises to ensure that
any doors to public areas on the premises remain unlocked during
business hours.
(Rev. 05-13-2013)
15. Compliance with Laws
The business licensee, the manager and employees shall comply with all federal and
state laws and the City of Troy Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to,
building and fire codes.
(Rev. 05-13-2013)
16. Right of Entry.
The filing of an application for a smokers lounge license shall constitute consent of the
applicant and licensee and his/her or its agents, managers and/or employees to permit
the Citys Police Department, Building Department, Planning Department or any other
department or agent of the city to conduct routine inspections of any licensed smokers
lounge business during the hours the establishment is conducting business and during
any time that employees or managers are on the premises. The Troy Police
Department and the Troy Fire Department shall be allowed unannounced access to the
smoking lounge premises to inspect for violation of this Chapter.
(Rev. 05-13-2013)
Chapter 77  Smoking Lounges
77-7
17. Revocation and Suspension of a License
The City Manager, or his or her designee, may immediately revoke or suspend a
Smoking Lounge License, upon the applicants violation of any provisions of this
Ordinance or for other good cause. The procedure for the suspension and revocation of
the license shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 59 of this Code.
18. Violations and Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any provision of this Chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 and/or 90 days in
jail, as well as the penalties provided herein.
(Rev. 05-13-2013)
(Enacted: 08-06-2007)
(Corrected Version Republished: 08-20-07)
Chapter 78 - Signs
78-1
Chapter 78-Signs of the Code of the City of Troy is repealed by the Council of the City of
Troy, Oakland County Michigan, at a Regular Meeting of the City Council held at City Hall,
500 W. Big Beaver, Troy, MI on the 12th day of September, 2005 and is effective ten (10)
days from the date hereof or upon publication, whichever shall later occur.
Chapter 79 - General Building Regulations
79-1
8.1 Adoption of Code by Reference. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3(k) of Act
270 of 1909, State of Michigan, as amended, Michigan Complied Laws 117.3(k)
and Section 8a of Act 230 of 1972, State of Michigan, as amended, Michigan
Complied Laws 125.1508a, the State of Michigan Building Code is hereby adopted
by reference by the City of Troy for the purpose of regulating the erection,
construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location,
occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures, and shall apply to
existing or proposed buildings and structures in the City of Troy. A complete copy
of the code is available for inspection at the office of the Troy City Clerk.
(Rev. 07/23/2001)
8.2 Changes in Code. The following sections and sub-sections of the Michigan
Building Code are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections
and sub-sections are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in
this Chapter shall refer to the like numbered sections of the Michigan Building
Code. The following article, Sections and sub-sections are numbered to conform to
the numbering in the Michigan Building Code.
(Rev. 07/23/2001)
116.0 Board of Appeals.
(Rev. 07/23/2001)
116.1 Application for Appeal. The owner of a building or structure or any other person
may appeal from a decision of the building official refusing to grant a modification
of the provisions of the building regulation enacted by the City Council, including
but not limited to, the Michigan Building Code, the Michigan Rehabilitation Code
for Existing Buildings, the Troy Fire Prevention Code, Michigan Electrical Code,
Michigan Plumbing Code, Michigan Mechanical Heating Code, Troy Property
Maintenance Code, Fence Ordinance, Troy Sign Ordinance, but not including the
Troy Zoning Ordinance, covering the manner of construction or materials to be
used in the erection, alteration or repair of a building or structure to the Board of
Appeals. Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that: the true
intent of the building regulations, as listed above, adopted to regulate the
construction or occupancies of buildings, or the rules legally adopted there under
have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the building regulations do not
fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction can be used.
(Enacted: 10/05/2009; Effective: 01/01/2010)
116.2 Membership of the Board. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the following: 1.
The City Manager. 2. A Representative of the Oakland County Health Department.
3. Three residents of the City of Troy who shall have a background, training or
experience in construction or similar trades, at least one shall be a professional
structural or civil engineer of architectural engineering experience. The residents
shall be appointed by the City Council for a period of five (5) years.
Chapter 79 - General Building Regulations
79-2
(Enacted: 10/05/2009; Effective: 01/01/2010)
116.2.1 Absence of Members. During absence of a member by reason of disability or
disqualification, the City Council shall designate a qualified substitute.
(Rev. 07/23/2001)
116.2.2 Compensation of Board of Appeals. Compensation of appointed members of the
board shall be determined by the City Council.
(Rev. 07/23/2001)
116.3 Public Hearing. All hearings shall be public; and the appellant, his representative,
the official of the municipality and any other person whose interests may be
affected by the matter on appeal, shall be given an opportunity to be heard; it shall
be the rule in cases heard for variance to Chapter 83, Fences, to notify all owners
of record or property within 300 feet of the premise in question, such notices to be
delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners at the address
given in the last assessment roll. The Board may require any party applying to the
Board for relief to give such notice to other interested parties as it shall prescribe.
(Rev. 07/23/2001)
116.4 Records of the Board. Minutes of each meeting shall be kept in accordance with
the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1975 (MCL 15.261 et. seq.), and
provided to City Council upon approval.
(Enacted: 10/05/2009; Effective: 01/01/2010)
ARTICLE 25
MECHANICAL CODE
2500.0 Adoption of Code by Reference. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3 (k) of Act
279 of 1909 State of Michigan, as amended, Michigan Complied Laws 117.3(k)
and the Michigan Mechanical Code is adopted herein by reference by the City of
Troy for the purpose of governing the requirements for the design and installation
of H.V.A.C. systems is building in the City of Troy. Complete and printed copies
of the Michigan Mechanical Code are available for public use and inspection at
the office of the City Clerk.
(Rev. 07/23/2001)
ARTICLE 27
ELECTRICAL WIRING AND EQUIPMENT
SECTION 2700.0 GENERAL
2700.0. Code Adopted. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3 (K) of Act 279 of 1909,
State of Michigan, as amended, Michigan Complied Laws 117.3(k) and Section
8a of Act 230 of 1972, State of Michigan, as amended Michigan Complied Laws
Chapter 79 - General Building Regulations
79-3
125.1508a, the State of Michigan Electrical Code is hereby adopted by reference
by the City of Troy, for the purpose of regulating the installation, alteration,
repair, conversion, use and maintenance of all electrical wiring for light, heat and
power, service equipment for radio and television receiving systems, alarm
systems and all alterations or extensions to existing wiring systems in or on
buildings and structures to insure safety. A complete copy of the code is
available for inspection at the office of the Troy City Clerk.
(Rev. 06-18-2001)
2700.1 Fees for the issuance of electrical wiring and equipment permits and for
inspections required under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be paid to the
City Treasurer.
The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council
and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from the
enforcement of this Ordinance.
(Rev. 06-18-2001)
ARTICLE 28
PLUMBING CODE
2800.0 Code Adopted. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3(k) of Act 279 of 1909, State
of Michigan as amended, Michigan Complied Laws 117.3(k) and the Michigan
Plumbing Code, is hereby adopted by reference by the City of Troy for the purpose
of governing the requirements for the design and installation of plumbing systems,
including sanitary and storm drainage, sanitary facilities, water supplied, and storm
water and sewer disposal in building in the City of Troy. Complete and printed
copies of the Michigan Plumbing Code are available for public use and inspection
at the office of the City Clerk.
(Rev. 07/23/2001)
Adoption of Code by Reference. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3(k) of Act
270 of 1909, State of Michigan, as amended, Michigan Complied Laws 117.3(k),
the State of Michigan Residential Building Code is hereby adopted by reference by
the City of Troy for the purpose of regulating the erection, construction, alteration,
addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of
all one and two family buildings and structures, and shall apply to existing or
proposed one and two family buildings and structures in the City of Troy. A
complete copy of the code is available for inspection at the office of the Troy City
Clerk.
(Rev. 07/23/2001)
Chapter 79 - General Building Regulations
79-4
ARTICLE 29
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
2900 Except as otherwise provided in other sections or articles of this Chapter, a
violation of any section, article or provision of Chapter 79 is a Municipal Civil
Infraction subject to the provisions of Chapter 100 of the Code of the City of
Troy. Each day that a violation continues is a separate Municipal Civil Infraction
violation. Sanctions for each violation of Chapter 79 shall include a fine of not
more than $500, costs, damages and injunctive orders as authorized by Chapter
100.
(03/01/2006)
Chapter 80 - Soil Removal and Fill
80-1
8.181 Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the City of Troy and preserve the natural resources and to
prevent the creation of nuisances and hazards to the health, safety, and general welfare
by the regulation of the removal of topsoil, sub-soil, sand, gravel, earth and other materials
from lands located within the City of Troy, and the regulation of depositing and dumping of
sand, gravel, earth, rock, stone, concrete, minerals and other materials on land located
within the City of Troy; and by providing for the issuance of licenses for such activities; and
to provide for fees; and to prescribe the rules and regulations and conditions for the
issuance of such licenses; and to provide for the bonds to insure satisfactory performance
of the terms of this Chapter.
8.182 Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to move, remove or deposit topsoil,
subsoil, sand, gravel, earth, rock, stone, concrete, minerals or other materials on land
located within the City of Troy without having first obtained a permit for such moving,
removal and/or deposition from the City Council; provided however, that
(1) No permit fee shall be collected for sites less than two acres, except as provided in
Section 8.189(2).
(2) No permit shall be required for the moving of the aforesaid materials upon a parcel
of land two acres or less in area where grade will not be changed by more than 1
foot and/or drainage will not be changed to the detriment of adjacent properties,
except as provided in Section 8.189(2).
(Rev. 02-25-85)
(3) No permit shall be required for sites where the moving, grading or leveling of the
aforesaid materials is carried on for the immediate use or development of land
upon which these substances are found pursuant to an approved grading plan for
a platted subdivision which has received final approval of the preliminary plat;
No permit shall be required for the application of topsoil or other similar material
when used for purposes of lawn maintenance or gardening; provided, however,
that such lawn maintenance or gardening does not violate the requirements of this
Chapter.
8.183 Procedure on Application. The application for any permit shall be filed with the City Clerk in
quadruplicate, signed by the property owner of record, the original of which shall be sworn
to before some person lawfully authorized to administer oaths, and shall set forth the
following information and shall be accompanied by the following data:
(1) A full identification of the applicant and all persons to be directly or indirectly
interested in the permit if granted;
(2) The residence and business address of the applicant, including all members of any
firm or partnership, or all officers of any corporation applying;
(3) A complete description and location of the property on which the work is
proposed to be done, as prepared by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor.
(4) The exact nature of the proposed excavation or fill and soil to be removed or
deposited and an estimate of the approximate number of cubic yards to be
Chapter 80 - Soil Removal and Fill
80-2
removed or deposited. This computation to be made by a registered civil engineer
or land surveyor.
(5) A statement of the manner in which it is proposed to excavate and remove or fill
the soil or other materials including the slope of the sides and the level of the floor,
and the kind of equipment proposed to be employed in making such excavation
and removing such materials.
(6) The proposed route which applicant proposes to use over the public streets and
over private property in transporting such material;
(7) The past experience of the applicant in the matter to which the permit pertains; the
name, address and past experience in such matter of the person to be in charge of
the proposed operations;
(8) Whether or not any permit of the applicant has been revoked, and if so, the
circumstances of such revocation;
(9) The time within which such excavation and/or fill is to be commenced after the
granting of said permit and the time when it is to be completed; and
(10) Such further information as the City Council, the City Manager, or the City
Engineer may require.
(Rev. 03-26-79)
8.184 Filing Map and Payment of Filing Fee. At the time of application, the applicant shall file
with the City Clerk a topographic map of the property on which the proposed work is to be
done covering the area extending 300 feet from the exterior boundary of the proposed
site. This map is to be prepared by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor. The map
shall indicate the number of acres on which excavation work is to be performed. At the
time of filing said map and application for permit, the applicant shall pay a filing fee of
$100.00 provided, however, no filing fee shall be charged for areas of 5 acres or less. Said
sum is to used to defray the cost of engineering services, investigation, publication
charges, and the other miscellaneous administrative expenses occasioned by processing
such application. In addition to the filing fee, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
8.185 Investigation and Hearing. Immediately upon the filing of an application for a permit one
copy thereof shall be delivered to the City Manager and one copy shall be delivered to the
City Engineer. The City Engineer shall make an investigation of the facts set forth in the
application and shall make a written report of his investigation together with his
recommendations to the City Manager, who shall then present same to the City Council
along with his recommendation.
The City Council, in granting or denying any applications for a permit shall take into
consideration the zoning of the proposed site, character of the applicant with regard to
morality, honesty, integrity, financial responsibility, and all pertinent things concerning the
proposed application which may concern the health, safety and general welfare of the
public, and the preservation of natural resources.
Chapter 80 - Soil Removal and Fill
80-3
Any permit for which application is made shall be denied if it appears from the investigation
thereof that the project would remove the lateral and subjacent support of the adjacent
land and result in a dangerous topographic condition or result in seepage or slides or
create an unattractive nuisance dangerous to public safety, or that it otherwise would in
any manner endanger the public health, morals and prevent the preservation of natural
resources or be detrimental to the general public welfare.
Approval by the City Council shall not be required for permits involving less than five acres
of land or for planned developments which have received site plan approval by the Plan
Commission. Such permits may be issued upon approval of the City Engineer. Estimates
of soil to be removed or deposited need not be made by a registered civil engineer, nor will
a topographic map be required for such limited operations.
8.186 Permit Fees. At the time of issuance of an excavation permit, if the application is
approved, the applicant shall pay an excavation permit fee of $2.00 per thousand cubic
yards, or any part thereof, to be removed from the site.
At the time of issuance of a filling permit, whether in conjunction with an excavation permit
or separately where no excavation work will take place, the applicant shall pay a filling
permit fee of $2.00 per thousand cubic yards or any part thereof, to be filled at the site.
At the time of issuance of a topsoil removal or stripping permit, if the application is
approved, the applicant shall pay a topsoil removal or stripping permit fee of $10.00 per
acre or any part thereof.
At any time prior to the time limit specified in the application that the number of cubic yards
for which a permit has been granted have been removed or filled, or in the case of topsoil
removal and stripping operations the number of acres for which a permit has been issued
have been stripped, the permit shall automatically be terminated and no further materials
may be removed or deposited from the site until a new application has been filed and a
permit granted in the same manner as the original application and permit. The cost of this
permit is designed to cover expenses of the City occasioned by the continued operation of
the soil removal or depositing and no part thereof shall be returnable to the permit holder.
The permit fee shall remain separate and distinct from the purpose and use of the surety
bond required in the following section and no part thereof shall be used to insure faithful
performance of all conditions and requirements under which the permit is issued.
8.187 Deposit of Bonds. The City Council shall require, as a condition to the granting of any
permit under this Chapter, that the applicant deposit a surety bond or cash in an amount to
be fixed by the City Council inuring to the benefit of the City of Troy and the general public,
guaranteeing that the applicant will faithfully perform all of the conditions and requirements
under which the permit is issued. In addition to the aforementioned surety bond the
applicant shall deposit with the City a cash bond in the amount of $1,000 the purpose of
which shall be to make immediate correction of any conditions threatening the health,
safety and welfare of the people of Troy caused by violation of the requirements of this
ordinance or of the conditions under which the permit is made. If any portion of the cash
bond is spent by the City for corrections of conditions caused by violation of the ordinance
or of the terms of the permit, the permit holder shall replace that same amount of money
spent. If said funds are not replaced, the City Engineer shall cause all operations at the
site for which the permit has been issued to cease and desist until such funds have been
replaced.
Chapter 80 - Soil Removal and Fill
80-4
(Rev. 03-26-79)
8.188 Other Conditions Required of Applicant. Any person to whom any permit is issued shall
comply with the following:
(1) AS TO EXCAVATIONS.
(a) All vehicles transporting soil or other materials from such excavation over
the public streets of the City shall travel only directly over such route as
may be directed by the City Engineer to be least dangerous to public
safety, cause the least interference with general traffic and cause the least
damage to the public streets.
(b) The floor of any such excavation shall not be made lower than the level
thereof as set forth in the application.
(Rev. 03-26-79)
(c) If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, any such excavation will present a
dangerous condition if left open, such excavation shall be enclosed by a
chain link or wire mesh fence completely surrounding the portion of the site
where the excavation extends, said fence to be not less than five (5) feet in
height, complete with gates, which gates shall be kept locked when
operations are not being carried on. The fence shall be topped with three
strands of barbed wire.
(d) Any soil or other material that may be deposited on any public street or
place from any vehicle transporting such materials from any excavation
shall be immediately removed in a manner satisfactory to City Engineer at
the expense of the person to whom the permit to excavate was issued.
(e) Any roads used for the purpose of ingress and egress to said excavation
site which are located within five hundred (500) feet of an occupied
residence shall be kept dust free by surfacing with concrete or bituminous
substance and/or chemical treatment.
(Rev. 04-10-67)
(f) No excavation shall be made with a cut fence steeper in slope than one (1)
horizontal to one (1) vertical except that a steeper or a different cut may be
permitted upon the approval of the City Engineer if he shall find the material
of the proposed cut sufficiently stable or a retaining wall or other approved
support is provided to support the face of the cut or excavation.
(g) Where excavation operations result in a body of water, the owner or
operator shall place appropriate "Keep Out-Danger" signs around said
premises not more than one hundred (100) feet apart, except where said
body of water is constructed as a permanent man-made lake in
conformance with plans approved by the City Engineer.
(Rev. 04-10-67)
Chapter 80 - Soil Removal and Fill
80-5
(h) No excavation shall be made closer than fifty (50) feet from the nearest
street or highway right-of-way nor nearer than forty (40) feet to the nearest
property line, provided, however, that the City Engineer may permit or
require closer or farther requirements depending on the surrounding
property and the stability of the soil.
(i) No person shall open more than ten (10) acres of land for purposes of
excavation for, or operation of, a gravel or sand mining pit at one time.
(j) No person, firm, or corporation shall allow water to form in stagnant ponds,
pools, or puddles in conjunction with any excavation within the City of Troy.
In the event such water is allowed to collect, the permit holder shall pump,
fill, or spray such bodies of water as determined and directed by the City
Engineer.
(k) In all cases wherein a lake, pool, or pond is constructed in connection with
the operation of a pit, chain link fences shall be placed around such body of
water adequate to prevent children from entering.
(l) Prior to excavation, grade stakes shall be set at 100' grids and shall be
maintained until the proper elevation is obtained.
(m) Prior to commencement of excavation operations, enough topsoil shall be
stripped and stockpiled on the site to allow a four (4) inch cover of topsoil to
be replaced over the entire excavation site upon finalization of excavation
and/or filling operations as specified in the permit(s). Rye grass seed, or
another type equally acceptable to the City Engineer, shall then be spread
upon such topsoil surface in the amount of fifty (50) pounds per acre.
(n) The City Council shall require such other and further requirements as are
deemed necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, morals,
preservation of natural resources and general welfare of the citizens of the
City of Troy.
(Rev. 03-26-79)
(2) AS TO STRIPPING AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL OPERATIONS.
(a) No soil or other material shall be removed in excess of two (2) feet below
the mean elevation of the existing ground surface.
(b) No soil or other materials shall be removed in such manner as to cause
water to collect or to result in a condition dangerous menacing to the public
health. The premises shall at all times be graded so that surface water
drainage is not interfered with.
(c) That sufficient topsoil shall stockpiled on said site so that the entire site
when stripping operations are completed, may be recovered with a
minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil and the replacement of such topsoil
shall be made immediately following the termination of the stripping
operations. In the event, however, that such stripping operations continue
over a period of time greater than thirty (30) days, the operator shall
Chapter 80 - Soil Removal and Fill
80-6
replace the stored topsoil over the stripped areas as he progresses.
(d) During stripping or topsoil removal operations enough topsoil will be left on
the site to allow a four (4) inch cover, which shall be spread over the site
upon completion of the operations specified in the permit. Rye grass seed,
or another type equally acceptable to the City Engineer, shall then be
spread upon such topsoil surface in the amount of fifty (50) pounds per
acre.
(e) Any roads used for purpose of ingress and egress to said stripping or
removal site which are located within five hundred (500) feet of an occupied
residence shall be kept dust free by surfacing with concrete or bituminous
substance and/or chemical treatment.
(Rev. 04-10-67)
(f) The City Council shall require such other and further requirements as are
deemed necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, morals,
preservation of natural resources and general welfare of the citizens of the
City of Troy.
(Rev. 03-26-79)
(3) AS TO FILLING OPERATIONS.
(a) Within thirty (30) days following filling or dumping, the parcel of land must
be graded in such manner as to prevent the collection of water, to provide
proper drainage and to leave the ground surface reasonably level or
smooth, free of all rock, stone, cement, heavy aggregate or rubbish, and fit
for the growing of turf and other land uses permitted in the district.
(b) No soil or other material shall be dumped on the spillways or flood plains of
any natural or artificial stream or water courses, or any area between the
upper and lower banks of such streams or water courses, except on the
approval of the City Council, after a satisfactory showing that such dumping
will not result in damage to other property within the limits of the City of
Troy and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, preservation of
natural resources or welfare. The flood plain is defined as the land abutting
a water course which has stored or, upon development, could store the
overflow of storm water during a ten year design storm.
(Rev. 03-26-79)
(c) Types of materials to be deposited shall be regulated by the City Engineer
and shall be specified as a condition issuance of the permit.
(d) Upon completion of filling operations topsoil shall be spread over the site
specified in the permit at least four (4) inches in thickness. Rye grass seed,
or another type equally acceptable to the City Engineer, shall be spread
upon such topsoil surface in the amount of fifty (50) pounds per acre.
(e) Any roads used for purpose of ingress and egress to said filling site which
Chapter 80 - Soil Removal and Fill
80-7
are located within five hundred (500) feet of any occupied residence shall
be kept dust free by surfacing with concrete or bituminous substance
and/or chemical treatment.
(Rev. 04-10-67)
(f) The City Council shall require such other and further requirements as are
deemed necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, morals,
preservation of natural resources and general welfare of the citizens of the
City of Troy.
(Rev. 03-26-79)
(g) Where filling operations result in a body of water, the owner or operator
shall place appropriate "Keep Out - Danger" signs around said premises
not more than one hundred (100) feet apart, except where said body of
water is constructed as a permanent man-made lake in conformance with
plans approved by the City Engineer.
(Rev. 07-8-68)
(4) WAIVER OF TOPSOIL REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENT.
The requirement for replacement of topsoil in conjunction with any permit issued
under this Chapter may be waived by the City Engineer in instances where the
proposed land use would make this requirement unreasonable or unnecessary as
in the construction of a parking lot, large industrial or commercial building sites.
(Rev. 03-26-79)
8.189 Artificial Hills and Berms.
(1) No artificial hill or berm shall be established, so as to cause the deflection of run-off
water onto property owned by another party, or so as to interfere with the normal
run-off of water from property owned by another party causing ponding or erosion
injurious to the other property.
(Rev. 02-25-85)
(2) If (a) any point on the perimeter of an artificial hill or berm is to be five (5) feet or
less from a property line, or (b) the hill or berm will contain fifty (50) cubic yards or
more of material; then: a permit for establishing the hill or berm must be obtained
from the City of Troy Engineering Department, which shall inspect the hill or berm
for compliance with this ordinance. The standards set forth herein and in Chapter
86 (The City of Troy Erosion Control Ordinance) shall be considered in determining
whether a permit should be issued. A permit fee shall be paid to the City
Treasurer's Office, in an amount as set from time to time by the Troy City Council
by Resolution.
(Rev. 02-25-85)
(3) The surface of any artificial hill or berm shall be maintained by planting or seeding,
fertilizing, irrigation, mowing, pruning, weeding and/or other practices, so as to
Chapter 80 - Soil Removal and Fill
80-8
prevent the production of dust, the presence of weeds, and erosion of the soil. If a
determination is made that there has been a failure to comply with this sub-section,
then the City shall provide a written notice to the occupants, and to the owner as
shown on the City tax rolls, stating that the property shall be brought into
compliance with this sub-section within twenty (20) days of the date of the notice. If
compliance is not achieved within the twenty (20) day period, then the owner of the
property shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Rev. 02-25-85)
(4) No artificial hill or berm shall be established higher than two (2) feet above the
average grade of the ground immediately adjacent to it and the ground under it,
except in compliance with the conditions stated below in sub-sections (a) through
(c).
(a) Slope. The slope of a hill or berm of greater than two (2) feet but less than
three (3) feet in height shall be three (3) feet horizontal for each one (1)
foot vertical (See examples in Figure #1); the slope of a hill or berm three
(3) feet in height or over shall be four (4) feet horizontal for each one (1)
foot vertical (See example in Figure #2).
(b) Line-of-sight. The hill or berm shall not be located or designed so as to
interfere with the line-of-sight for safe observation of any street, driveway,
or walkway (a) by motorists driving on a street adjacent to the lot on which
the hill or berm is located, or (b) by motorists entering or leaving a driveway
on that lot or an adjoining lot. In no event shall any part of an artificial hill or
berm, or any plant material thereon, (other than isolated flower stems or
leaves that do not substantially block safe observation) extend more than
thirty (30) inches above the surface of a driveway on either the lot on which
the hill or berm is located or on an adjoining lot, or above the surface of a
street adjacent to the lot on which the hill or berm is located (said driveways
and streets in their traveled portion, being referred to hereinafter as
"adjacent ways of travel") if that part is within the triangle created by
measuring twenty-five (25) feet back along the two adjacent ways of travel,
from the point of intersection of the two adjacent ways of travel, and then
drawing an imaginary line connecting the two points thereby established.
(See examples in Figure #3).
(Rev. 02-25-85)
(c) Erosion. Establishment of such a hill or berm shall be in compliance with
the standards set forth in Chapter 86 (The City of Troy Erosion Control
Ordinance). The surface of the hill or berm shall be prepared and fertilized,
and grass shall be seeded or sodded, or the soil shall be covered with
vegetative ground cover which meets the requirements of Section 6.05 of
the City's Landscape Design Standards, adopted by Resolution No.75-829,
as revised by Resolution No. 77-88.
(5) Those artificial hills or berms now in existence if and when altered by changing the
slope, height, length or other dimension by the removal, addition or movement of
nonliving material; such alteration shall be made in a manner to bring the artificial
hill or berm into compliance with this Chapter.
Chapter 80 - Soil Removal and Fill
80-9
8.190 Excavations or Holes. The existence within the limits of the City of any unprotected,
unbarricaded, open excavation, holes, pits, or wells or of any excavations, which constitute
or are reasonably likely to constitute a danger or menace to the public health, safety,
morals, and preservation of natural resources are hereby prohibited and declared a public
nuisance, provided, however, that this Chapter shall not prevent the construction of
excavations under a permit of the City of Troy, where such excavations are properly
protected and warning signs and lights located in such manner as may be approved by the
City Manager and provided, further, that this section shall not apply to drains created or
existing by authority of the State of Michigan, County of Oakland, City of Troy or other
governmental agency.
Where the City Manager shall determine a nuisance to exist as herein defined, he shall
notify the owner as shown on the latest tax rolls in writing of such finding and require the
owner to abate such nuisance within a reasonable time, in no event more than thirty (30)
days.
In the event no appeal is made within ten (10) days time, the City Manager may abate or
cause to be abated such nuisance, and the cost or reasonable value of such work shall be
placed as an assessment against said property on the next assessment roll.
8.191 Revocation and Suspension of Permit. Any permit granted pursuant to this Chapter may
be revoked or suspended for failure to comply with any of the provisions of said sections.
A hearing on revocation of a permit shall be held before the City Council after five (5) days
notice to such permit holder stating the grounds of complaint against permittee and stating
the time and place which such hearing will be held. Proper notice shall consist of any of
the methods specified in Section 1.11 of this Code. If, in the opinion of the City Manager,
the public health, safety or welfare requires it, the City Manager may suspend any permit
pending hearing by the City Council. Such revocation or suspension of any permit shall not
affect the prosecution of any person for a violation of this Chapter.
(Rev. 02-25-85)
8.192 Penalties for Violations. Except as otherwise provided in specific sections of this
Chapter, a violation of any section of Chapter 80 is a Municipal Civil Infraction subject to
the provisions of Chapter 100 of the Code of the City of Troy. Each day that a violation
continues is a separate Municipal Civil Infraction violation. Sanctions for each violation
of Chapter 80 shall include a fine of not more than $500, costs, damages and injunctive
orders as authorized by Chapter 100.
(Rev. 03-01-06)
Chapter 81 - Moving of Buildings
81-1
Chapter 81- Moving of Buildings of the Code of the City of Troy is rescinded by the Council of
the City of Troy, Oakland County Michigan, at a Regular Meeting of the City Council held at City
Hall, 500 W. Big Beaver, Troy, MI on the 10th day of September, 2001 and is effective ten (10)
days from the date hereof or upon publication, whichever shall later occur.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-1
CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION
101 GENERAL.
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City
of Troy, hereinafter referred to as this code.
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and
nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and
standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space,
heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other
hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and
occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration,
enforcement and penalties.
101.3 Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure
and promote public health, safety and welfare in so far as they are affected by the continued
occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that
do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of
health and safety as required herein.
101.4 Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is held to
be unconstitutional for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this code.
SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY
102.1 General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to
structures and premises, as set forth in Section 101. Where, in a specific case, different
sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
102.2 Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a
previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or
repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall
cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such
temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The
requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of
fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise
specified herein, the owner or the owners designated agent shall be responsible for the
maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes
of occupancy shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Michigan
Building Code, International Fuel Gas Code, Michigan Mechanical Code, Michigan Plumbing
Code, and the Michigan Electrical Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel,
modify or set aside any zoning provisions of Chapter 39, Zoning Ordinance, of the Troy Code
of Ordinances.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-2
102.4 Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or
impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or
demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
102.5 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are
caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in
a workmanlike manner and in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions.
102.6 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing
buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are
judged by the code official to be safe and the perpetuation of such historical buildings is in the
public interest.
102.7 Referenced codes, ordinances, and standards. The codes, ordinances, and
standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 of this Ordinance
and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such
reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced
standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
102.8 Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the strength,
stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public
safety, health and general welfare shall be determined by the code official if not specifically
covered by this code. The details of any such determination shall be recorded and entered in
the department files.
SECTION 103 BUILDING DEPARTMENT
103.1 General. The Building Department is hereby designated as the City of Troy
enforcement division of this code and shall be known as the Department and the Director of
Building and Zoning shall be known as the code official.
103.2 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the City of Troy, the City
Manager shall have the authority to appoint or remove the code official, other related technical
officers, inspectors and other employees.
103.4 Liability. The code official and fire official, while acting for the City of Troy, shall not
thereby be rendered liable personally, and are relieved from all personal liability for any
damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the
discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any code official or fire official because
of an act performed by that official in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of
this code shall be defended by the City Attorney or his/her designee until the final termination
of the proceedings. The code official or fire official shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit
or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code. Any official of the
department, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts
performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance
of official duties, excluding acts which constitute gross negligence and/or intentional acts on
the part of individual.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-3
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out
its responsibilities under this code shall be set forth in Chapter 60, Fees and Bonds Required,
of the City of Troy Ordinances, or by resolution of the Troy City Council.
SECTION 104 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL
104.1 General. The code official shall enforce the provisions of this code.
104.2 Rule-making authority. The code official shall have authority as necessary and in the
interest of public health, safety and general welfare to adopt and promulgate rules and
procedures; to interpret and implement the provisions of this code; to secure the intent thereof;
and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such
rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements
specifically provided for in this code, or of violating accepted engineering methods involving
public safety.
104.3 Inspections. The code official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept
reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall
be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as
deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise.
104.3.1 Multiple Family Dwellings. Structures with three or more dwelling units are subject to
periodic inspections to insure compliance with this code as set forth in Chapter 82A, Rental
and Dwelling Inspections and Enforcement, of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
104.4 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of
this code, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a
structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which
makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is
authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the
duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that
credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is
unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or
other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is
refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure
entry.
104.5 Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting
structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code.
104.6 Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to
ensure compliance with this code.
104.7 Department records. The code official shall keep official records of all business and
activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be
retained for as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in
existence, unless otherwise provided under law.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-4
SECTION 105 APPROVAL
105.1 Modifications. Existing buildings or structures will not be required to comply with all or
some of the Property Maintenance code requirements when the code officer determines that
unique circumstances make the strict enforcement of this code impractical, provided that such
modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of any such
modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.
105.2 Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this code are not
intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction
not specifically prescribed by this code, as long as any such alternative has been approved.
An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official
finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of
this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least
the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability and safety.
105.3 Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the
requirements of this code, or when necessary to substantiate requests for alternative materials
or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests in order to verify
compliance. Any such required test shall be paid for by the person charged with demonstrating
compliance, and shall not be charged to the City of Troy.
105.3.1 Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized
test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official
shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures which shall be performed by an
approved agency.
105.3.2 Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period
required for retention of public records.
105.4 Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused
unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when
necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved. This section is not
intended to limit the use of recycled materials.
SECTION 106 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
106.1 Unlawful acts and prosecution of violations. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. A violation
of this ordinance shall be prosecuted as a municipal civil infraction, pursuant to Chapter 100,
Municipal Civil Infractions, of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
106.2 Separate offense and violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this
code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the
limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after a notice of
violation has been issued can be deemed a separate offense. Penalties shall be assessed as
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-5
provided in Chapter 100, Municipal Civil Infractions, of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
106.3 Abatement of violation. The issuance of a Municipal Ordinance Violation Notice or a
Municipal Ordinance citation or the imposition of penalties pursuant to Chapter 100, Municipal
Civil Infractions, of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances shall not preclude the Troy City
Attorney or his/her designee from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a
violation or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to stop an illegal
act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises; or to take any other
legal action or remedy as provided by law.
SECTION 107 NOTICES AND CITATIONS
107.1 Notice or Citation to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that
there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred,
a Municipal Civil Infraction Notice or a Municipal Civil Infraction Citation may be given to the
person responsible for the violation in the manner prescribed in Chapter 100, Municipal Civil
Infractions, of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
107.2 Form and Method of Service. A Municipal Civil Infraction Notice or Municipal Civil
Infraction Citation shall be in a form as prescribed in Chapter 100, Municipal Civil Infractions,
of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances and shall be served in a method prescribed in Chapter
100.
107.3 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or
structure who has received a notice of violation or an order from the court requiring
compliance, to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or
structure to another person until the code violations have been corrected or there is
compliance with an applicable court order. In the alternative, an owner can furnish the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee with a true copy of any notice of violation issued by the code
official or his/ her designee or a copy of any order of the court requiring compliance. The
owner shall then furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation
or order requiring compliance where such grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee fully
accepts the responsibility, without condition, for making the corrections or repairs required by
such notice of violation, or court order requiring compliance.
SECTION 108 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, UNSAFE STRUCTURES, UNSAFE EQUIPMENT
AND DEMOLITION
108.1 General. The procedures set forth in this Section are established to secure the health
and safety of the occupants of dwellings and structures and the general public. The code
official shall enforce the provisions of this Section, and shall have jurisdiction to establish the
inspection and violation procedures to implement enforcement. This Section does not
preclude enforcement by any other governmental agency with jurisdiction over dangerous
buildings, unsafe structures or unsafe equipment. This Section may be enforced by joint
agreement between the City of Troy and any other governmental agency, if practical.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-6
108.1a Unlawful to maintain dangerous building, unsafe structure or unsafe equipment.
It is unlawful for any owner to keep or maintain any building, structure or equipment or part
thereof in a dangerous or unsafe manner, as set forth in Section 108.1.1 or 108.1.2.
108.1b Owners subject to ordinance. All owners shall be subject to the provisions of this
ordinance and shall be parties to all proceedings, actions, or prosecutions for dangerous
buildings, unsafe structures and/or unsafe equipment.
108.1.1 Dangerous or Unsafe Building or structure. A dangerous or unsafe building or
structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public
or the occupants of the structure. It does not provide minimum safeguards to protect or warn
occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so
damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable
foundation that partial or complete collapse is possible. A dangerous building or unsafe
structure is a building or structure which has one or more of the following defects or satisfies
one or more of the following conditions:
a. A door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not in compliance with
the approved Troy Fire Code.
b. A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood, or other cause in
such a manner that the structural strength or stability of the building is appreciably less
than it was before such catastrophe and does not meet the minimum requirements of
the City of Troy Ordinances.
c. A portion of the building or structure has settled to such an extent that walls or other
structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is required for new
construction under the City of Troy Ordinances.
d. The building or structure or part of the building or structure is likely to partially or
completely collapse, or become detached, or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fall or give way because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the removal or movement of
some portion of the ground necessary for support or for other reason.
e. The building, structure, or part of the building or structure is manifestly unsafe for the
purpose for which it is intended to be used
f. The building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and open at any door or window
leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by
trespassers; or otherwise becomes an attractive nuisance to children who might play in
the building or structure to their danger; or becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or
immoral persons or enables persons to use the building or structure in the commission
of a nuisance or an unlawful or immoral act.
g. A residence or the adjoining grounds of a building or structure which is used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation,
due to dilapidation, decay, damage, or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-7
is in a condition that the code official determines is likely to cause sickness or disease
or is likely to injure the health, continued safety or general welfare of people living in or
near the residence.
h. An owner has been previously notified of existing code violation(s), according to the
provisions of the Troy Code of Ordinances and after said notice has left the structure
unattended or unoccupied, whether boarded up or in an open condition, for a period
exceeding thirty (30) days.
i. A building or structure is unfit for human occupancy such that the building or structure
is unsafe, unlawful or because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or
lacks maintenance, it is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other
essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.
j. A building or structure found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than
permitted under this code, or a building or structure that was erected, altered or
occupied contrary to law.
108.1.1.1 Notice of dangerous and unsafe building, structure or condition. When the
whole or part of any building or structure is found to be a dangerous or unsafe building or
structure, the code official shall issue a notice declaring that the building or structure is a
dangerous or unsafe building or structure. The notice shall itemize the current code violation(s)
and dangerous condition(s) and specify a time to complete all necessary repairs or demolish
of the building or structure.
108.1.1.2 Service of Notice. The notice shall be served on the owner of record or the
registered agent in the following manner:
1. Delivered personally; and
2. Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the owners or resident agents last
known address.
If the owner cannot be found, the notice may alternatively be served by posting it
prominently and securely on the property and publishing it once a week for three (3)
consecutive weeks in a newspaper authorized to provide service by publication. Service
of notice under this provision shall supersede Chapter 100, Municipal Civil Infractions,
of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
108.1.1.3 Contents of Notice. The notice shall state that the owner or his/her authorized
representative has the right to appeal the determination of the code official that the building or
structure is dangerous or unsafe to the Troy City Council. The notice shall further state that
any appeal under this Section shall be filed in writing to the code official within ten (10) days of
service of the notice.
108.1.1.4 Waiver of Hearing. If a written appeal of the dangerous or unsafe building or
structure determination is not received by the code official within ten (10) days of the date of
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-8
service of the notice, then a hearing will not be necessary. The matter shall be referred to the
City Council for resolution.
108.1.1.5 Hearing. If the code official receives a written appeal of the dangerous or unsafe
building or structure determination within the allocated ten (10) day period, then a hearing will
be scheduled before the City Council as soon as administratively possible. At the hearing, the
City Council shall take the testimony from the code official and/or his/her authorized
representatives and employees; testimony from the owner of the property and any other
interested party to determine whether the building or structure constitutes a dangerous or
unsafe building or structure, as defined by this section.
108.1.1.6 City Council action. If the City Council determines that the building or structure is a
dangerous or unsafe building or structure, and that the building or structure should be
demolished or made habitable, Council shall order either demolition within twenty-one (21)
days or require that all necessary repairs be completed within sixty (60) days after the hearing
and/or resolution, unless the City Council determines that the conditions justify a longer time
period to complete the necessary repairs.
108.1.1.7 Failure to demolish or repair. If the ordered demolition or repairs are not
completed within the allocated time period, as set forth in the resolution, City Council can then
authorize any and all necessary action to enforce their order. This includes, but is not limited
to, causing the building or structure or any part of the building or structure to be razed and
removed either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private
persons, and the cost of such razing and removal shall be charged against the real property
upon which the building or structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real property.
Such lien shall be enforced against the real property as a special assessment.
108.1.1.8 Recovery of Citys cost. The owner or party in interest according to the last local
tax assessment records, shall be notified of the cost of the necessary repairs or demolition by
first class mail at the address shown on the local tax assessment records. If the owner or party
in interest fails to pay the same within thirty (30) days after mailing by the Assessor of the
notice of the amount due, the Assessor shall add the same to the next tax roll of the City of
Troy, and the same shall be collected in the same manner and in all respects as provided by
law for the collection of taxes by the City of Troy. The City Council shall also have the option of
initiating a lawsuit to recover the Citys full cost of necessary repairs or demolition. If the City
receives a favorable judgment, then the City shall have all rights and remedies under law to
collect the amount of the judgment from the property owner(s) and/or parties in interest.
108.1.1.9 Salvage materials. When any building or structure has been ordered demolished
and removed, the City of Troy shall have the right, but not the obligation, to sell the salvage
and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable either through the City or through a
contractor hired by the City. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of
such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted to the property owner with a report of
such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted. If there is
no surplus, the report shall so state.
108.1.1.10 Appeal to Circuit Court. An owner aggrieved by any dangerous building final
decision or order of the City Council may appeal the decision or order to the Circuit Court
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-9
within twenty (20) days from the date of the decision.
108.1.2 Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment,
elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other
equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that
such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the
premises or structure.
108.2 Closing of vacant buildings and structures. If a building or structure is vacant and
unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code
official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the
structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close
up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the
premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or
arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real
property upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real property and
may be collected by any other legal resource.
108.3 Posting Notice. Whenever the code official has declared a building, structure or
equipment dangerous or unsafe under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in or about the building or structure affected by such notice or placed on
the unsafe equipment.
108.4 Placarding. The code official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a
placard bearing the words Dangerous Building or Unsafe Building or Dangerous Structure
or Unsafe Structure or Dangerous Equipment or Unsafe Equipment and a statement of
the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the
placard.
108.4.1 Placard removal. The code official shall remove the placard whenever the defect or
defects upon which the determination of dangerous or unsafe building, structure or equipment
and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes
a placard without the approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by
this code.
108.5 Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied building or structure determined to be dangerous
or unsafe and placarded by the code official shall be vacated as ordered by the code official.
Any person who shall occupy a placarded premise or shall operate placarded equipment, and
any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a
placarded premise or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided
by this code.
SECTION 109 EMERGENCY MEASURES
109.1 Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the code official or fire official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when
any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the
structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-10
proximity of any building or structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the
presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous
equipment, the code official or fire official or designee are hereby authorized and empowered
to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises immediately. At each entrance to
such a building or structure, the code official or his/her designee shall post a notice declaring
the building or structure unsafe and prohibiting occupancy. It shall be unlawful for any person
to enter such building or structure except for the purpose of securing the building or structure,
making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the building
or structure.
109.2 Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever the
code official determines that there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code
official shall order the necessary work to be done to render such structure temporarily safe,
whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted. This necessary work
could be to board up openings of the building or structure, or could be any other action that the
code official deems necessary to address such emergency.
109.2a Abating a nuisance. The code official or fire official shall have the power to abate any
public nuisance from any dangerous building or structure if immediate action is required to
avoid a distinct hazard to life or property. Since this action is for public safety, the action can
be taken without preliminary notice as is otherwise required in the City of Troy Code of
Ordinances.
109.3 Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily
close buildings and structures. The code official can also close or order the closure of
sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the
same from being utilized.
109.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the
necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
109.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work
shall initially be assumed by the City of Troy. The other costs of abating a public nuisance
shall be charged against the owner(s) or occupant(s) of the premise. The owner(s) or
occupant(s) shall be sent an invoice for the cost of abatement by the City of Troy Building
Department. If payment is not made within thirty (30) days, the amount shall be collected in
the same manner as set forth in Section 108.1.1.8.
109.6 Hearing. Owners or occupants must comply with orders for emergency measures.
However, the owner or occupant can request relief from the order by filing a written petition
with the Building Code Board of Appeals within twenty (20) days of the decision of the code
official and in compliance with Section 111, as set forth below.
SECTION 110 Reserved
SECTION 111 APPEAL TO BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-11
111.1 Application for appeal. Except for individuals filing an appeal under Section 108.1.1.5
 Hearing (Dangerous or Unsafe Buildings, Structures or Conditions), any person directly
affected by a decision of the code official or a notice of violation issued under this code shall
have the right to appeal to the Building Code Board of Appeals, provided that a written
application for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the day the decision or notice of
violation was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of
this code been incorrectly interpreted; the provisions of this code do not fully apply; or the
requirements of this code have been adequately satisfied.
111.2 Membership of Building Code Board of Appeals. The authority, membership,
procedures, and compensation of the Building Code Board of Appeals is set out in Section
116 of Chapter 79, General Building Regulations, of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
111.3 Commission or Court Review. Any interested person, whether or not a previous party
of an appeal under this section, shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Building
Code Board of Appeals. Appeals can be filed with the Michigan Construction Code
Commission pursuant to MCL 125.1516, or with an appropriate court. Appeals shall be filed in
the manner and time required by law.
111.4 Stays of enforcement. For all but emergency cases, appeals of notices and orders of
the code official shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard
and a final decision rendered by the Building Code Board of Appeals, the Michigan
Construction Code Commission or an appropriate court of law.
CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS
SECTION 201 GENERAL
201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of
this code, have the meanings as set forth in this chapter.
201.2 Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated
in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the
plural and the plural includes the singular.
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are
defined in the Michigan Building Code, Troy Fire Code, Troy Zoning Ordinance, Michigan
Plumbing Code, Michigan Mechanical Code or the Michigan Electrical Code, such terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by
this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings taken in light of the context.
201.5 Parts. Whenever the words dwelling unit, dwelling, premises, building, rooming
house, rooming unit housekeeping unit or story are stated in this code, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words or any part thereof.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-12
SECTION 202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
APPROVED. Approved by the code official.
BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a
dwelling or sleeping unit.
CITY COUNCIL. The Troy City Council.
CODE OFFICIAL. The code official charged with the administration and enforcement of this
code is the City of Troy Director of Building and Zoning or his/her designee.
COMMON PROPERTY. Property commonly owned by a number of individuals in a
condominium development (including site condominium), subdivision or other form of
development with common areas, such as cul-de-sacs, traffic medians, boulevard, islands,
parks, playgrounds, detention and retention areas, open space or other common areas.
DEADBOLT. A locking mechanism consisting of a bolt that when moved into the locked
position cannot be retracted by end pressure on the bolt.
DWELLING UNIT. A residential structure, or portion thereof, permanently sited on a
continuous frost-free masonry foundation, containing all required plumbing, heating and
electrical systems attached to the available public utilities, designed for the occupancy of one
(1) family with cooking facilities.
EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or
agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to
be for use under, on, or above a said lot or lots.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under
the control of owners or operators of such premises.
EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating
their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food
or water source; by poison, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest
elimination methods.
FIRE OFFICIAL. The fire official charged with the administration and enforcement of this code
is the City of Troy Fire Chief or his/her designee.
GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-13
GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the
open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking
surface to a lower level.
HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms,
toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered
habitable spaces.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped
and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain a
toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower within such a unit.
IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death
at any time.
INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of rats, vermin
or other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets.
Inoperable vehicles include, but are not limited to those that are unlicensed, wrecked,
abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power.
LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been affixed a label,
seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection
agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic
inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not
the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or
license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space
within a building.
OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR. Any owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, landlord, agent or person who has charge,
care, control or responsibility over a structure, premises or any private property which is let or
offered for occupancy.
OWNER. Any person, partnership, association, agent, operator, firm or corporation and/or
their legal successors and assigns having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or
recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-14
property; or otherwise having control or responsibility over the property, including the guardian
of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such
person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.
PREMISE. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures
thereon, also including such portions of any street dedicated for public use that would be
attached to the owners property upon vacation of the public rights to the street that are not
otherwise paved or improved. Premise includes easements or rights-of-way owned by the City
or the Road Commission of Oakland County.
PRESERVATION OR RESTORATION AREA. All or a portion of a premise managed to
preserve or restore native Michigan grasses, native trees, shrubs, wildflowers, and aquatic
plants, including but not limited to: indian grass (Sorghastrum nutans), prairie cordgrass
(Spartina pectinata), prairie dropseed (Sporobolus heterolepis), rice cut grass (Leersia
oryzoides), panic grass ( Panicum implicatum), switch grass (Panicum virgatum), riverbank
wild-rye (Elymus riparius), purple love grass or tumble grass (Eragrostis spectabilis), fowl
manna grass (Glyceria striata), bottlebrush grass (Hystrix patula), big bluestem (Andropogon
gerardii), long-awned wood grass (Brachyelytrum erectum) and blue-joint grass
(Calamagrostis canadensis); an oldfield succession of native and non-native plants; or a
combination of these.
PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the
ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the
public for public use.
ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for residential lodging for compensation
with or without meals and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or
intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. The term
includes burnt wood, burnt coal, burnt coke and other combustible materials; paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust, residue and other similar materials.
SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent
provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms
and spaces that are part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
STORY. That part of a building, except a mezzanine, included between the surface of one
floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is not a floor above, then the ceiling next
above. A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than fifty (50) percent
by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining ground.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-15
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is
not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the
defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant
was legally required to do.
STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of
record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.
TURF GRASS. Grass commonly used in regularly-cut lawns or play areas, including but not
limited to: bluegrass, fescue, and ryegrass blends.
VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned
air to, or removing such air from, any space.
WEEDS. Noxious weeds as defined under Michigan law (MCL 247.62) including, but not
limited to:
Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards
(charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild
carrots (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle
(Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.);
and poison ivy (rhustoxicodendron), and poison sumac (toxicodondron vernix).
Any other varieties, species or plant growth designated by the City as poisonous,
injurious and/or regarded as a common nuisance in the opinion of the City of Troy
Public Works Director or his/her designee.
WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line,
undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 301 GENERAL
301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the
responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
301.2 Responsibility. The owner of a premise shall maintain the structures and exterior
property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided in this code. A
person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy a premise that
is not in a sanitary and safe condition and which does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for
keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit,
housekeeping unit or premise which they occupy and control.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-16
301.3 Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land
shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as
not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
SECTION 302 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
302.1 Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property that is occupied
or controlled by that occupant in a clean and sanitary condition.
302.2 Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the
erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any
structure located thereon, including but not limited to garden pools and swimming pools.
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. The occupant or property owner is responsible to keep all
sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas in reasonable repair,
and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
302.4 Turf Grass, Weeds and Plant Growth.
302.4.1 Weeds and Grass. The presence of turf grass and/or weeds exceeding eight (8)
inches in height on any premises in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The owner,
occupant, or any person having control or management of any premises is required to cut turf
grass and weeds on the premises to a height that is eight (8) inches or less.
Exceptions:
1) Preservation or Restoration Areas are allowed to exceed eight (8) inches in
height if those areas do not contain any turf grass and/or weeds.
2) Areas declared to be wetland or preservation areas by the Michigan Department
of Natural Resources or the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality are
allowed to exceed eight (8) inches in height.
3) Cultivated flowers and gardens or fields devoted to growing any small grain crop
such as wheat, corn, oats, barley or rye.
(Rev. 3/17/2014)
302.4.2 Duty of Owner to abate. It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or any person
having control or management of any premises within the City upon which weeds are found
growing or standing, to cut and destroy or cause to be cut and destroyed all such weeds in
such a manner as to prevent such weeds from perpetuating themselves or going to seed.
302.4.3 Failure to abate. Upon failure of the owner, occupant or any person having control or
management of any premises to cut turf grass and/or weeds and to take action to prevent
such weeds from perpetuating themselves; the owner, occupant or any person having control
or management of the premises shall be subject to prosecution as set forth in Chapter 100,
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-17
Municipal Civil Infractions, of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances. Additionally the City or its
agent may enter onto said premises as many times as necessary between May 1st to
November 1st to cut turf grass and/or weeds, treat weeds or otherwise abate the nuisance.
(Rev. 3/17/2014)
302.4.4 Published Notice. It shall be the duty of the Planning Director or his/her designee to
give general notice to every owner, occupant, or person having control or management of any
premises of the cutting and weed prevention requirements of this section. Such duty shall be
satisfied if publication is made of the cutting and weed prevention requirements in the
newspaper of record in the City during the month of March notifying the owners, occupants or
persons having control or management of any premises that failure to cut turf grass or weeds
or failure to prevent the perpetuation of weeds as required under this section during the period
of May 1 to November 1 of each year, may result in the issuance of a Municipal Civil Infraction
Notice or Citation under Chapter 100, Municipal Civil Infractions, of the City of Troy Code of
Ordinances and/or the entry on the premises by the City or its agent to cut said turf grass
and/or weeds or to prevent the perpetuation of weeds. The general notice shall also inform
owners, occupants and persons having control or management of any premises that if the City
is required to enter onto the premises to cut turf grass and/or weeds or to take an action to
prevent the perpetuation of weeds, the property owner designated on the City assessment or
tax rolls shall be assessed the cost, payable to the City, for each required abatement. The City
or its agent may enter onto said premises as many times as necessary between May 1st to
November 1st to cut turf grass and/or weeds or treat weeds and charge the cost to the
property owner for each such cutting or treatment. The City has the discretion to send via first
class mail a ten (10) day notice to the last property owner of record and/or to attach a notice to
the premises stating that the City intends to cut said turf grass and/or weeds or treat weeds,
and if the turf grass and/or weeds are not cut or the weeds are not treated within ten (10) days
from the date of the notice, the City may proceed to cut the turf grasses and/or weeds or treat
the weeds. Failure to send such a warning notice does not in any way prevent the City or its
agent from entering on the premises to cut turf grass and/or weeds or to treat weeds, as long
as a general notice has been published, as set out herein.
(Rev. 3/17/2014)
302.4.5 Recovery of Cost by City. The Planning Director or his/her designee is hereby
authorized and directed to keep accurate accounts of all reasonable expenses incurred by the
City to abate a nuisance. The Planning Director or his/her designee is hereby authorized to
include in its cost of recovery the following: wages, overtime wages, fringe benefits, cost of
equipment, supplies, materials, and a ten (10) percent administration charge to cover the
expense of administering the abatement work that is performed. The Planning Director or
his/her designee shall prepare an invoice of total charges for each premise and forward those
invoices to the City Treasurer. Within ten (10) days after receipt of an invoice, the City
Treasurer shall forward to the owner on the last local assessment or tax roll an invoice of the
total charges assessed against each premises. Thirty (30) days from the date each statement
was mailed, payment shall be made. If the invoice is not paid within thirty (30) days, the total
amount charged shall become an assessment against the land and a lien against the property.
(Rev. 3/17/2014)
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-18
302.4.6 Common Property. If property is held as common property, such as, but not limited
to: common areas of a condominium development (including a site condominium), subdivision,
cul-de-sac, traffic medians, boulevards, islands, parks, playgrounds, detention and retention
areas, open space or any other common area or other form of development for which the City
is unable to determine the occupant, person, or entity having control or management over a
common area with assessment or tax records, the City or its agent may enter onto the
common property to abate any nuisance of a type set out in this Chapter. The costs incurred
by the City for the nuisance abatement shall be pro-rated among each individual property
owner in the condominium development, subdivision or other individual owner in a
development with common property. The City Treasurer shall send a statement to each owner
for their specific pro-rated portion. If the invoice is not timely paid, the total amount charged
shall become an assessment against that particular property for that pro-rated share.
302.5 Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent
harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by
approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper
precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.
Exception: The presence of squirrels or chipmunks on the exterior of a structure shall
not constitute a rodent infestation.
302.6 Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases,
steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly
upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant.
302.7 Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences
and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
302.8 Motor vehicles. No person shall permit the accumulation of one or more inoperable
vehicles outside of a completely enclosed building for a period of more than fourteen (14)
days. Inoperable vehicles are those that are not in operating condition and eligible for use in
accordance with the requirements of the Michigan Vehicle Code, being MCL 257.1 through
257.925. These minimum conditions include, but are not limited to: an engine that runs, four
wheels and four pneumatic tires capable of holding air, working battery, and current license
plates. This prohibition applies to owners, tenants, managers of private property, last
registered owners of motor vehicles or transferees on a bill of sale covering a vehicle.
Exception: Any person enumerated in this section who, under special conditions of
hardship, or for valid reasons such as the preservation of a historic or classic vehicle,
may request an extension of the fourteen (14) day limitation above described by filing a
timely request with Director of Building and Zoning. The Director of Building and Zoning
may, after review of all of the circumstances, grant a reasonable extension of time for
compliance.
302.9 Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or
deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by
placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. Owners of property bear the responsibility to
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-19
remove or obliterate markings, carvings or graffiti from their property.
SECTION 303 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
303.1 Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition, and in good repair.
303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas capable of holding water more
than 24 inches in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches
in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the
pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the selflatching
device is less than 54 inches above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism
shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self latching gates shall be
maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open
position of 6 inches from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced
or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall
be exempt from the provisions of this section.
SECTION 304 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
304.1 General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally
sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
304.2 Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and
window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in
good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected
from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling,
flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry
joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors,
and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject
to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust
or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains
shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are
exempt from this requirement.
304.3 Premise identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers as required by
Chapter 2 of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
304.4 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from
deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
304.5 Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open
cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents
and other pests.
304.6 Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-20
materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to
prevent deterioration.
304.7 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects
that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the
walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be
maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a public nuisance.
304.8 Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings
and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and
in a safe condition.
304.9 Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies,
marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be
maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition.
When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements
and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
304.10 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and
balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in
good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
304.11 Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar
appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or
rust by periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.
304.12 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable
of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
304.13 Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be
kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
304.13.1 Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
304.13.2 Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily
openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to November 1, every door, window and
other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with
approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch, and every screen door used
for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-21
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means are employed,
such as air curtains or insect repellent fans.
304.15 Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good
condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the
door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 702.3.
304.16 Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the
entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
304.17 Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be
supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of
rodents.
304.18 Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or
housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the
occupants and property within.
304.18.1 Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily
openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special
knowledge or effort and shall have a lock throw of not less than 1 inch. Such deadbolt locks
shall be installed according to the manufacturers specifications and maintained in good
working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an
acceptable deadbolt lock.
304.18.2 Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet above ground
level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking
device.
304.18.3 Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices
that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
SECTION 305 INTERIOR STRUCTURE
305.1 General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the
structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a
structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more
dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and
sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
305.2 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound,
and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
305.3 Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-22
maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint
shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other
defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
305.4 Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other
walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
305.5 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable
of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
305.6 Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be
capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs,
headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
SECTION 306 HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS
306.1 General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall
have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony,
porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches above the floor or
grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches high or more than
42 inches high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of
the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches high above the floor
of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building
code.
SECTION 307 RUBBISH AND GARBAGE
307.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the
interior of every structure shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
Exception: Fallen trees and branches from trees on the premise in a preservation or
restoration area.
307.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
307.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premise shall supply
approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible
for the removal of rubbish.
307.2.2 Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be
discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors.
307.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a building shall dispose of garbage in a clean
and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or
approved garbage containers.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-23
307.3.1 Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following: an
approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; or an approved, leak-proof,
covered, outside garbage container.
307.3.2 Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide,
and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof containers with close-fitting covers
for the storage of garbage until it is removed from the premise for disposal.
307.4 Rubbish removal after eviction notice for landlord/tenant or foreclosure. If a tenant
or occupant has personal property on the premises at the time of an eviction or involuntary
removal the owner or operator shall place a large movable container or receptacle on the
private property which holds at least 6 cubic yards and can be mechanically emptied for
disposal purposes of the tenant or occupants personal property, such as but not limited to:
household furniture, appliances, clothing, rugs, window treatments, books and paper products
and personal goods. At no time shall any part of the container be placed on any public area
adjacent to the private property.
307.4.1 Type of container. Upon eviction or involuntary removal, the tenants or occupants
personal property shall be legally removed from the property or placed and disposed of only in
the large movable container as referenced above. The container shall be of the type which will
allow access from its side as opposed to access solely through the top of the container.
307.4.2 Removal of container. The movable container and its contents shall be removed
from the real property within forty-eight (48) hours of placement.
307.4.3 Blight violation. In the event that a moveable container is not used for disposal of the
tenants or occupants personal property and that property is improperly placed elsewhere on
the property, or the container is not properly removed, then the owner, operator or other
person in violation of this Section is subject to immediate issuance of a Municipal Civil
Infraction Notice or a Municipal Civil Infraction Citation pursuant to Chapter 100, Municipal
Civil Infractions, of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances.
307.4.4 Cost Recovery. In addition to any other penalties set out in the Troy Code of
Ordinances, if the City of Troy incurs any costs to remove solid waste from property resulting
from an eviction or foreclosure proceeding, the owner and the operator shall be billed by
invoice sent by first class mail for the cost of the removal, including but not limited to: the cost
of labor for removal of the solid waste and the cost of the use or rental of the container. If the
owner or operator fails to pay the same within thirty (30) days after the invoice is mailed, the
City shall add the amount to the next tax roll of the City of Troy, and it shall be collected in the
same manner as provided by law for the collection of taxes by the City of Troy. The City
Council shall also have the option of initiating a lawsuit to recover the Citys full cost of
necessary expenses. If the City receives a favorable judgment, then the judgment may be
assessed against all of the assets of the owner of the property, both real and personal, not just
the real property where the removal of solid waste occurred.
SECTION 308 EXTERMINATION
308.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from rodent or pest infestation. All
structures in which rodents or pests are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-24
processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions
shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.
308.2 Responsibility. The owner, occupant, or any person having control of any structure or
premises shall be responsible for extermination.
Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner
shall be responsible for extermination.
CHAPTER 4 LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
SECTION 401 GENERAL
401.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure.
401.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation
and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein
prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the Michigan Building Code
shall be permitted.
SECTION 402 LIGHT
402.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved
size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every
habitable space shall be 8 percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other
portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than
3 feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such
window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room.
Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is
provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room
shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less
than 25 square feet. The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area
being served.
402.2 Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential
occupancies, other than in one and two family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at
least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet of floor area or
equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30
feet. In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of
egress stairways, shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-25
egress is occupied with a minimum of 1 foot-candle at floors, landings and treads.
402.3 Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient
to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and
utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures.
SECTION 403 VENTILATION
403.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window.
The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of
the minimum glazed area required in Section 402.1.
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated
through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at
least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25
square feet. The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor
area being ventilated.
403.2 Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the
ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by Section 403.1, except that a
window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system.
Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall
discharge to the outdoors and shall not be re-circulated.
403.3 Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall
not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall
not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit.
Exceptions:
1. Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.
2. Devices such as coffee pots, hot plates, toaster ovens and microwave ovens shall
not be considered cooking appliances.
403.4 Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or
mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the
contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated
to any space.
403.5 Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all
other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturers instructions.
SECTION 404 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
404.1 Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory
units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
404.2 Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than 7
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-26
feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than 3 feet
between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls.
404.3 Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas,
bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not
less than 7 feet.
Exceptions:
1. In one and two family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than 4 feet on
center and projecting not more than 6 inches below the required ceiling height.
2. Basement rooms in one and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry,
study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches
with not less than 6 feet 4 inches of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and
similar obstructions.
3. Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a
sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least 7 feet
over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor
area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of 5
feet or more shall be included.
404.4 Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room shall comply
with the requirements of Sections 404.4.1 through 404.4.5.
404.4.1 Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet and every
bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet.
404.4.2 Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to
other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from
other habitable spaces.
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
404.4.3 Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water
closet and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a
dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same
story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and non-habitable spaces shall not be used for
sleeping purposes.
404.4.5 Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this
code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room
width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities
requirements of Chapter 5; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of
Chapter 6; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of Chapter 7.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-27
404.5 Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create
conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of
the occupants.
404.6 Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from
meeting the following requirements:
1. A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor area of not
less than 220 square feet. A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor
area of not less than 320 square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the
areas required by Items 2 and 3.
2. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration
facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches in front. Light
and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided.
3. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet,
lavatory and bathtub or shower.
4. The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
404.7 Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall
contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner.
There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and
refuse, including facilities for temporary storage.
CHAPTER 5 PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 501 GENERAL
501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems,
facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
501.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing
facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not
occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises
which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
SECTION 502 REQUIRED FACILITIES
502.1 Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory,
water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition.
The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity
to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink
shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.
502.2 Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied for every four rooming units.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-28
502.3 Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water
closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be
provided for each ten occupants.
502.4 Employees facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking
facility shall be available to employees.
502.4.1 Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled
water cooler or clean cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be
located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
SECTION 503 TOILET ROOMS
503.1 Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the
only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. In multiple dwellings, a door and
interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms.
503.2 Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory
units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs
and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.
503.3 Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the
employees working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story
above or below the employees working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not
exceed a distance of 500 feet. Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or
combined employee and public facilities.
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks,
which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control,
shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet from the employees regular working area
to the facilities.
503.4 Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to
be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
SECTION 504 PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES
504.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working
order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of
performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures
shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition.
504.2 Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and
cleaning.
504.3 Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service,
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-29
inadequate venting, cross connection, back siphonage, improper installation, deterioration or
damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to
eliminate the hazard.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-30
SECTION 505 WATER SYSTEM
505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other
plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved
private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers
shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the Michigan
Plumbing Code.
505.2 Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all
water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture.
Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are
attached and left in place shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum
breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
505.3 Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply
of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures
adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
505.4 Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained
and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink,
lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110F. A gasburning
water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other
occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An
approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe
shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
SECTION 506 SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM
506.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer
system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
506.2 Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly
and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
SECTION 507 STORM DRAINAGE
507.1 General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, sub soil collection
systems, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that
creates a public nuisance.
CHAPTER 6 MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 601 GENERAL
601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-31
601.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not
occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
SECTION 602 HEATING FACILITIES
602.1 Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this
section.
602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of
maintaining a room temperature of 68F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms
based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the
Michigan Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to
meet the requirements of this section.
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to
the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 1 to June 1 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 68F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet
rooms.
Exception:
When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the
locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided
that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the Michigan
Plumbing Code.
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat
during the period from September 1 to June 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65F
during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature
conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
602.5 Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be
measured 3 feet above the floor near the center of the room and 2 feet inward from the center
of each exterior wall.
SECTION 603 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
603.1 Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning
appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended
function.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-32
603.2 Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be
connected to an approved chimney or vent.
Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented
operation.
603.3 Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
603.4 Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in
effective operation.
603.5 Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation
of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning
equipment.
603.6 Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by
attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or
vent piping there from, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the
installation is specifically approved.
603.7 Portable cooking equipment. Unless otherwise approved, portable cooking equipment
shall not be used on the interior of a structure in any area other than an area designated as a
cooking room.
SECTION 604 ELECTRICAL FACILITIES
604.1 Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system
in compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 605.
604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for
determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the Michigan Electrical Code.
Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service
having a rating of not less than 60 amperes.
604.3 Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service,
improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation,
deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard.
SECTION 605 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
605.1 Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed
and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate
and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type
receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-33
at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit
interrupter protection.
605.3 Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry
room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire.
SECTION 606 ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS
606.1 General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with
ASME A17.1. The most current certification of inspection shall be on display at all times within
the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, or the certificate shall be available for
public inspection in the office of the building operator. The inspection and tests shall be
performed at not less than the periodical intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, except
where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
606.2 Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator shall
be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied.
Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to have the
elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.
SECTION 607 DUCT SYSTEMS
607.1 General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of
performing the required function.
CHAPTER 7 FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 701 GENERAL
701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety
facilities and equipment to be provided.
701.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety
facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
SECTION 702 MEANS OF EGRESS
702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any
point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Troy, Chapter 93 of the Troy Code of Ordinances, hereafter
referred to as the Troy Fire Code.
702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the Troy Fire Code shall be
unobstructed.
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-34
702.3 Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from
which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except
where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the Michigan Building Code.
702.4 Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be
maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following:
required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the
room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to
be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear
opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such
devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force
greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.
SECTION 703 FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS
703.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire resistance rating of fireresistance-
rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
703.2 Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative
condition. All fire and smoke stop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors
and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
SECTION 704 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or
suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable
condition at all times in accordance with the Troy Fire Code.
704.2 Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and
maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies,
regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity
of bedrooms.
2. In each room used for sleeping purposes.
3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including
crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels
and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed
on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower
level is less than one full story below the upper level. Single or multiple-station smoke
alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the Troy Fire Code.
704.3 Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R
occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building
wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped
with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-35
shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent
protection.
Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings
where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial
power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do
not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
704.4 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within
an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R
occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of
one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. Such interconnection shall be
permitted to be through wired or approved wireless methods. The alarm shall be clearly
audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
Exceptions:
1. Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations,
repairs, or construction of any kind.
2. Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where
alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes
exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available
which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
CHAPTER 8 REFERENCED STANDARDS
This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of this document. The
standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of the standard, the standard
identification, the effective date and title and the section or sections of this document that
reference the standard. The application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in
Section 102.7.
ASME
American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Three Park Avenue
New York, NY 10016-5990
Standard
reference
number
Title Referenced in code
section number
A17.12000 Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators
with A17.1a 2002 Addenda
606.1
ASTM
ASTM International
100 Barr Harbor Drive West
Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959
Standard
reference
number
Title Referenced in code
section number
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-36
F134691
(2003)
Performance Specifications for Safety
Covers and Labeling Requirements for All
Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot
Tubs
303.2
DELEG
Michigan Department of Energy Labor and
Economic Growth
Bureau of Construction Codes
2501 Woodlake Circle
Okemos, MI 48864
Standard
reference
number
Title Referenced in code
section number
MEC06 Michigan Electrical Code 102.3, 201.3, 604.2
MBC06 Michigan Building Code 102.3, 201.3, 401.3, 702.3
IMC06 Michigan Mechanical Code 102.3, 201.3
IPC06 Michigan Plumbing Code 102.3, 201.3, 505.1, 602.2,
602.3
City of Troy
City of Troy
500 W. Big Beaver
Troy, MI 48084
Standard
reference
number
Title Referenced in code
section number
Charter Charter of the City of Troy 104.3
Chapter 2 Address Numbering and Street
Naming
304.3
Chapter 39 Troy Zoning Ordinance 102.3, 201.3
Chapter 60 Fees and Bonds Required 103.5
Chapter 79 General Building Regulations 111.2
Chapter 82A Rental and Dwelling Inspection and
Enforcement
104.3.1
Chapter 88 Nuisances 302.8
Chapter 93 Troy Fire Prevention Code 108.1, 201.3, 702.1, 702.2, 704.1
704.2
Chapter 100 Municipal Civil Infractions 106.1, 106.2, 106.3, 107.1, 107.2,
108.1.1.2, 302.4.3, 302.4.4,
307.4.3
ICC
International Code Council
5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600
Falls Church, VA 22041
Standard
reference
number
Title Referenced in code
section number
Chapter 82 - Property Maintenance Code
82-37
IFGC-06 International Fuel Gas Code 102.3
(Enacted 10/05/2009; Effective: 01/01/2010)
Chapter 82-A - Rental and Dwelling Inspection and Enforcement
82A-1
1. Purpose and Reference to State Act
The inspection procedures set forth in this Chapter are established in the public
interest, to secure the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the
general public.
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the Housing Law of Michigan, found at Michigan
Compiled Laws  125.401 et. seq and is to be construed in conjunction and interpreted
to comply with the language of said law and any subsequent amendments.
2. Definitions
1) For the purposes of this Chapter, certain terms, words and phrases shall,
whenever used in this Chapter, have the meaning herewith defined as follows:
2) Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
(03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
Apartments: The dwelling units in a multiple family dwelling as defined herein.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
Child: An individual under 18 years of age.
(03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
Dwelling Unit: A residential structure, or portion thereof, permanently sited on a
continuous frost free masonry foundation, containing all required plumbing,
heating and electrical systems attached to the available public utilities, designed
for the occupancy of one (1) family with cooking facilities.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
Leasehold: A private dwelling or separately occupied apartment, suite, or group
of rooms in a 2-family or in a multiple dwelling if the private dwelling or separately
occupied apartment, suite, or group of rooms is leased to the occupant under the
terms of either an oral or written lease.
(03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
Multiple Family Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy
by three (3) or more families living in individual dwelling units.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
Chapter 82-A - Rental and Dwelling Inspection and Enforcement
82A-2
Premises: A building which is enclosed by continuous exterior walls and is
covered by a single roof, except that the roof does not have to be continuous
and may be of several types or elevations and may be on different levels.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
Rooming House: Any dwelling occupied in such a manner that certain rooms, in
excess of those used by the members of the immediate family and occupied as a
home or family unit, are leased or rented to persons outside of the family, without
any attempt to provide therein or therewith, cooking or kitchen accommodations
for individuals leasing or renting rooms.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
(Renumbered: 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
3. Designation of Enforcement Body
The Building Department, through its Director of Building and Zoning, his authorized
representatives and employees, shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter, and shall
have jurisdiction to establish the registration, inspection, violation, and certification
procedures to implement the said enforcement.
4. Joint Implementation
The Chapter herein may be enforced by any other governmental agency by joint
agreement where joint enforcement is practicable.
(Rev. 04-17-00)
5. Registry of Owners and Premises
1) A registry of owners and premises shall be maintained by the Director of Building
and Zoning or his authorized representatives and employees.
2) The owner(s) of a multiple family dwelling or rooming house which contains any
apartment(s) or unit(s) which will be offered to rent, let, or to hire, for more than
six months of a calendar year, shall register their names and places of residence
or usual places of business and the location of the premises regulated by this
Chapter with the Director of Building and Zoning or his authorized
representatives or employees. The owners shall complete this registry within
sixty days following the day on which any part of the premises is offered for
occupancy.
3) If the premises are managed or operated by an agent, the agent's name and
place of business shall be placed with the name of the owner in the registry. Any
change in agency status shall be immediately reported to the Director of Building
and Zoning or his authorized representatives or employees.
Chapter 82-A - Rental and Dwelling Inspection and Enforcement
82A-3
4) If there is a transfer of ownership or a transfer of management by an agent, the
new owner(s) shall register their names and places of residence or usual places
of business and the location of the premises regulated by this Chapter with the
Director of Building and Zoning or his authorized representatives or employees.
This registration shall be completed within sixty days following the date of the
transfer of ownership.
5) The owner(s) of a multiple family dwelling or rooming house shall pay an initial
registration fee of $50 per premises.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
6. Certificate of Compliance; No Occupancy Unless Certificate Issued; Hazardous
Conditions; Inspections.
1) In addition to registering each premises, owner(s) of a multiple family dwelling or
rooming house shall apply for a certificate of compliance. Inspection and
issuance of certificates shall be in accordance with the requirements of this
Chapter and with procedures established by the Director of Building and Zoning
or his authorized representative or employee.
2) An application for a certificate shall be made when the owners, or any of them,
enroll in the registry of owners and premises. If the owner fails to register, any
occupant of unregistered or uncertified premises may make application.
3) Apartments or units in multiple family dwellings or rooming houses shall not be
occupied unless a certificate of compliance has been issued by the Building
Department. The Certificate of compliance shall be issued only upon an
inspection of the premises by the Director of Building and Zoning or his
authorized representatives or employees, except that the inspection required for
the first issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall also serve as the initial
inspection for a certificate of compliance. The required inspections shall be
conducted as soon as possible, but in no event later than 15 days after written
application for a certificate of compliance.
4) A violation of this Chapter shall not prevent the issuance of a certificate, but the
Building Department shall not issue a certificate when the existing conditions
constitute a hazard to the health or safety of those who may occupy the
premises.
(Rev. 04-17-00)
5) A certificate of compliance shall be issued on condition that the premises remain
in safe, healthful and fit condition for occupancy.
6) If an inspection reveals condition(s) that constitute a hazard to health and safety,
the certificate of compliance shall be immediately suspended as to the affected
Chapter 82-A - Rental and Dwelling Inspection and Enforcement
82A-4
areas. Those premises which have been or are occupied for dwelling or rooming
purposes may be ordered vacated until re-inspection and proof of elimination of
the condition constituting a hazard to health and safety. On re-inspection and
proof of compliance, the order shall be rescinded and a certificate of compliance
shall be re-issued.
7) The Director of Housing and Zoning or his authorized representatives or
employees shall charge a $20 per apartment or dwelling unit fee for each
inspection required by this Chapter. An owner or property manager shall not be
liable for an inspection fee if the inspection is not performed and the Director or
Building and Zoning, his designee or employee is the direct cause of the failure
to perform.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
7. Inspection; Intervals; Basis; Inspectors
1) The Director of Building and Zoning or his authorized representatives or
employees shall inspect, on a periodic basis, multiple family dwellings and
rooming houses regulated by this Chapter. The period between inspections shall
be no longer than two years, unless the most recent inspection of the premises
revealed no violations of this Chapter, in which event the maximum period
between inspections may be extended to three years.
2) An inspection shall be conducted in the manner best calculated to secure
compliance with the Chapter and appropriate to the needs of the community.
Inspections may be conducted for one or more of the following basis:
a) An area basis, such that all the regulated premises in a predetermined
geographical area will be inspected simultaneously, or within a short
period of time.
b) A complaint basis, such that complaints of violations will be inspected
within a reasonable time.
c) A recurrent violation basis, such that those premises which are found to
have a high incidence of recurrent or uncorrected violations will be
inspected more frequently.
d) A compliance basis, such that a premises brought into compliance before
the expiration of a certificate of compliance or any requested repair order
may be issued a certificate of compliance for the maximum renewal
certification period authorized by the City.
(03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
e) A percentage basis, such that the City may establish a percentage of units
in a multiple dwelling to be inspected in order to issue a certificate of
compliance for the multiple dwellings.
(03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
Chapter 82-A - Rental and Dwelling Inspection and Enforcement
82A-5
3) An inspection shall be carried out by the Director of Building and Zoning or his
authorized representatives or employees, which may include representatives of
other agencies as permitted by law.
4) Except in the case of an emergency, the owner of the premises regulated by this
Chapter shall request and obtain permission to enter before entering a premises
regulated by this Chapter. In the case of an emergency, including but not limited
to, fire flood, or other serious injury or death, the owner may enter at any time.
5) The Director of Building and Zoning or his authorized representatives or
employees shall require the owner of the premises regulated by this Chapter to
do one or more of the following:
a) The owner of a premises regulated by this Chapter shall provide the
Director of Building and Zoning or his authorized representatives or
employees and/or inspection team with access to the premises if the
lease provides the owner a right of entry.
(Rev. 04-17-00)
b) If the lease does not provide the owner with a right of entry, then the
owner of a premises regulated by this Chapter shall make a good faith
effort to obtain the tenants permission for an inspection, and arrange for
the inspection. The owner is further required to notify the enforcing
agency when a tenant vacates a dwelling after an inspection has been
requested. This notification shall be provided within ten days after the
leasehold is vacated.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
c) The owner of a premises regulated by this Chapter shall provide the
Director of Building and Zoning or his authorized representatives or
employees and/or inspection team with access to areas other than a
dwelling or areas open to the public view or both.
d) The owner of a premises regulated by this Chapter shall provide access to
the dwelling if a tenant of the premises has made a complaint to the City
of Troy.
6) In the case of an emergency, which is defined as an occurrence or imminent
threat of severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural
or man made cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, snow, ice, windstorm,
utility failure, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion
or civil disorder, or upon presentment of a warrant, the inspector or team of
inspectors shall have the right to enter at any time.
7) If a complaint identifies a dwelling or rooming house regulated under this
Chapter in which a child is residing, the dwelling or rooming house shall be
inspected prior to inspection of any nonemergency complaint.
(03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
Chapter 82-A - Rental and Dwelling Inspection and Enforcement
82A-6
8) If the apartment or dwelling unit regulated by this Chapter houses more than one
tenant, then the requirements of this Chapter are satisfied when notification is
provided to and permission is received from at least one tenant in a multiple
tenant apartment or dwelling unit.
(Renumbered: 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
8. Inspection; Warrant
1) The inspection procedures set forth in this Chapter are established in the public
interest, to secure the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the
general public. (Rev.04-17-00)
s for Non-Emergency Situation; No Warrant Required in Emergency
1) In a non-emergency situation, the Director of Building and Zoning or his
authorized representatives or employees shall request and receive permission,
either oral or written, from a tenant or the landlord as set out herein, before
entering an apartment or dwelling unit regulated by this Chapter. If permission is
not received, the Director of Building and Zoning or his authorized representative
shall obtain an administrative search warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction. The affidavit for the administrative search warrant and proposed
warrant shall include the address of the premises or apartment or unit to be
inspected, the nature of the inspection, as defined in this Chapter or other
applicable acts, and the reasons for the inspection. It shall be appropriate and
sufficient to set forth the basis for inspection (e.g. complaint, area or recurrent
violation basis) established in this Chapter, in other applicable acts and/or
ordinances or in rules or regulations. The affidavit for the administrative search
warrant and proposed warrant shall also state that periodic inspections of rental
dwelling(s) are mandated by both state and local law. Inspections and the
execution of administrative search warrants shall be conducted at reasonable
hours. Reasonable hours shall include the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on
Mondays through Fridays on days considered regular work days for the Director
of Building and Zoning or his authorized representatives or employees, or on
days and hours agreed to by appointment, either orally or in writing by a tenant,
or landlord or the landlords property manager. An inspection or execution of an
administrative search warrant carried out on a date and time not specified in this
Chapter is not per se unreasonable.
(Rev: 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
2) If the court finds that the proposed warrant is in proper form and in accord with
this section, it shall be issued forthwith.
3) In the event of an emergency, as herein defined, no warrant shall be required.
9. Inspection; Policy; Records; Checklist of Recurring Violation; Non- Discrimination.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
Chapter 82-A - Rental and Dwelling Inspection and Enforcement
82A-7
2) The Director of Building and Zoning or his authorized representatives or
employees shall keep a record of all inspection reports, code violation notices,
and the results of enforcement actions for all premises regulated by this chapter.
These records shall be made available to the general public for inspection and
copying during business hours. Any or all parts of this file may be stored on an
electronic medium.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
3) The Director of Building and Zoning or his authorized representatives or
employees shall make available to the general public a check list of commonly
recurring violations for use in examining premises offered for occupancy.
(Rev. 03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
4) Neither the Director of Building and Zoning, his authorized representatives or
employees nor the owner of any leasehold, may discriminate against an
occupant on the basis of whether the occupant requests, permits, or refuses
entry to an apartment or dwelling unit. The Director of Building and Zoning, his
authorized representatives or employees shall not discriminate against an owner
who has met the requirements of subsection 7. 5. (b) but has been unable to
obtain the permission of the tenant or occupant, based on the owners inability to
obtain that permission.
(03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
5) The City shall produce a report to a requesting party on the income and
expenses of the inspection program for the preceding fiscal year. The report
shall contain the fees assessed by the City, the cost incurred in performing
inspections, and the number of units inspected. The report shall be provided to
the requesting party within 90 days of the request. The City may produce the
report electronically. If the City does not have readily available access to the
information required for the report, the City may charge the requesting party a
fee no greater than the actual reasonable cost of providing the information. If the
City charges a fee under this section, the City shall include the costs of providing
and compiling the information in the report.
(03-23-09; Effective: 07-01-09)
10. Penalties for Violations: Except as otherwise provided by other sections of this Chapter,
a violation of any section of Chapter 82-A is a Municipal Civil Infraction subject to the
provisions of Chapter 100 of the Code of the City of Troy. Each day that a violation
continues is a separate Municipal Civil Infraction violation. Sanctions for each violation
of Chapter 82-A shall include a fine of not more than $500, costs, damages and
injunctive orders as authorized by Chapter 100.
(03-01-06)
Chapter 82-B - Dangerous Buildings
82B-1
Chapter 82-B-Dangerous Buildings of the Code of the City of Troy is deleted by the Council
of the City of Troy, Oakland County Michigan, at a Regular Meeting of the City Council held at
City Hall, 500 W. Big Beaver, Troy, MI on the 5th day of October 2009 and is effective January
1st, 2010.
Chapter 83 - Fences
83-1
1. DEFINITIONS.
(A) Fences - For the purpose of this Ordinance a fence shall be construed as a structure
erected upon or near the dividing line between adjoining properties for the purpose of
separating, screening and protecting the lands.
(B) Front Building Line - A line formed by the front face of the building setback line and
extending to the side lot lines.
2. FENCE CONSTRUCTION IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
The owner of any lot may construct and maintain fences between his own and the next adjoining
lots, or along street or alley lines in the manner stated in the following sections of this Ordinance
and elsewhere in the City Code. All owners of lots shall be responsible for rebuilding, care, and
upkeep of all fences as defined in this Ordinance.
(A) All fences in residential areas separating properties shall be of an ornamental type. Such
fences may be constructed of metal, wood or masonry. Only new material, or such
material as found to be structurally acceptable to the Chief Building Inspector, shall be
used. In residential areas no fence shall be constructed to a height more than six (6') feet
above the existing grade of the land, and no fence shall be constructed to a height of more
than thirty (30") inches above the existing grade of the land in that portion of the property
in front of the front building setback line. On corner lots where a double front setback is
required, and where there is a common rear yard relationship with a lot in the same block,
a non-obscuring fence no greater than forty-eight (48") inches in height above the existing
grade of the land may be installed along the common street line from the front building
setback line to the rear property line. The maximum heights requirements of this section
may be waived with the approval of the Building Board of Appeals.
(Rev. 07-08-1996)
3. FENCE CONSTRUCTION IN NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
On all non-residential zoned properties, no fence shall be permitted in the yards between the
building and any frontage street, unless required for utility enclosure purposes.
A decorative masonry obscuring wall shall be provided on those sides of non-residential property
abutting land zoned for residential use. The decorative side of these walls shall face the land
zoned for residential use. Such walls shall not be less than six (6') feet in height and may,
depending upon land use, be required to be eight (8') feet in height.
(Rev. 11-12-1990)
4. CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL.
No electrically charged fence shall be permitted in any areas of the City, nor shall barbed wire
material be used in the construction of a fence in any residentially zoned area of the City; provided
that barbed wire may be used in residential areas for the purpose of avoiding access to attractive
nuisances. Said wire shall be a minimum of six (6'0") feet above ground. In non-residential areas,
barbed wire or other sharp pointed material may be used provided said material is over five (5'0")
feet above the ground. Barbed wire, when used, should be installed so that any projections at the
Chapter 83 - Fences
83-2
top shall be over the fence owner's property. Fences which enclose school grounds, playgrounds,
tennis courts, public swimming pools, or other public areas may be erected to a height in excess
of six (6'0") feet with the approval of the Building Board of Appeals.
(Rev. 10/09/1972)
5. PERMITS.
No fence shall be constructed until a permit for such construction has been obtained from the
Building Department. Application for said permit shall contain such information as is necessary to
determine if the proposed fence meets the requirements of this Ordinance and the Zoning
Ordinance. The fee for said permit shall be in accordance with the Fee Schedule found within
Section 60.03 of Chapter 60 of the Troy City Code.
(Rev. 06/02/2003)
No permit shall be issued for any fence construction prior to the approval of the final lot grading for
said lot where the fence is proposed.
No permit shall be issued for any fence construction within any easement without the approval of
the Director of Public Works, or his authorized representative.
(Rev. 09/19/1977)
Chapter 84 - Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse Transfer Stations
84-1
1. Purpose. The City of Troy, Michigan, hereby declares that it is necessary to provide and establish
regulations and conditions governing the operation of garbage, rubbish and refuse transfer
stations within the City of Troy, in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the
community.
2. License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any garbage, rubbish and refuse
transfer station operation within the territorial limits of Troy without having first obtained a license
for such operation as herein provided.
3. Application. Application for licenses hereunder shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be in
writing and contain the following information:
(1) Names and addresses of the person, persons, firm or corporation making the application.
(2) Name and address of the owners of the land for which a license is applied for.
(3) The full legal description of the land or premises upon which the transfer station operation
is to take place.
(4) Complete architectural plans and drawings covering all buildings proposed to be
constructed on the premises.
(5) Complete plans showing all truck routes of ingress and egress to and from the transfer
station within the City of Troy.
(6) Complete plans of operation in regard to the daily capacity to be handled by such transfer
station, such not to exceed in any case an average of over 600 tons per day of operation,
with said average to be based on the permitted days of operation during any one calendar
month.
(7) Complete plans and specifications indicating controls to be applied in order to reduce
detrimental effects from dust, odor and excessive noise.
(8) A schedule of operations indicating the times of operation during the day and the days of
the week of operation, provided only, that such operation shall not be permitted other than
from 8:00 a.m. in the morning to 6:00 p.m. at night from Monday through Saturday.
(9) Complete plans and specifications indicating what measures are to be used to control any
rodent problem or other health hazard.
(10) Complete plans and specifications indicating method by which vehicles will be cleaned.
Outside storage of vehicles is prohibited.
(11) An agreement to prohibit delivery to the transfer station by any vehicles other than those
owned by or hired by the City of Troy or a governmental unit being a member of the
Southeastern Oakland County Incinerator Authority.
(7-21-69)
Chapter 84 - Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse Transfer Stations
84-2
4. Investigation and Hearing. Immediately upon the filing of an application for license, one copy
thereof shall be delivered to the City Manager and one copy shall be delivered to the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall make an investigation of the facts set forth in the application
and shall make a written report of his investigation, together with his recommendations to the City
Manager. One copy of the application for permit shall be delivered to the City Planner. The City
Planner shall make an investigation of the facts set forth in the application and shall make a
written report of his investigation, together with his recommendations to the City Manager. The
City Manager shall then present to the City Council the recommendations of the City Engineer, the
City Planner and his own recommendations.
The City Council in granting or denying any application for License shall take into consideration
the zoning of the proposed site, character of the applicant with regard to morality, honesty,
integrity, financial responsibility and all pertinent things concerning the proposed application which
may concern the health, safety and general welfare of the public and preservation of the
community. In addition, the City Council shall require that the applicant establish the following
controls in regard to the operation, to wit:
1. Prohibit any incineration or open burning in the building or on the site.
2. Prohibit the overnight storage of any refuse material in the building.
3. Prohibit the dumping or storage of any material on the site outside the building at any time.
4. Limit the capacity of the transfer station to an average of 600 tons per day, with said
average to be based on the permitted days of operation during any one calendar month.
5. Provide adequate dust, odor and noise controls.
6. Require that the building be completely enclosed, with doors to permit entrance and exit.
7. Permit refuse to be received at the station only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday.
8. Require that the building be kept clean and that the Health Department be authorized to
require any measures necessary to control any rodent problem or other health hazard.
9. Limit delivery to the transfer station to vehicles owned by or hired by the City of Troy or
members of the Southeastern Oakland County Incinerator Authority.
10. Require that all drives and parking areas on the site be hard-surfaced to meet Engineering
Department
specifications.
11. Require approval from the City for all truck routes, within the City of Troy.
(Rev. 3-26-79)
Chapter 84 - Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse Transfer Stations
84-3
5. Revocation and Suspension of License. Any license granted pursuant to this Chapter may be
revoked, or suspended, for failure to comply with any of the provisions of said Sections. A hearing
on revocation of license shall be held before the City Council after five (5) days notice of such
hearing, license holder stating the grounds of complaint against licensee and stating the time and
place where such hearing shall be held. Proper notice shall consist of any of the methods
specified in Chapter 1 of this Code. If, in the opinion of the City Manager, public health, safety or
welfare requires it, the City Manager may suspend any license pending on hearing by the City
Council. Such revocation or suspension of any license shall not affect prosecution of any person
for violation of this Chapter.
(Rev. 3-26-79)
6. Violation Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate this Chapter, or any provision
thereof; shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail
or any place of imprisonment provided by the City or laws of the State of Michigan for a period not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Rev. 7-21-69)
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-1
85.01.00 Administration
85.01.01 Title, Purpose and Severability
A. Short Title: This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the City of Troy
Sign Ordinance.
B. Findings and Purpose:
1. It is hereby determined that proliferation of signs in the City is unduly distracting
to motorists and pedestrians, creates a traffic hazard, and reduces the
effectiveness of signs needed to direct and warn the public. Too many signs can
overwhelm the senses, impair sightlines and vistas, create feelings of anxiety
and dismay, affect the tranquility of residential areas, impair aesthetics and
degrade the quality of a community.
2. It is also determined that the appearance of the City is marred by proliferation of
signs.
3. It is also determined that proliferation of signs restricts light and air.
4. It is also determined that proliferation of signs negatively affects property values.
This Ordinance promotes safe, well-maintained, vibrant and attractive
residential and business neighborhoods while accommodating the need for
signs to function for the purposes for which they are intended.
5. It is also determined that the individual users rights to convey a message must
be balanced against the publics right to be free of signs which unreasonably
compete with one another, distract drivers and pedestrians, and create safety
concerns and confusion. This Ordinance is intended to balance the individual
users desire to attract attention with the citizens right to be free of
unreasonable distractions.
6. It is also determined that proliferation of signs results in an inappropriate use of
land. The purpose of this Ordinance is to control the occurrence and size of
signs in order to reduce the aforementioned negative effects.
7. It is also determined that there is a unique value to signs which provide a means
of exercising constitutional freedom of expression.
8. It is also determined that the signs of least value to people within the City are
those which carry commercial messages other than the advertisement of any
product, service, event, person, institution or business located on the premises
where the sign is located (off premise sign) or indicates the sale or rental of
such premises.
9. It is further determined that off premise signs are unduly distracting to motorists
and residents because of the periodic changing of the message on such signs
and because such signs are generally larger and are predominantly located
along busy highways where several businesses are located in close proximity to
each other, thereby posing a greater risk to the Citys interest in traffic safety
and aesthetics. Additionally, off-premises signs can also deter the
redevelopment of a parcel or limit the redevelopment potential of a site due to
extended lease periods for off-premises signs.
10. It is further determined a proliferation of off premise signs creates confusion and
the perception of visual clutter in conflict with one of the goals and themes of the
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-2
City of Troy Master Plan. This Ordinance supports the purposes and
recommendations of various area specific plans adopted in support of orderly
development and ensures that signs are located, designed, constructed,
installed and maintained in a way that protects life, health, property, and the
public welfare.
11. It is also determined that the regulations contained in this Ordinance are the
minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve its purposes.
12. It is also determined that restrictions in this Ordinance on the size of signs, their
height and placement on real estate, are the minimum amount necessary to
achieve its purposes.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
C. Severability: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this
Ordinance to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this
Ordinance.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
85.01.02 Enforcement:
A. This Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator as
provided for in Chapter 3 of the Troy City Code.
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
B. Responsibility of Compliance: The owner of any property on which a sign is placed,
and the person maintaining said sign are equally responsible for the condition of the
sign and the area in the vicinity thereof.
C. Removal of Signs: Should any sign be found unsafe, insecure, improperly
constructed or not in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter, the Sign
Erector and/or Owner shall be required to make the sign safe, secure and
otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
85.01.03 Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, words and tenses
used herein, shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
Amortization: Amortization refers to the grace period in which a sign that becomes
nonconforming as a result of an amendment to this Chapter must be removed, which
allows the owner of such sign to recoup their investment in the sign prior to its removal.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Board of Appeals: Board of Appeals means the Building Code Board of Appeals.
Business Development: One or more uses within a building or buildings that share
common parking facilities.
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-3
Department: The Planning Department of the City of Troy, its officers, inspectors and other
employees.
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
Display Time: The amount of time a message and/or graphic is displayed on an Electronic
Message Sign.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Dissolve: A mode of messaging transition on an Electronic Message Sign accomplished
by varying the light intensity or pattern, in which the first message gradually appears to
dissipate and lose legibility with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second
message.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Dynamic Frame Effect: An Electronic Message Sign frame effect in which the illusion of
motion and/or animation is used.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Electronic Message Sign (EMS): A sign or portion of a sign, that displays an electronic
image or video, which may or may not include text, including any sign or portion of a sign
that uses changing lights or similar forms of electronic display such as LED to form a sign
message with text and or images wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of
change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. This
definition includes without limitation television screens, plasma screens, digital screens,
flat screens, LED displays, video boards, and holographic displays.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Fade: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign accomplished by
varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point
of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point
of legibility.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Frame: A complete, static display screen on an Electronic Message Sign.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Frame Effect: A visual effect on an Electronic Message Sign applied to a single frame. See
also Dynamic Frame Effect.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Ground Sign: A freestanding sign supported by one or more uprights, braces, or pylons
located in or upon the ground and not attached to any building.
Illuminance: The amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary surface, commonly called
light level or illumination. Measured in foot candles (lumens/square foot).
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-4
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
LED: Light emitting diode
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Major Thoroughfare: A street which is intended to serve a large volume of traffic for both
the immediate area and the region beyond. Any street with a right of way existing or
proposed, of one hundred twenty (120) feet or greater as designated in the City of Troy
Master Plan.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Off Premise Sign: A sign that may include a commercial message, and directs attention to
any business, profession, product, activity, commodity, or service offered, sold,
manufactured or furnished on property or premises other than that upon which the sign is
located.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Owner: A person, firm, partnership, association or corporation and/or their legal
successors that own real property or personal property. For purposes of this Chapter, the
term owner may also refer to a lessee in possession of the subject real or personal
property.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Person: Any individual firm, partnership, association or corporation and their legal
successors.
Premise: A tract or parcel of land with the buildings thereon.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Projecting Sign: A sign which is affixed to any building or part thereof, or structure, which
extends beyond the building wall or parts thereof, or structure, by more than twelve (12)
inches.
Public Property: All publicly-owned property, including streets, rights-of-way, and
everything affixed thereto and there over.
Road Closure Construction Sign: A sign permitted when road lane(s) adjacent to a
property are closed, due to road construction activity, for a period of 30 or more calendar
days.
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
Roof line: The vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point
of the roof surface for flat roofs, the deck line of mansard roofs, and the average height
between eaves and ridge boards for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-5
Roof Sign: A sign that is erected, constructed or maintained upon, and projects above or
beyond the roof or parapet.
Scroll: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign in which the
message appears to move vertically across the display surface.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Sign: A sign means any structure or wall or other object used for the display of any
message, and includes but is not limited to any bill, poster, placard, handbill, flyer, painting,
balloon, streamer or other similar object in any form whatsoever which may contain printed
or written matter in words, symbols, or pictures, or in any combination thereof attached to
or affixed to the ground or any structure.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Sign Erector: Any person engaged in the business of erecting, altering, or removing signs
on a contractual or hourly basis.
Temporary Sign: A sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic, cardboard, wall board,
plywood or other like material without a permanent foundation or otherwise permanently
attached to the ground that appears to be intended or is determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be displayed for a limited time.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Transition: A visual effect used on an Electronic Message Sign to change from one
message to another.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Travel: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign in which the
message appears to move horizontally across the display surface.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Wall Sign: A sign attached to, painted on, or placed flat against the exterior wall or surface
of any building, no portion of which projects more than 12 inches from the wall, and which
may not project above the roof or parapet line.
Zoning Administrator: The City Manager or his/her designee, the person charged with the
administration of this Ordinance.
85.01.04 Requirements for Permits
A. Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, alter or relocate
any sign without obtaining a permit from the Zoning Administrator and paying the
applicable permit fee, as set forth in Chapter 60 of the City Code.
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-6
Exceptions:
1. Sign Permits shall not be required for street signs, which are erected by the
City, State or Federal Government for street direction or traffic control.
2. Sign Permits shall not be required for signs located on the interior of
buildings.
3. Sign Permits shall not be required for signs that are not visible from any
adjacent right-of-way which do not exceed thirty-six square feet.
4. Sign Permits shall not be required for small ground signs for uses other than
one and two family dwellings, as long as the signs are not more than two
square feet in area.
5. Sign Permits shall not be required for temporary signs, as set forth in
Section 85.03.02 of this Chapter.
6. Sign Permits shall not be required for flags that are allowed by Section
85.03.05.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
B. Permit Application: Applications for sign permits shall be made upon forms
provided by the Department and shall contain the following information:
1. Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
2. Name and address of the Sign Erector.
3. Location of the building or structure to which the sign is to be attached or lot
where the sign is to be erected.
4. Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, property lines,
and existing or proposed rights-of-way.
5. The zoning district of the real property where the sign is to be located.
6. Plans and specifications for the proposed sign and the method of
construction and attachment to the building or placement in the ground.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
7. If deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator, stress sheets and
calculations, bearing the signature and seal of a registered professional
engineer or architect, which show the structure as designed for dead load
and wind pressure, and demonstrate that the proposed sign will satisfy the
regulations adopted by the City of Troy.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-7
8. Such other information as the Zoning Administrator may require to
demonstrate that the proposed sign would meet full compliance with this and
other applicable laws of the City of Troy and the State of Michigan.
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
C. Permit Fees: Permit fees are as set forth in Chapter 60 of the City Code.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
85.01.05 Prohibited Signs
A. Signs in Right-of-Way: No sign shall be located in, project into, or overhang a public
right-of-way or dedicated public easement, except as provided below:
1. Signs established and maintained by the City, County, State, or Federal
Governments may be located in the right of way.
2. Banners for City sponsored events may be permitted on publicly owned
property, subject to the approval of the City Manager.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
3. In its discretion, City Council may approve an agreement to allow residential
development identification signs in the medians of boulevard entrance
streets. Any such agreement shall require continuing liability insurance and
also provide satisfactory maintenance of the sign, as well as any other
condition that is deemed necessary by the Troy City Council to protect the
right of way. The agreement must also indicate the City Councils approval of
the proposed design and materials for the sign. The residential development
identification sign shall not exceed five feet in height, and shall not be more
than 50 square feet in area. The height of such signs shall not exceed 30
when located in the corner clearance area depicted in Figure 85.01.05 A.
Figure 85.01.05 A
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-8
B. Corner Clearance: Signs higher than 30 inches shall be prohibited in the triangular
area formed at the intersection of any two street right-of-way lines (existing or
proposed) by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance
along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. No sign shall be located in
that area, or project into, or overhang into the area.
C. Roof Projecting Signs: Roof projecting signs are prohibited.
D. Fire Escapes: No signs of any kind shall be attached to or placed upon a building in
such a manner as to obstruct any fire escape.
E. Support Location: No pole, cable or support of any nature shall be placed on any
publicly owned property, street right-of-way, or proposed street right-of-way.
F. Traffic Interference: No advertising device shall be erected or maintained which
simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering, or design any traffic sign or signal or
other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with,
mislead, or confuse traffic.
G. Flashing Signs: Flashing or intermittent illumination of signs shall be prohibited.
H. Off Premise Signs: Off premise signs are prohibited in all zoning districts. This
prohibition is applicable only to signs displaying commercial messages.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
85.01.06 Inspections
A. Concealed Work: In cases where fastenings are to be installed and enclosed in
such a manner that the Inspector cannot easily remove material to see the
fastenings and material used, the Sign Erector must advise the Zoning
Administrator so that the inspection may be made before concealment.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
B. Compliance Certification: All signs shall be inspected at original installation; if
found to comply with this chapter, the sign shall be issued a certificate of
compliance.
C: Inspections of Existing Signs: The Zoning Administrator can inspect existing signs
to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
85.01.07 Non-Conforming Signs:
A. Intent: It is the intent of this Chapter to encourage eventual elimination of signs that,
as a result of an amendment to this Chapter, becomes non-conforming. It is
considered as much a subject of health, safety, and welfare as the prohibition of
new signs in violation of this Chapter. It is the intent, therefore, to administer this
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-9
Chapter to facilitate the removal of non-conforming signs while simultaneously
avoiding any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
B. Continuance: A non-conforming sign shall be maintained in good condition. A nonconforming
sign may be continued, but shall not be:
1. Replaced by another non-conforming sign; or
2. Structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign; or
3. Expanded; or
4. Re-established after damage or destruction to the sign, if the estimated
expense of reconstruction exceeds 50% of the estimated replacement cost
of the sign.
5. Continued for more than eight (8) years after receiving notification that the
sign does not comply with the size, height, and/or setback provisions of this
Chapter as amended.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
C. Removal: A non-conforming sign shall be removed upon a showing that it is
unsafe, unduly distracting to motorists or pedestrians, creates a traffic hazard, or
reduces the effectiveness of signs needed to direct and warn the public.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
D. EMS Illumination Non-Conformity: Any sign existing as of the effective date of this
subsection that exceeds the EMS illumination levels permitted under Section
85.03.06 shall be modified and/or adjusted and made to comply with the provisions
of 85.03.06 within 30 days of the effective date of this subsection.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
E. For purposes of amortization, after the effective date of this subsection, the Zoning
Administrator shall cause to be made a list of every existing sign that fails to comply
with Section 85.01.05 H, and the size, height, and/or setback provisions of Chapter
85 as amended, and shall provide written notification to the permit holder of each
such non-conforming sign describing the non-conformity and advising the permit
holder that the sign may be continued for a period not to exceed eight (8) years
from the date of such notification.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-10
85.01.08 Appeals:
A. Procedure
1. Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling or order from the Building
Inspector, Zoning Administrator, or any other City official in connection with
an application for a sign permit may appeal that decision to the Board of
Appeals and request a variance from the requirements of this Chapter. The
appeal shall be made by filing an application for a hearing with the
Department. The application shall specify the grounds for the appeal. The
Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application and all other documents
relating to the appeal to the Board of Appeals. Upon receipt of the Appeal
Application, the Building Inspector shall administratively establish a date of
the Public Hearing. The public hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days
of the receipt of a complete application or placed on the agenda of the
next occurring agenda of the Board of Appeals, whichever is later, in order
to meet the notice requirements set forth below.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
2. The Zoning Administrator shall notify all owners of real property within 300
feet of the real property that is proposed as the site of the sign subject to the
appeal. The notice shall be sent by U.S. Mail to the owners at the address
listed with the Troy Assessing Department, and shall be postmarked no less
than 14 days before the date of the Public Hearing.
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
3. A final decision on an appeal shall be made by the Board of Appeals within
30 days of the public hearing, unless a final decision is tabled or postponed
for the purpose of receiving additional information needed to make a final
decision or if it is tabled or postponed at the request of the applicant.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
B. Powers of the Board of Appeals
1. Subject to the provisions of the following subsection, the Board of Appeals
shall grant specific variances from the requirements of this Chapter, upon a
showing of each of the following:
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
a. Exceptional characteristics of the property for which the variance is
sought make compliance with the requirements of this Chapter
substantially more difficult than would be the case for the great
majority of properties in the same zoning district. Characteristics of
property which shall be considered include exceptional narrowness,
shallowness, smallness, irregular shape, topography, vegetation, and
other similar characteristics; and
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-11
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
b. The characteristics which make compliance with the requirements of
this Chapter difficult must be related to the premises for which the
variance is sought, not some other location; and
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
c. The characteristics which make compliance with the requirements of
this Chapter difficult shall not be of a personal nature; and
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
d. The characteristics which make compliance with the requirements of
this Chapter difficult must not have been created by the owner of the
premises, a previous owner, or the applicant; and
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
e. The proposed variance will not be harmful or alter the essential
character of the area in which the property is located, will not impair
an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or
unreasonably increase congestion in public streets, or increase the
danger of fire or endanger public safety, or unreasonably diminish or
impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in
any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or
welfare of the inhabitants of the City.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
2. Limitation on Variances: In no case shall any variance be granted that
would result in a sign that exceeds the height, size, or setback provisions of
this Chapter by 25% or that would increase the number of signs permitted by
this Chapter by more than 25%.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
85.01.09 Violations
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain, enlarge, alter,
move, or convert any sign in the City of Troy, or cause or permit the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. Any
person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be responsible for
committing a Municipal Civil Infraction subject to the provisions of Chapter 100 of
the Code of the City of Troy. Each day that a violation continues is deemed a
separate Municipal Civil Infraction. Sanctions for each violation of Chapter 85
shall include a fine of not more than $500, costs, damages and injunctive orders
as authorized by Chapter 100. Any sign constituting an immediate hazard to
health and safety is deemed a nuisance and may be removed by the Zoning
Administrator at the expense of the owner of the sign or other responsible party,
in the discretion of the Zoning Administrator.
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-12
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
B. Signs in Public Right-of-Way: In addition to the penalties prescribed in paragraph
85.01.09 A, any sign erected in violation of this Chapter may be removed by the
Zoning Administrator or his/her authorized representative and stored in a safe
location for at least 48 hours. During this period of time, the owner of the sign may
obtain the sign from the Zoning Administrator upon request and payment of a fee of
Fifty Dollars ($50) for each sign to cover the costs of removal and storage. After 48
hours, the Zoning Administrator may dispose of the sign.
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
C. Public Nuisance: Signs installed after the effective date of the adoption or
subsequent amendment of this Chapter that are in violation of this Chapter are
hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be abated by the City. The City
can take any legal action to abate the public nuisance. The collection of removal
fees from the Owner, Sign Erector, or other responsible person shall not preclude
the City from prosecuting the responsible person.
85.02.00 General Provisions
85.02.01 Construction Requirements
A. Material Requirement: All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformity to
the provisions for materials, loads, and stresses of the latest adopted edition of the
Michigan Building Code and the requirements of this Chapter.
B. Fastenings: All signs must be erected in such a manner and with such materials to
remain safe and secure during the period of use and all bolts, cables, and other
parts of such signs shall be kept painted and free from corrosion. Any defect due to
the fault of the Sign Erector shall be repaired by the Sign Erector.
C. Revolving Signs: Signs that revolve shall make no more than four complete
revolutions per minute.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
D. Revolving Signs: Signs that revolve shall make no more than four complete
revolutions per minute.
E. Proximity to Electrical Conductors: No sign shall be erected so that any part,
including cables, guys, etc, will be within six feet of any electrical conductor, electric
light pole, street lamp, traffic light, or other public utility pole or standard.
85.02.02 Illuminated Signs:
A. Illumination: Only listed electrical devices shall be used for the illumination of signs.
These listed electrical devices shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the regulations adopted by the City of Troy. No open spark or flame
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-13
may be used for display purposes unless specifically approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
(Rev. 06-07-2010)
B. Shielding from Residential Districts: Any lighting used to illuminate signs shall be
directed away from and shall be shielded from any adjacent residential zoning
districts and shall not adversely affect driver visibility on adjacent public
thoroughfares.
C. Electronic message signs shall be permitted subject to the sign regulations set forth
in Section 85.03.06.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
85.02.03 Identification of Sign Erector:
A. Sign Erector's Imprint: Every sign, other than temporary signs herein defined, must
carry the identification of the Sign Erector, in clearly legible letters.
B. Re-hanging: In case of re-hanging or re-erection of any sign, the Sign Erector must
place his/her identification and the date of the re-hanging on the sign.
85.02.04 Measurement of Signs:
A. Sign Area: For the purpose of this Chapter, the area of the sign shall include the
total area within any circle, triangle, rectangle or other geometric shape enclosing
the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any similar figure, together
with any frame, ground sign support, or other material forming an integral part of
the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it
is placed, and is further calculated as follows:
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
1. Single Face Sign: For a single face sign, the area shall be computed as the
total exposed exterior surface in square feet.
2. Multi-faced Signs: When the sign has two or more faces, the area of all
faces shall be included in computing the area of the sign.
Exceptions:
1. For a sign that has two or more faces placed back to back, the area
shall be computed as one-half the total exposed exterior surface area
in square feet.
2. For a sign that has two or more faces so arranged that the faces are
greater than 24 inches from one another or such sign with any two
faces that form a "V" is greater than 15 degrees, the area shall be
computed as a single face sign.
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-14
3. Ground Signs: Support poles, bases, reveals, or similar components not
exceeding 24 inches in thickness or depth shall not be included in the area
computation.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
4. Wall Signs: When a sign consists solely of writing, representation, emblems,
logos, or any other figure or similar character which is painted or mounted on
the wall of a building or a self-supporting wall or fence, without distinguishing
border, the area of such sign shall be computed as if it were framed by a
border consisting of horizontal and vertical lines touching the outer limits of
the sign and extending not more than one foot from smaller sign elements.
However, in no instance shall there be any line having a dimension of less
than one foot.
(Renumbered: 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
B. Sign Height: The height of the sign is measured from the ground to the highest
point of the sign from the ground.
85.02.05 Allowable Signs:
A. The Zoning District Regulations and Table 85.02.05 set forth the allowable signs in
each zoning district. These are in addition to the signage that is exempted from
permits by Section 85.01.04 A.
B. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed so as to prohibit ideological or noncommercial
advertising on any sign on which commercial advertising is allowed.
C. Specific Zoning District Regulations
1. R-1 One Family Residential and RT One Family Attached Residential
Districts: Signs in R-1 and RT districts shall be allowed as follows:
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
a. For non-single family uses, one sign not to exceed 100 square feet
in area.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
b. For one, two, and multiple family housing development entrances, a
maximum of two signs not exceeding a total of 100 square feet in
area.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
c. For one, two, and multiple family housing developments under
construction, one sign not to exceed 100 square feet in area is
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-15
allowed until such time as a certificate of occupancy is issued for all
units in the development.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
2. Multiple-Family, UR Urban Residential, MHP Manufactured Housing and CF
Community Facilities Districts: Signs in MF, UR, MHP and CF Districts
shall be allowed as follows:
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
a. One sign not to exceed 100 square feet in area.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
b. One additional sign not to exceed 36 square feet in area.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
c. No sign shall be located closer than 30 feet to any property line of an
adjacent R-1 or RT District.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
3. Office, OM Office Mixed Use and R-C Districts: Signs in O, OM, and RC
districts shall be allowed as follows:
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
a. One ground sign for each building in accordance with Table
85.02.05.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
b. One additional ground sign for each building, not to exceed thirty-six
square feet in area, if the site fronts on a major thoroughfare.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
c. Any number of wall signs, such that the total combined area of all wall
signs for each tenant shall not exceed 10% of the front area of the
structure or tenant area. Wall signs must be located on the face of
the area that is occupied by the tenant.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
d. No sign shall be located closer than 30 feet to any property line of an
adjacent R-1 or RT district.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
4. CB, Community Business, GB General Business and PV Planned Vehicle
Sales: Signs in CB, GB, and PV shall be allowed as follows:
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-16
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
a. One ground sign in accordance with Table 85.02.05.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
b. The required setback for ground signs from adjacent residentially
zoned property shall be the same as for buildings within the zoning
district.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
c. Any number of wall signs, such that the total combined area of all wall
signs for each tenant shall not exceed 10% of the front area of the
structure or tenant area. Wall signs must be located on the face of the
area that is occupied by the tenant.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
d. An automobile dealership within the PV district shall be allowed one
additional ground sign not to exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area
per side.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
5. IB, Integrated Industrial and Business District: Signs in the IB District shall
be allowed as follows:
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
a. One ground sign in accordance with Table 85.02.05.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
b. One additional ground sign, not to exceed thirty-six square feet in
area, if the site fronts on a major thoroughfare.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
c. Any number of wall signs, such that the total combined area of all
wall signs for each tenant shall not exceed 10% of the front area of
the structure or tenant area. Wall signs must be located on the face
of the area that is occupied by the tenant.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
d. No sign shall be located closer than 50 feet to any property line of an
adjacent R-1 or RT district.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
6. BB Big Beaver, MR Maple Road, and NN Neighborhood Node Districts:
Signs in the BB, MR, and NN Districts shall be allowed as follows:
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-17
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
a. One ground sign for each building in accordance with Table
85.02.06.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
b. One additional ground sign for each building, not to exceed thirty-six
square feet in area if the site fronts on a major thoroughfare.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
c. Any number of wall signs, such that the total combined area of all
wall signs for each tenant shall not exceed 10% of the front area of
the structure or tenant area. Wall signs must be located on the face
of the area that is occupied by the tenant.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
d. Interior or exterior signs, including signs affixed to windows, must
comply with the Transparency Requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
e. One pedestrian-scaled wall sign or projecting sign per tenant,
provided it does not exceed twelve square feet in area and does not
project more than forty eight (48) inches from the wall.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
TABLE 85.02.05
STANDARDS FOR GROUND SIGNS
Zoning District Minimum
Setbacks*
Maximum
Height Maximum Area
All R and C-F 10 ft. 12 ft. See Section 85.02.05 C
(1) & 85.02.05 C (2)
All CB, GB, BB,
IB, MR, NN, O,
R-C and PV
0 ft. 10 ft. 50 sq. ft.
20 ft. 20 ft. 100 sq. ft.
* Indicates setback from existing street right-of-way, or from planned right-of-way (as
indicated in Master Thoroughfare Plan), whichever is greater.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
85.03.00 General Exceptions: The regulations of this Chapter shall be subject to the
following exceptions.
85.03.01 Special Event Signs
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-18
A. Signs that will be displayed for a period of seven (7) consecutive days or less are
allowed as long as a Special Event Sign permit is issued. The application for a
Special Event sign permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, and shall
include the following:
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
1. Plans indicating the following:
a. Site layout (building location, parking, etc.)
b. Number, size and location of proposed signs, including banners,
flags, cold air balloons, and other forms of signage.
2. Documentation detailing desired dates for the placement of the Special
Event signs.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
3. If the applicant for the Special Event Sign permit is not the property owner
of the site where the signage is proposed to be located, then the written
approval of property owner must be submitted with the application.
4. The required application fee, as set forth in Chapter 60 of the Troy City
Code.
Exception: All fees for a Special Event sign application shall be waived for
all non-profit applicants who provide satisfactory proof of the non-profit
status to the Zoning Administrator.
B. A Special Event Sign permit shall be issued for not more than seven (7)
consecutive days within any twelve (12) month period.
C. No more than four off-site signs related to a Special Event may be permitted. Such
off-site signs shall each be limited to six (6) square feet in area. Applicant must
also submit written approval from the owners of properties where the off-site
Special Event Signs are proposed to be located. This permission must be provided
prior to the issuance of a permit.
85.03.02 Temporary Signs
A. Temporary signs as defined in Section 85.01.03 are allowed without a permit
subject to the following:
1. Size of Temporary Signs: The total aggregate sign area of all temporary
signs on any one site shall not exceed fourteen (14) square feet. The
maximum size of individual temporary signs shall not exceed six square
feet in area. Temporary signs shall not be higher than forty-two (42)
inches above average mean grade of the yard on which it is placed.
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-19
Exceptions:
a. For uses other than one and two family dwellings, temporary signs
for buildings under construction shall be a maximum size of 10% of
the square foot area of the front of the structure, and not more than
10 feet in height.
b. One temporary sign located on vacant land that is for sale or for
lease, when the parcel exceeds two acres in area, shall be allowed
to have a size equal to 15 square feet of sign area per acre of land
or 15 square feet of sign area per 100 lineal feet of thoroughfare
frontage. In no case shall the sign be allowed to exceed 100 square
feet of sign area or be more than 10 feet in height.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
2. Location of Temporary Signs:
a. Temporary signs shall not be attached to any utility pole or be
located within any public right-of-way.
b. Temporary signs shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet to
the edge of the traveled portion of the roadway and shall not be
located in a dedicated right-of-way.
c. Temporary signs shall not be erected in such a manner that they
will or reasonably may be expected to interfere with, obstruct,
confuse or mislead traffic.
d. Temporary signs cannot be placed or constructed so as to create a
hazard of any kind.
e. Prior to the erection or placement of a temporary sign, the
permission of the property owner where the sign is to be located
must be secured.
f. Signs shall be located so as to comply with the corner clearance
requirements of Section 85.01.05 B.
g. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated except as provided in
Section 85.03.06.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
3. Time Limitations for Temporary Signs: Temporary signs shall be removed
within 60 days of placement, except for temporary signs that are located
on real property that is for sale or lease.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-20
85.03.03 Road Closure Construction Signs
One sign, not exceeding 36 square feet in area, shall be permitted for each owner
or tenant of a building located on property adjacent to a road lane that is closed due
to construction activity for a period of 30 or more calendar days. Ground signs shall
not exceed 10 feet in height and shall be located outside of the right-of-way. Wall
signs shall be placed flat against the exterior surface of the building, shall not
project more than 12 inches from the building surface, and shall not project above
the roof or parapet line. Signs shall be removed upon the opening of all road lanes
adjacent to the property.
(Renumbered:. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
85.03.04 Signs on Motor Vehicles
A. No person, corporation, partnership or other legal business entity shall attach a sign
to a motor vehicle, trailer, or other mobile structure where the primary use of such
structure is to provide a base for such sign or to constitute the sign itself. This
provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit identification signs on vehicles used for
normal business purposes, nor shall it be interpreted to prohibit bumper stickers.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
B. No person shall place a sign on a motor vehicle offered for sale or trade except as
follows:
1. Properly licensed auto dealerships and properly licensed used car lots may
place signs on motor vehicles located on the dealership lot.
2. The owner of a motor vehicle may place a sign on or within the vehicle
provided:
a. The vehicle is located only on the vehicle owners residential
property; and
b. Not more than one vehicle with a sign is displayed on the residential
property.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
3. The owner of non-residential property may place or allow to be placed a
sign on or within the vehicle provided that not more than one vehicle is
displayed on the nonresidential property
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
C. Proof that the vehicle described in the citation issued for violating this Section was
parked in violation of this Section, together with proof that the defendant named in
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-21
the citation was at the time of the cited parking the registered owner of the vehicle
constitutes a presumption that the registered owner is responsible for the violation.
(Renumbered; Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
D. Signs on motor vehicles allowed under this Section do not require permits.
(Renumbered; Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
85.03.05 Flags
(Renumbered: 06-07-2010)
A flag adopted by the federal government, a state government, or the local government
may be displayed under the law that adopts its use and as provided below in the following
subsections:
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
A. In residentially zoned districts, two flags and one flag pole may be displayed. Each
flag may not exceed 15 square feet in area and the flag pole may not exceed 25
feet in height.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
B. In nonresidential zoned districts, 4 flags and two flag poles may be displayed. Each
flag may not exceed 15 square feet in area and the flag poles may not exceed 30
feet in height.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
C. One small flag of no more than one square foot in area may be attached to vehicles
on display for sale or rent at vehicle sales and service establishments. Such flags
must be no higher than two feet above the height of the vehicle as if it were
displayed at grade level.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
D. Flags allowed under this Section do not require permits.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
85.03.06 Electronic Message Signs:
A. Where Permitted:
1. Electronic Message Signs (EMS) shall be permitted solely as a ground sign
subject to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
However, only one (1) EMS shall be permitted per premise.
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-22
2. EMS shall be subject to the maximum height and area requirements set
forth in Section 85.02.05, provided that the EMS portion of any ground sign
shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
B. Illumination:
1. No such electronic changeable copy sign shall display an illuminative
brightness of such intensity or brilliance that it impairs the vision or
endangers the safety and welfare of any pedestrian, cyclist, or person
operating a motor vehicle;
2. EMS illumination shall not exceed 0.3 foot candles above ambient light
levels based upon EMS illumination measurement criteria set forth in
Section 85.03.06 B (3) and Table 85.03.06.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
Table 85.03.06
Sign Area Versus Measurement Distance
Area of Sign
sq. ft.
Measurement
(ft.)
10 32
15 39
20 45
25 50
30 55
35 59
40 63
45 67
50 71
55 74
60 77
65 81
70 84
75 87
80 89
85 92
90 95
95 97
100 100
110 105
120 110
130 114
140 118
150 122
160 126
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-23
170 130
180 134
190 138
200 141
*For signs with an area in square feet other than those specifically listed in
the table (i.e., 12 sq ft, 400 sq ft, etc.), the measurement distance may be
calculated with the following formula: Measurement Distance = vArea of
Sign Sq. Ft. x 100
3. EMS Illumination Measurement Criteria: The illuminance of an EMS shall
be measured with an illuminance meter set to measure foot candles
accurate to at least two decimals. Illuminance shall be measured on all
sides, at night, with the EMS off, and again with the EMS displaying a
white image for a full color-capable EMS, or a solid message for a singlecolor
EMS. Sign measurements shall be taken at night. All measurements
shall be taken as close as practical to a perpendicular plane of the sign,
measured at a height of 60 inches, at the distance determined by the total
square footage of the EMS as set forth in the accompanying Sign Area of
a Sign versus Measurement Distance table.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
C. Message Display and Communication:
1. The display time of an EMS shall not be less than one minute per message
display.
2. The transition or change of message shall appear instantaneous without the
use of special effects such as dissolve or fade.
3. An EMS shall not exhibit any characteristics of movement or flashing and
shall not use techniques defined as dynamic frame effect, scroll, or travel.
4. No EMS message display shall resemble or simulate any warning or danger
signal, or any official traffic control device, sign, signal or light or have the
brilliance or intensity that will interfere with any official traffic sign, device or
signal.
5. An EMS shall not include any audio message.
(Rev. 09-24-2018; Effective 10-04-2018)
D. Miscellaneous:
1. No sign shall be permitted to operate unless it is equipped with:
a. A default mechanism that will cause the sign to revert immediately to
a black screen if the sign or any component thereof malfunctions.
Chapter 85 - Signs
85-24
b. A non-glare panel covering the electronic changeable copy display or
other equivalent method approved by the city to substantially reduce
glare.
c. Dimming Capabilities: All permitted EMS shall be equipped with a
sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient
illumination and programmed to automatically dim according to
ambient light conditions.
d. A written certification from a sign manufacturer or other approved
testing agency that the light intensity has been preset to conform to
the brightness and display standards established herein and that the
preset levels are protected from end user manipulation by password
protected software or other method.
2. The owner or controller of said electronic changeable copy sign must adjust
the sign to meet these brightness standards in accordance with this chapter.
The adjustment must be made immediately upon notice of non-compliance
from the City.
Chapter 85A  Political Signs
85A-1
Chapter 85A-Political Signs of the Code of the City of Troy is repealed by the Council of
the City of Troy, Oakland County Michigan, at a Regular Meeting of the City Council held
at City Hall, 500 W. Big Beaver, Troy, MI on the 12th day of September, 2005 and is
effective ten (10) days from the date hereof or upon publication, whichever shall later
occur.
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-1
1. Short Title. This chapter shall be known as the City of Troy Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Ordinance.
2. Purpose and Authority
A. The purpose of this ordinance is to control accelerated soil erosion and
sedimentation in all construction practices and other earth change activities
within the City, and protect the Waters of the State.
B. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to MCL 324.9106. Part 91, Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, being Sections 324.9101 to 324.9123a of
the Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated, and any amendment thereto, and Rules
promulgated under Part 91, and any amendments thereto, are hereby
incorporated into this ordinance and adopted by reference as part of this
ordinance.
C. The City of Troy Engineering Design Standards and Details for Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control as developed by the City Engineer and contained in the
City of Troy Development Standards and Standard Detail Sheets are
incorporated into this ordinance as the control measures and practices which
must be complied with under this ordinance. In addition, the specifications and
recommendations regarding soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
and practices as provided by the "Guidebook of Best Management Practices for
Michigan Watersheds", published by the Water Bureau, Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality ("BMP guidebook") or subsequent version may be used
for additional information. A complete copy of the BMP guidebook shall be kept
available for public inspection at the Engineering Department at City Hall.
D. The City of Troy Engineering Department is hereby designated as the
municipal enforcing agency responsible for the administration and enforcement
of Part 91, the Rules and this ordinance. The Troy City Engineer is authorized
to administer and enforce Part 91, the Rules and this ordinance.
E. The Troy City Engineer and/or his designees shall be the enforcement agents for
this ordinance and are authorized to issue civil infraction tickets, stop work orders
or to take any other actions allowed under Part 91, the Rules and this ordinance.
The City Engineer and the person(s) designated shall have completed the entire
Part 91 soil erosion and sedimentation control training and valid certificate issued
by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
3. Construction and Definitions:
A. Construction:
1. For the purpose of this ordinance, terms, words and phrases shall have
the meanings defined in Part 91 and the Rules unless otherwise defined
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-2
in this ordinance. If there is a conflict between definitions in Part 91 and
the Rules, Part 91 shall control. If there is a conflict in definitions between
Part 91, the Rules and/or this ordinance, this ordinance shall control if the
ordinance is more restrictive than Part 91 or the Rules.
2. Words or terms not specifically defined herein shall have the meaning
commonly attributed to the word or term in the Standard English grammar.
3. The terms shall or will are mandatory; the term may is discretionary.
B. Definitions:
1. Accelerated Soil Erosion: The increased loss of the land surface that
occurs as a result of human activities.
2. Certification: A signed written statement by the City Engineer, or the
designated representative charged with enforcement of this ordinance,
that specific construction, inspections, and tests where required have
been performed and comply with this ordinance.
3. City: City of Troy, Michigan.
4. City Engineer: City Engineer for the City of Troy or any person designated
by the City Engineer to act on his/her behalf in the administration and
enforcement of this ordinance.
5. County: Oakland County, Michigan.
6. Design Standards: Construction methods and detailed drawings issued
by the City Engineer, which pertain to this ordinance.
7. Designated Agent: A person who has written authorization from the
landowner to sign the application and secure a permit in the landowners
name.
8. Earth Changes: A human-made change in the natural cover or
topography of land, including cut and fill activities, which may result in or
contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the Waters of the State.
Earth change does not include the practice of plowing and tilling soil for
the purpose of crop production.
9. Earth Disrupting Costs: The estimated total construction cost of all private
or public improvements, which involve an earth change, excluding
buildings.
10. Existing Grade: The ground elevation at a site prior to any earth change.
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-3
11. Finished Grade: The final ground elevation conforming to the proposed
plan for an earth change.
12. Follow-up Maintenance: Maintenance necessary on all soil erosion or
sedimentation control measures as a part of earth-change activities as
well as after earth-change activities has been completed.
13. Lake: The Great Lakes and all natural and artificial inland lakes or
impoundments that have definite banks, a bed, visible evidence of a
continued occurrence of water, and surface area of water that is equal to,
or greater than, 1 acre. Lake does not include sediment basins and
basins constructed for the sole purpose of stormwater retention, cooling
water, or treating polluted water.
14. Landowner: The person who owns property or holds a recorded easement
on the property or who is engaged in construction in a public right of way
in accordance with sections 13, 14, 15, and 16 of Act No. 368 of the
Public Acts of 1925, as amended, being Sections 247.183, 247.184,
247.185 and 247.186 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended.
15. Municipal Enforcement Agency: (MEA) An agency designated by a
municipality under MCL 324.9106 to enforce and administer Part 91, the
Rules and/or a local ordinance. For purposes of this ordinance the
municipal enforcement agency designated by the City of Troy is the City
of Troy Engineering Department.
16. Nonerosive Velocity: A speed of water movement that is not conducive to
the development of accelerated soil erosion.
17. Part 91: Part 91 of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended,
being Sections 324.9101 to 324.9123a of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
18. Periodic Maintenance: maintenance necessary on soil erosion or
sedimentation control measures to preserve effectiveness of the
measures.
19. Permanent Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Control
measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion and
sedimentation and which are maintained after project completion.
20. Rules: The administrative rules promulgated by the Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality pursuant to the administrative procedures act of
1969, 1969 PA 306, as amended. MCL 24.201, to MCL 24.328, as
amended and referenced under MCL 324.9104(1).
21. Runoff: Rainfall which does not percolate into the ground or which is not
absorbed by vegetative transpiration or other natural process on the site
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-4
and which runs off the surface onto adjoining properties or into Waters of
the State.
22. Sediment: Sediment means solid particulate matter, including both
mineral and organic matter that is in suspension in water, is being
transported, or has been removed from its site of origin by the actions of
wind, water, or gravity and has been deposited elsewhere.
23. Sediment basin: A naturally occurring or constructed depression used for
the sole purpose of capturing sediment during or after an earth change
activity.
24. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Permit: A permit required under
Chapter 86 of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances, known as the Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. Used to control erosion,
not a permit to allow soil erosion.
25. Stabilization: The establishment of vegetation or the proper placement,
grading, or covering of soil to ensure its resistance to soil erosion, sliding,
or other earth movement.
26. Staging: Dividing a construction site into phases. Phase grading and
stabilization are completed in each phase before proceeding to the next
phase as required under Engineering Standards.
27. State: State of Michigan.
28. Storm Water Retention Basin: An area which is constructed to capture
surface water runoff and which does not discharge directly to a lake or
stream through an outlet. Water leaves the basin by infiltration and
evaporation.
29. Stream: A river, creek, or other surface watercourse, which may or may
not be serving as a drain as defined in Act No. 40 of the Public Acts of
1956, as amended, being 280.1 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws,
and which has definite banks, a bed, and visible evidence of the
continued flow or continued occurrence of water, including the connecting
waters of the Great Lakes.
30. Temporary Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Interim
control measures that are installed or constructed to control soil erosion
and sedimentation and which are not maintained after project completion.
31. Waters of the State: Means the Great Lakes and their connecting waters,
inland lakes and streams as defined in rules promulgated under this part,
and wetlands regulated under Part 303 of the Natural Resource and
Environmental Protection Act (NREPA).
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-5
32. Wetlands: Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances
does support, wetland vegetation or aquatic life, and is commonly referred
to as a bog, swamp, or marsh, as regulated under Part 303 of the Natural
Resource and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA).
4. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Requirements
A. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to engage in and/or
maintain any earth change activity in such a manner as to allow uncontrolled
accelerated soil erosion and sedimentation to be transported off site onto
adjacent properties and into the Waters of the State.
B. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to engage in and/or
maintain any earth change activity, which is not in compliance with Part 91, the
Rules and/or the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures (SESC) shall be included
with plans and specifications for a project, and submitted to the City with site
plans and the soil erosion permit application for review. A copy of the approved
plans will be kept at the site where it will be available for inspection. SESC
plans will contain all Rule 1703 information and comply with Part 91 Rule
requirements and design standards prepared by the City Engineer.
D. No person shall engage in and/or maintain an earth change activity which will
disturb more than 1 acre of land, or which lies within 500 feet of the waters edge
of a lake or stream, regardless of the amount of land disturbed, without a valid
SESC permit issued under this ordinance.
1. To assure compliance, all building permit applications will require any
construction project to apply for a soil erosion permit. Upon submittal of
application, the City Engineer or his/her designee will issue a soil erosion
permit, if they meet the requirements found in this subsection.
5. Permit and Plan Requirements; Permit Applications; Soil Erosion & Sedimentation
Control (SESC) Plans; Review Procedures and Requirements
A. After the effective date of this ordinance, no person shall maintain or undertake
an earth change on any land within the City that requires a soil erosion permit
without a soil erosion permit and approved soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan as provided by Part 91, the Rules, and this ordinance.
1. An application for a soil erosion permit shall be submitted to the City
engineer by the owner of the land upon which the earth change is
proposed to be made or by the owners designated agent. The applicant,
if not the owner, shall have written authorization from the landowners to
sign the soil erosion permit application and secure a soil erosion permit in
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-6
the landowners name.
2. The application shall be on forms provided by the Engineering
Department and accompanied by an application review and inspection fee
made payable to the City of Troy in the amount provided in the
Development Standards adopted by the resolution of the City Council.
3. The application shall also be accompanied by a soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan that includes the following required data:
a. A vicinity sketch of the site location and the proximity of any
proposed earth change to the surface Waters of the State or to
drains or storm water inlets leading directly to the surface Waters
of the State.
b. A boundary line survey or legal description of the site.
c. The name, address, and telephone number of the landowner or
designated agent, and of the developer, if different form the
landowner.
d. A plan of the site at a scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch or
as otherwise determined adequate by the City Engineer, showing
existing topography or slope description at five-foot intervals.
e. A soil survey map or written description of the soil types of the
exposed land area contemplated for the earth change.
f. Details for the proposed each change including:
1) A description of the location of the physical limits of each
proposed earth change.
2) A description of the location of all existing and proposed onsite
drainage and dewatering facilities.
3) The timing sequence of each proposed earth change, such
as starting and completion dates of the development
sequence and time exposure of each area prior to the
completion of effective soil erosion and sediment control
measures.
4) The location and description for installing and removing all
proposed temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures and their established cost.
5) A description and the location of all proposed permanent
soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and their
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-7
estimated cost.
6) A statement of the quantity of the excavation and fill
involved.
7) A program proposal for the continued maintenance of all
permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
which remain after the project completion, including the
designation of the person or organization responsible for the
maintenance. Maintenance responsibilities shall become a
part of any sales or exchange agreement for the land on
which the permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures are located.
4. The soil erosion and sedimentation plan shall be reviewed by the city
Engineer and/or his designee.
5. All earth changes shall be designed, constructed, implemented and
maintained in accordance with the minimum requirements for earth
changes as provided by Part 91, the Rules, and this ordinance, and shall
also comply with any structural, vegetative, or managerial practices to
effectively prevent or reduce soil erosion and sedimentation as
determined necessary by the City Engineer. In determining the adequacy
and effectiveness of the design, implementation and maintenance of
proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control measures for purposes
of this ordinance the City Engineer shall consider:
a. Site-specific factors and information of the type required to be
included in the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for the
property; and
b. The specifications and recommendations regarding soil erosion
and sedimentation control measures and practices as provided by
the Guidebook of Best Management Practices for Michigan
Watersheds, published by the Water Bureau, Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality (BMP guidebook) or
subsequent version. A complete copy of the BMP guidebook shall
be kept available for public inspection at the Engineering
Department at City Hall.
6. The City Engineer shall approve, disapprove or require modification of the
application for the soil erosion permit and accompanying SESC plan
within 30 calendar days following receipt of a complete application.
Notification of disapproval shall be made by certified mail. If the
application is disapproved, the City Engineer shall advise the applicant of
the reasons for disapproval and conditions required for approval. The
requirement of notification by certified mail is not necessary if the
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-8
applicant is personally given written approval or disapproval of the
application.
7. A soil erosion permit shall not be issued where:
a. The proposed work would cause uncontrolled soil erosion and
sedimentation; or
b. The proposed work would cause hazards to the public safety and
welfare; or
c. The work, as proposed by the applicant, will damage any public or
private property or interfere with any existing drainage course in
such a manner as to cause damage to any adjacent property or
result in the deposition of debris or sediment on any public way or
into any Waters of the State or create an unreasonable hazard to
persons or property; or
d. The land area for which work is subject to geological hazard to the
extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate
or sufficiently reduce settlement, slope instability or any other such
hazard to persons or property; or the land area for which the work
is proposed lies within the one hundred (100) year floodplain of any
stream, unless a permit from the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality accompanies the application and a
hydrologic report prepared by a licensed an professional engineer
is submitted to certify that the proposed work will have, in the City
Engineers opinion, no detrimental influence on the public welfare
or upon the total development of the watershed.
8. No soil erosion permit shall be issued until the applicant has paid
applicable permit and inspection fees to the City Treasurer in accordance
with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. The City
Engineer shall calculate the fee after reviewing the application and plan.
9. Upon a determination by the City Engineer that an applicant has met all
applicable requirements under this ordinance and other applicable laws
and regulations, and that the applicant has paid all applicable fees, the
City Engineer shall issue a permit for the proposed earth change. The
permit shall be kept available on the site of the proposed earth change at
all times for inspection by the City.
10. If the earth change for which a permit has been issued has not been
commenced within one year from the date of issuance of the permit, the
permit shall lapse, provided that the City Engineer may extend the time for
commencement of the earth change if the permitee requires an extension
prior to the expiration of the initial period and no material change of
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-9
circumstances has occurred.
11. A soil erosion permit issued under this ordinance shall not relieve the
permitee from complying with any other applicable statutes, ordinances,
rules or regulations.
12. The failure to comply with any term or condition of an approved permit or
to timely complete all work as set forth in an approved plan constitutes a
violation of this ordinance.
13. An authorized public agency as defined by Part 91 is exempt from
obtaining a soil erosion permit but shall notify the City Engineering
Department in advance of such proposed earth change.
14. An earth change activity that does not require a permit under this
ordinance is not exempt from enforcement procedures under this
ordinance, Part 91 & the Rules, if the activity exempted by Part 91, the
Rules and/or this ordinance causes or results in a violation of Part 91, the
Rules and/or this ordinance.
6. Inspections:
A. The City Engineer or his designee shall inspect all work covered by a soil erosion
permit issued pursuant to this ordinance and is hereby authorized to enter
property in the City covered by a permit for the purpose of performing any duties
under this ordinance. Inspection fees shall be paid as provided according to the
fee schedule.
B. The City Engineer or his designee may enter at all reasonable times in or upon
any private or public property for the purpose of inspection and investigating
conditions or practices that may be a violation of Part 91, the Rules, or this
ordinance.
7. Permit Required Prior To Issuance Of Building Permit:
A. A building permit shall not be issued for any property upon which a soil erosion
permit is required until the soil erosion permit has been issued for the property as
provided by this ordinance.
8. Logging, Mining, Land Plowing Or Tilling And Permit Exemption:
A. A person engaged in the logging industry, the mining industry, or the plowing or
tilling of land for the purpose of crop production or the harvesting of crops is not
required to obtain a permit under this ordinance. However, all earth changes
associated with the activities listed in this section shall conform to the same
standards as if they required a permit under this ordinance. The exemption
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-10
from obtaining a permit under this subsection does not include either of the
following:
1. Access roads to and from the site where active mining or logging is taking
place.
2. Ancillary activities associated with logging and mining.
B. This ordinance does not apply to metallic mineral mining activity that is
regulated under a mining and reclamation plan that contains soil erosion and
sedimentation control provisions and that is approved by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ).
C. A person is not required to obtain a permit from the City for earth changes
associated with well locations, surface facilities, flow lines, or access roads
relating to oil or gas exploration and development activities regulated under Part
615 of Act 451 of 1994; MCL 324.61501, et seq., if the application to drill and
operate under Part 615 contains a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan
that is approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ)
under Part 615. However, those earth changes shall conform to the same
standards as required for a permit under this ordinance. This subsection does
not apply to a multisource commercial hazardous waste disposal well as defined
in Section 62506a of Act 451.
D. As used in this section, mining does not include the removal of clay, gravel,
sand, peat or topsoil.
E. This ordinance does not apply to exempted activities identified in section 9115a
of Part 91 and Rule 323.1705.
F. The City Engineer may grant a permit waiver for an earth change after receiving
a signed affidavit from the landowner stating that the earth change will disturb
less than two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet and that the earth change
will not contribute sediment to lakes or streams.
9. Reduction of Soil Erosion or Sedimentation by Owner:
A. A person who owns land on which an earth change has been made that may
result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the Waters of the State
shall implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
that will effectively reduce soil erosion and sedimentation from the land on which
the earth change has been made.
B. This section is effective whether or not this ordinance requires a soil erosion
permit.
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-11
10. Notice of Violation; Cost of Recovery
A. If the City Engineer determine that soil erosion and sedimentation of the Waters
of the State or adjacent properties, has or is reasonably likely to occur from a
parcel of land in violation of this ordinance, the City Engineer shall notify the
person who owns the land by certified mail, with return receipt required, of that
determination. The notice shall contain a description of the violation and what
must be done to remedy the violation and shall specify a time to comply with this
ordinance.
B. Within five days after the notice of violation is mailed, the landowner shall
implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in
conformance with the ordinance, as specified by the notice or as otherwise
determined adequate by the City Engineer to prevent soil erosion and
sedimentation of the Waters of the State.
C. If after five days from the date that a notice of violation is mailed, the condition of
the land, in the opinion of the City Engineer, may result, in or contribute to, soil
erosion and sedimentation of adjacent properties or the Waters of the State, and
if soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with Part 91,
the Rules and this ordinance are not in place, the City may enter upon the land
and construct, implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures in conformance with Part 91, the Rules and this ordinance. The City
shall not expend more than $10,000.00 for the cost of the work, materials, or
labor unless the notice of violation contained written notice that such costs might
exceed $10,000.00. Further, if more than $10,000.00 is to be expended under
this section, then the work shall not begin until at least 10 days of the notice of
violation is mailed.
D. All expenses incurred by the City under this section to construct, implement, or
maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures to bring the land into
conformance with Part 91, the Rules and this ordinance shall be reimbursed to
the City by the person who owns the land. The costs recovered by the City shall
be in addition to any civil fines, damages, expenses or costs payable to the City
as a result of a violation. Further, the abatement by the City of a violation of this
ordinance and subsequent recovery of costs incurred by the City shall not be a
defense to any action by the City against any person for the violation, including
without limitation, any action by the City to collect civil fines, damages, expenses
or costs as authorized by law.
E. The City shall have a lien for the expenses incurred under this section in bringing
the land into conformance with Part 91, the Rules and this ordinance. With
respect to single or multifamily residential property, the lien for such expenses
shall have priority over all liens and encumbrances filed or recorded after the
date of the expenditure. With respect to all other property, the lien for such
expenses shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for
property tax liens under the general property tax act, Act No. 206 of the Public
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-12
Acts of 1893, being Sections 211.1 to 211.157 of the Michigan Complied Laws,
as amended.
11. Enforcement Authority
Upon a finding that there has been a violation of a provision, requirement or condition of
this ordinance or of any permit or plan issued or approved under this ordinance, the City
may take any enforcement action authorized by Part 91, the Rules, this ordinance, or by
other applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. In addition to other remedies
provided in this ordinance, the City Engineers enforcement authority and/or his
designees also includes, without limitation, the ability to issue cease and desist orders
and to revoke soil erosion permits. Failure to comply with a cease and desist order or
revocation of a soil erosion permit shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
12. Municipal Civil Infraction
A. A person who violates any provision of this ordinance is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as provided by law,
plus costs and other sanctions for each day of violation.
B. A person who knowingly violates any provision of this ordinance or knowingly
makes a false statement in an application for a permit or in a soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan is responsible for the payment of a civil fine as
provided by law for each day of violation.
C. A person who knowingly violates any provision of this ordinance after receiving a
notice of determination under section 10a of this ordinance is responsible for the
payment of a civil fine as provided by law for each day of violation.
D. Civil fines collected under subsections A, b, and C above shall be deposited with
the City Treasurer.
E. A default in the payment of a civil fine or costs ordered under this section or an
installation of the fine or costs may be remedied by any means set out in Chapter
100 of the Troy Code of Ordinances or under the Revised Judicature Action, P.A.
261 of 1961, as amended (MCL 600.101, et seq.).
F. Notwithstanding the existence of any other remedy, the City may maintain an
action in its own name in a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction or
other process against a person to restrain or prevent violations of Part 91, the
Rules, or this ordinance.
G. In addition to a fine assessed under this ordinance, a person who violates this
ordinance is liable to the state for damages for injury to, or destruction of, or loss
of natural resources resulting from the violation. The court may order a person
who violates this part to restore the area or areas affected by the violation to their
conditions as existing immediately prior to the violation.
Chapter 86 - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
86-13
H. Each day on which a violation of Part 91, the rules and/or this ordinance
continues constitutes a separate violation and shall be subject to sanctions or
penalties as provided in this section as a separate violation.
I. The Code Enforcement Officers are hereby designated as the authorized City
officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations directing alleged violators to
appear in court.
J. Chapter 100 of the Troy Code of Ordinances shall govern municipal civil
infractions. If there is a conflict between Chapter 100 and Chapter 86, Chapter
86 shall apply.
13. Severability Clause
Should any word, phrase, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance be held
invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of this ordinance shall remain in full
force and effect.
14. Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days from the date hereof or upon
publication, whichever shall later occur.
(06/18/2007)
Chapter 87 - Crime Prevention and Security Standards
87-1
1. Purpose:
It is hereby determined that because of the increase of population and the increase in the
number of non-residential and residential buildings and structures, the risk of crime, fire
and general injury to persons has increased within the City. It is also determined that the
adoption of these crime prevention and security standards, which anticipate, apprise and
recognize the risk of crime and the need for security, will thereby remove the opportunity
for crime, fire and create a safe and secure environment.
It is further determined that these standards are the minimum regulations and controls
of the design, construction, security and crime prevention devices used in all buildings,
structures and building sites in the City necessary to attain these goals of protection of
persons and property and to create a safe and secure environment.
It is still further determined that certain types of facilities that house elderly persons must
have minimum safety regulations to respond to their specific needs. These regulations
take into consideration their limited capabilities to respond in an emergency and their
need for security to minimize the risk of fire and crime hazards.
2. Enforcement:
This chapter shall apply to all new construction and to buildings and structures to which
additions, alterations or both are made. The Police, Fire and Building Departments of the
City, through their authorized employees and representatives, shall enforce this chapter.
The requirements of this chapter are in addition to all other requirements and applicable
codes, including, but not limited to, the BOCA Building Code and the State Building Code.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of other devices or
methods of construction, provided that such devices or methods of construction provide
no lesser degree of safety or security than the minimum requirements set forth in this
Chapter.
3. Appeals:
The decisions of the Chief Building Inspector, concerning whether other devices or
methods of construction may be equal to or better than the requirements of this chapter,
may be appealed to the Building Code of Appeals. The Board's decision shall be final.
4. Parking Structures and Facilities:
The following crime prevention and security design standards are required for all parking
structures or facilities in the City.
A. Ramp surfaces shall be laid with corrugated pavement in place. These will slow
descending vehicles and discourage the use of the ramp by bicycles and
skateboards.
Chapter 87 - Crime Prevention and Security Standards
87-2
B. Stairways or elevators shall be open as much as practical to permit viewing from
the interior and exterior of the structure or facility.
C. Closed circuit television cameras shall be located throughout the structure or
facility and shall be monitored by on-site security personnel as determined by the
Chief of Police or his designee. The cameras shall be situated in vandal proof
housings to reduce acts of destruction or vandalism and to insure their continuous
operation.
D. Microphones and speakers shall be strategically located throughout the structure
or facility and monitored by on-site security personnel as determined by the Chief
of Police or his designee. The system shall allow for constant two-way
communications.
E. The developer or user of the facility or structure must provide the police and fire
departments with emergency access for vehicles attempting to enter the structure
or facility.
F. A posted "fire lane, no parking" roadway shall encircle all freestanding structures or
facilities.
G. Lighting in all areas of the structure of facility shall be at least 1.0 foot candles per
square foot. All lighting fixtures shall have vandal proof polycarbonate type globes
or coverings.
H. All levels that are totally or partially covered shall be equipped with an automatic
fire suppression system as approved by the Fire Chief or his designee.
I. All levels are to be equipped with a dry standpipe system with connections
provided so that any vehicles parked on the level can be reached with 100 feet of
fire hose and a 30 foot stream, as approved by the Fire Chief or his designee.
J. A mechanical smoke control system shall be provided where necessary as
determined by the Chief Building Inspector or his designee. The system shall
provide 6 air changes per hour in the affected areas.
K. At least 2 pedestrian exits shall be provided from each level. These exits shall be
remote or separated as far as practical from each other.
L. Access for firefighting shall be provided by a grade level exterior door with direct
access to pedestrian exit stairwells. The vehicle entrances and exits shall also be
available for firefighting access.
5. Housing Facilities for the Elderly:
A. Lighting in parking lots, carports, and in the area of walkways, shall be at least 1.0
foot candles per square foot. All lighting shall be operational between the hours of
Chapter 87 - Crime Prevention and Security Standards
87-3
dusk to dawn. All light fixtures shall be protected with vandal resistant
polycarbonate globes or coverings.
B. Lighting in interior hallways, commonly shared basements and/or utility rooms shall
be continuously operational. All light fixtures shall have vandal resistant
polycarbonate globes or coverings.
C. Storage lockers, whether they be situated in basements and/or utility rooms, shall
extend from the floor to ceiling with no openings at the top or bottom. Doors or
gates shall be equipped with hardware that is non-removable from the exterior.
D. All crawl spaces, attic hatches and similar openings shall be secured so as to
prevent entry form the space/opening into individual apartments.
E. There shall be positioned at each entrance an illustrated diagram representative of
the layout of the complex. The diagram shall be illuminated and protected with a
vandal resistant covering.
F. Street addresses shall be prominently displayed on all four walls of individual
buildings within the complex. The numerals shall be at least 4" in height and of a
color that contrasts with the background. If there is insufficient exterior lighting in
the area, the address shall be illuminated by means of a light fixture. Light fixtures
shall be protected with vandal resistant polycarbonate globes or coverings.
G. All buildings in a complex housing the elderly shall be fully protected with approved
quick response automatic fire suppression installed in accordance with NFIPA 13.
H. Individual Apartment/Unit Entry Doors
Swing-type doors on the exterior periphery of residential dwelling units shall satisfy
the following requirements:
1. A wood door leaf shall be of solid core construction and have a total
thickness of 1-3/4" between inner and outer surfaces in the zone of the
perimeter stiles and rails. Total thickness of a metal door leaf shall also be a
minimum of 1/3/4". A metal door leaf shall have a reinforced lock block to
accept appropriate lockset.
2. Locks shall have 1" throw deadbolt and 1/2" throw deadlatch. The deadbolt
shall be made of a hardened material. The inside knob shall retract the
upper and lower bolt in one operation. Key operation shall be prohibited for
reasons of life safety of the occupants.
3. Lock cylinders shall be so designed or protected as to preclude
disassembly from the exterior by twisting, prying, pulling or other
manipulation.
Chapter 87 - Crime Prevention and Security Standards
87-4
4. Double doors with an inactive leaf shall be furnished with two 1" vertical
throw bolts extending into metal strike plates. One vertical through bolt shall
be mounted at the header and the second shall be mounted at the
threshold.
5. Metal strike plates shall be required for all locking devices and shall have a
minimum thickness of .062 inches (1.5mm).
6. Hinges for outswinging doors shall be equipped with nonremovable hinge
pins or an interlock to preclude removal of the door from the exterior by
removing the hinge pins.
7. Hinges and strike plates will be affixed to the jamb with at least No. 8 size
screws, or equivalent, penetrating at least 2" into solid backing beyond the
surface to which they are attached.
8. Keyed locks shall have a minimum of five tumblers or be of such design as
to provide a minimum of 10,000 possible inter-change free combinations.
9. A system of construction keying must be provided which will insure that the
use of construction keys will be precluded after occupancy.
10. If a single or active leaf of a double door is not equipped with glazing, a
door viewer must be installed. The viewer shall allow for a 180 degree field
of vision and be installed at a height so that any adult in the household will
be able to comfortably utilize it.
I. Entry Doors and Common Doors
1. Main entrance doors and common doors (i.e. doors leading into basement
laundry rooms and storage rooms, etc.) shall be secured with exit devices
featuring 3/4" throw latchbolts or 3/4" throw two-piece anti friction latchbolts.
The locks shall require keys to enter and "panic" bars to exit. All standards
pertaining to door construction in H. 1. shall apply.
2. These doors shall be equipped with automatic closing devices.
3. Doors leading into basements, storage rooms, and laundry rooms, etc. shall
be equipped with door viewers as specified in H. 10.
J. Sliding Patio Type Doors
1. Sliding patio doors shall be so protected that when the door is locked,
neither fixed nor movable panels can be removed from the track.
2. Locks shall be provided as so to secure the movable panel to the jamb or
upper track. The lock shall engage sufficiently so as to prevent its being
Chapter 87 - Crime Prevention and Security Standards
87-5
disengaged by any possible movement of the door within the space of
clearances provided for installation and operation. Mounting screws for the
lock shall be inaccessible from the exterior. Key operation of locks from the
interior shall be prohibited for reasons of life safety of the occupants.
3. Keyed locks (exterior) shall have a minimum of five tumblers or be of such
design as to provide a minimum of 10,000 possible inter-change free
combinations.
4. Double sliding patio doors shall be locked together at the meeting rail with
the locking means described in (b).
5. Sliding patio doors shall be adjusted in such a manner that the vertical play
is taken up so as to prevent lifting with a pry tool.
K. Windows
1. Any window capable of being opened (double hung, sliding, casement,
louver or jalousie) shall be secured with a locking device capable of
withstanding a force of 300 lbs. applied in any direction.
2. Locking devices for windows shall be installed so that the securing
hardware cannot be removed or circumvented from the exterior.
Additionally, window assemblies shall incorporate no screw, bolt, nail,
staple, hinge, pin or other mechanical fastener which is accessible from the
exterior and whose removal would permit entry by disassembly.
3. All basement windows except those required for emergency egress, shall
contain no more than 96 square inches with the smaller dimension not
exceeding 6" or a structural element shall be incorporated so that objects
greater than 6" cannot pass through.
4. The glazing material of any window (light) located within 40' of any door
lock, shall be a polycarbonate having a thickness of at least 1/8". Glazing of
this type shall be mounted/seated with an engagement of at least 5/8".
5. Sliding windows shall be adjusted in such a manner that the vertical play is
taken up so as to prevent lifting with a pry tool.
L. Structure
Although structural design shall generally conform to the requirements contained
herein, it is not the intent of these requirements to exclude other designs. Where
other construction methods/means are shown to have equal or superior security
characteristics in all of the areas specified, the police department, fire department
and building department, through their authorized representatives and employees
may consider them acceptable as meeting the intent of the requirements.
Chapter 87 - Crime Prevention and Security Standards
87-6
1. Wood wall framing on each side of a door opening governed by security
requirements shall include the following components:
a. Stud framing to which the door header is secured shall be equal to a
pair of 2 x 4 (nominal size) wood studs on each side of the door
opening extending between top and bottom plates of the wall framing
in addition to the 2 x 4 wood buck extending the height of the rough
opening for the door.
b. Stud framing immediately beyond the between-stud space on each
side of the door opening shall be equal to paired 2 x 4 wood studs
extending between top and bottom plates of the wall framing.
c. The distance between centerlines of the 2 x 4 stud components on
each side of the between-stud space shall not be greater than
sixteen (16") inches.
d. Horizontal 2 x 4 wood bridging spanning the between-stud space on
each side of the door opening shall consist of a top bridging member
approximately five (5") inches beneath the bottom of the door
header; a bottom bridging member approximately ten (10") inches
above the rough floor level and a center bridging member equidistant
between the other two bridging members.
e. Sheathing applied to wall framing on each side of a door opening
shall be mechanically secured to each of such bridging members.
f. Sidelights on either side of a door opening shall incorporate such
bridging members into their design.
2. Finished wood door frames shall have stops rabbeted from the jamb and
head member. Such stops shall project no less than 1/2" from the surface
of the jamb for a distance of no less than 1-1/2".
3. Finished door frames shall be set within the rough opening of the door with
tolerances for shim space no greater than 1/4" between a door jamb
member and the rough framing buck or wall structure and no greater than
1/2" between a door head member and the rough header framing, lintel or
wall structure.
a. Such shim spacing shall be securely filled beside a door jamb at
each position opposite bridging members of between-stud space or
at the same level of hinges and strike plates on both sides of door
openings.
b. Such shim spacing shall be securely filled above the vertical throw
bolt on the inactive leaf of a double door that projects into the
Chapter 87 - Crime Prevention and Security Standards
87-7
header.
4. Such shim spacing shall be provided for sliding patio type doors.
5. Windows shall be subject to the same shim space requirements as doors.
Such shim spacing shall be securely filled on both sides of the rough
opening that are parallel to the track upon which movable sash slide.
M. C.C.T.V.
1. In housing for the elderly, parking lots, walkways, courtyards, and the
aforementioned commonly shared doors (i.e. main entrances and those
leading into basements and/or laundry rooms, shall be monitored with
closed circuit television. Cameras shall be strategically located and transmit
signals to a staffed management or caretaker's office. During those hours
when the management or caretaker's office is unmanned, camera
transmissions shall be recorded by means of a video time lapse recorder
with time and date generator.
(05-04-1987)
6. Swing-Arm and Other Types of Security Gates:
Those developers, leasing agents, etc., choosing to erect wingarm and other type gates
to limit access to the general public shall equip same with a means by which Public
Safety officers may easily bypass such barriers.
A. It is required that these devices be equipped with activation units (key pads and
remote transmitters). Key pads shall be located so that they are easily reached by
the operators of and from within emergency vehicles. Key pads shall be
programmed so that any public safety officer may readily be designated by the
police and fire departments. Gates shall also be controlled by means of remote
transmitters, programmed to a unique code set by the police and fire departments.
A sufficient quantity of transmitters shall be supplied to the City so that all
emergency vehicles may be equipped with same.
B. It shall also be required that swing-arm and other type of gates be capable of being
operated manually in case of power failures or other types of mechanical failures.
This should be accomplished by means of manual pull stations that are connected
to audible and/or visible signals.
(Rev. 09-09-1991)
Chapter 88 - Nuisances
88-1
9.1 Public Nuisances Defined. Whatever annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health,
comfort or repose of the public; interferes with or destroys or renders dangerous any
street, highway, allows accumulation of junk or obnoxious matters on private property; or
in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by
any provision of this Chapter and the common and statute law of this state.
NOISE CONTROL
9.5 Noises. Among others, each of the following acts is declared unlawful and is prohibited,
but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely
(a) Horns and Signal Devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus, street car or other vehicle while not in motion except
as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control or to
give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion, only as a danger signal;
the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for any unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time;
(b) Radio and Musical Instruments. The playing of any radio, television, phonograph,
or any musical instruments in such a manner or with such volume, particularly
during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to
annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any
dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity;
(c) Shouting and Whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing or the
making of any other loud noise on the public streets, between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or the making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling,
hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity;
(d) Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud and
boisterous manner.
(e) Animal and Bird Noises. The keeping of any animals or birds which by causing
frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort of any person;
(f) Whistle or Siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give notice of the
time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger;
(g) Engine Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle, except through a
muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud explosive noises therefrom;
(h) Construction Noises. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration, or
repair of any building, the excavation and/or grading of streets, highways, or
Chapter 88 - Nuisances
88-2
private property other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on
Mondays through Saturdays, unless a permit be first obtained from the Building
Department for building work or from the Engineering Department for street work.
(i) Handling Merchandise. The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection
with loading and unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers;
(j) Devices to Attract Attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, amplifier or other
instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention for any purpose.
(k) Noise, Sound Amplification, or Commotion in Vehicles. To make a commotion,
amplify sound, or make unnecessarily loud noises which are audible more than 50
feet from the vehicle, or whereby the peace and good order of the neighborhood is
disturbed, or persons owning or occupying property in the neighborhood are
disturbed.
(Rev. 08-06-1990)
(l) Sound Trucks. To operate or cause to be operated a sound truck with radio or
amplifier within the City without first having obtained a permit therefor from the City
Council.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
(m) Exceptions. None of the prohibitions herein shall apply to or be enforced against;
any police or fire vehicle of the City or ambulance while engaged upon necessary
public emergency business; necessary excavations or repairs of bridges, streets,
or highways on behalf of the city, county or state during the night, when the public
safety, welfare, and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during
the day; the reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or loud speakers in the course
of public addresses which are non-commercial in character.
9.8. Abandoned Iceboxes, Refrigerators, etc. Any person who knowingly leaves, in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or
other container of a kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and suffocation of a
child therein, without first removing the snap lock or other locking device from the lid or
cover thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Rev. 03-20-1967)
9.9 Radio and Television Interference.
(1) No person shall maintain or operate any equipment, device, appliance, or
apparatus in the city which generates or causes high frequency oscillations which
interfere with radio or television transmitting or reception; except, that x-ray
pictures, examinations, or treatments and diathermy treatments may be made if
the machine or apparatus therefor is equipped to avoid all unnecessary
Chapter 88 - Nuisances
88-3
interference and is not negligently operated.
(2) The City Engineer may designate a radio inspector, to investigate complaints of
interference with radio and television transmitting, and reception and he is hereby
given authority upon presenting his evidence of authority, to have a right of access
to any premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspecting any
equipment, device, appliance, or apparatus coming within the terms of this
Chapter to determine if such equipment, device, appliance, and apparatus
complies with the terms of this Chapter, and no person shall interfere with said
radio inspector in making such inspection or refuse to allow the radio inspector to
enter upon the premises for such purpose.
(3) Whenever an inspection and test shall have been made by the radio inspector,
and it is found that such equipment device, appliance, or apparatus is being
operated in violation of this section, the person responsible for such operation shall
be notified in writing to discontinue the use of such equipment, device, appliance
or apparatus or to make additions, repairs, or modifications thereof, in order that
the same may be operated in a manner which complies with the provisions of this
Chapter. Such notice may be given personally to said person or by certified mail,
addressed to said person. In the event that said person within 48 hours after
receipt of such notice fails to repair the same so that it complies with the Chapter,
such person shall be deemed to be operating the same in violation thereof.
(4) The operation of any machine, mechanical device, electrical device or thing that
interferes with, or causes static in the operation of the police radio system is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance; the operator of said machine or device
shall immediately discontinue the use of said equipment upon being notified of its
interference with the police radio system and shall not again place the same in
operation until it has been repaired or modified so as not to interfere with the police
radio system.
(5) No provision of this Chapter shall be construed as regulating any equipment,
device, appliance or apparatus used in interstate commerce where the same is
licensed or regulated by or under any act of Congress of the United States.
LITTERING
9.13 Deposit of Unwholesome Substances. No person shall, within the limits of the City, by
himself or by another, throw, place, deposit or leave in the street, lane, alley, public place
or private lands, any animal or vegetable substance, dead animals, fish, shavings, dirt,
rubbish, excrement, filth, unclean or nauseous water or liquor, hay, straw, soot, offal,
garbage, swill, or any other article or substance whatever which may cause any offensive,
unwholesome, or nauseous smell, or endanger the health of the public.
9.15 Paper, Rubbish. No person shall throw or place, or through insecure fastening, or
otherwise, cause or suffer to be placed or thrown or to fall in or upon any public street,
alley, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare or any public park or private property of the
City, any loose paper or other rubbish of any nature.
Chapter 88 - Nuisances
88-4
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
9.16 Injurious Substances. No person shall by himself or by another, throw, place, deposit or
leave in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place or square, or in any private place or
premises, any glass, broken or unbroken, or any metal, stone, earthenware, tacks,
cinders or other substances of a nature likely to cause injury to travelers or pedestrians,
automobiles, bicycles, or vehicles, or to injure any horse or other animal or which might
injure, cut or puncture any pneumatic tire.
ABATEMENT
9.19. Abating Nuisances. In the event any officer of the City shall determine that there exists a
nuisance within the meaning of this Chapter and Code, such officer shall cause a notice
to be served on the owner or occupant of the premises on which said nuisance exists,
requiring such person to abate said nuisance within the time specified in the notice.
Service of the notice shall be made in accordance with Chapter 1 of this Code. In the
event such person fails to abate said nuisance in accordance with the notice, the City
shall do so and the cost thereof shall be charged against the owner or occupant of
premises any payment thereof shall be enforced as a special assessment as provided in
the Charter.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
22. Aircraft. The term "aircraft" shall include any and all contrivances now or hereafter used
for navigation or flight in the air or space, including but not limited to airplanes, airships,
balloons, hovercraft, dirigibles, helicopters, gliders, amphibians and seaplanes. This
definition shall include any type of tethered contrivance.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to use or attempt to use any property, building, land
or water for landing or taking-off of aircraft other than property duly licensed and approved
as an airport or heliport.
Exceptions:
1. Emergency transportation of medical patients and personnel or supplies.
2. Building construction sites when use is for lifts in construction, providing further
that a valid applicable permit has been issued for the work and prior notice to and
approval obtained from the City of Troy, Building Department.
3. Aircraft being operated by or under the direction of a Police, Fire or Military officer
for public safety related purposes. It shall be unlawful for any individual to hover or
attempt to hover an aircraft over property, building, land or water except in the
approach surface of an airport or heliport, as defined in Chapter 39, Section
41.12.01 of the Troy City Code. To "hover" shall mean the suspension of an
aircraft closer to any property, building, land or water than one hundred (100) feet.
(Rev. 10-07-96)
Chapter 88 - Nuisances
88-5
23. Mini-bikes
A. Statement of Purpose. By the adoption of this section the City Council finds and
determines that the uncontrolled operation of motorcycles, as defined herein, has
become a public nuisance with the City of Troy due to loud and raucous noises,
noxious odors, excessive dust, dangerous to the health and safety of person within
the City of Troy and to property located therein and the use of such vehicles on
private property without the consent of the owners thereof, and on public property
without the consent of the public bodies having jurisdiction. The City Council
further finds that this section controlling the use of such vehicles is necessary to
prevent nuisance conditions detrimental to the safety, health, and general welfare
of the public.
(Rev. 07-30-1973)
B. Definitions.
1. The word "motorcycle" as used in this Chapter means every motor vehicle
having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not
more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground. In addition, this term
shall mean every vehicle not entitled to be licensed for travel upon the
public highways of the State of Michigan which is designed primarily for
recreational purposes, including but not limited to all-terrain vehicles, gokarts,
trail bikes, mini-bikes, or drag-bikes. The term shall not include
tractors, motor powered lawn mowers, special mobile equipment as defined
in the Michigan Vehicle Code, or similar vehicles.
2. All definitions which appear in the Michigan Vehicle Code shall be
applicable to such terms when used in this Chapter.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
C. Regulations Governing the Use of Motorcycles.
1. No motorcycles shall be operated upon the streets and highways of the City
or other areas open to public motor vehicle travel except in accordance with
the Uniform Traffic Code, Chapter 105 of the Troy City Code, and the
Michigan Vehicle Code.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
2. No motorcycles shall be operated in any area open to the public for the
parking of motor vehicles except for the sole purpose of normal ingress and
egress into such parking facilities.
Chapter 88 - Nuisances
88-6
(Rev. 07-30-1973)
3. No motorcycles shall be operated upon property owned by the City, by a
public school district, by a community college or by a library, other than
areas designated for the parking of motor vehicles, except in accordance
with the rules and regulations established for such property by the public
body having jurisdiction.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
4. No motorcycles shall be operated upon any private property not open to the
public for the operation of motor vehicles except the owner thereof,
members of his immediate family, and persons lawfully residing upon said
premises without the express written permission of the owner. The written
permission shall identify the property for which permission is granted, and
his address, the owner of said property and the duration of said permission.
The written permit shall be carried upon the person of the permittee and
shall be displayed to any law enforcement officer of the City of Troy upon
request. No such written permission shall be required if the permittee is
accompanied by the owner, a member of his immediate family, or a person
lawfully residing upon said property nor shall such written permit be required
where the operation of the motor vehicle upon the property is solely for
normal ingress and egress to and from a residence, a commercial
establishment or other occupancy of the property.
(Rev. 07-30-1973)
5. No person shall operate a motorcycle in the City of Troy in such a manner
as to create excessive, unusual or unnecessary noise. Every motorcycle so
operated shall be equipped with an efficient muffler which will insure noise
levels comparable to that of a private passenger automobile. Racing
motorcycle engines, or repeated acceleration and deceleration of
motorcycle engines except in the course of maintenance of such engines is
hereby deemed to be excessive, unusual and unnecessary noise. Abrupt or
violent acceleration of a motorcycle, including acceleration which causes
the front wheel of the motorcycle to lose contact with the ground, shall be
deemed to create excessive, unusual, or unnecessary noise.
(07-30-1973)
6. No person shall operate a motorcycle on public or private property while
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs, barbital or any
derivative of barbital or when, due to consumption of intoxicating liquor,
narcotic drugs, barbital or any derivative of barbital he has visibly impaired
his ability to operate the vehicle or in willful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons, including himself, or property, or in a careless or
negligent manner likely to endanger any person or property, in a speed or
Chapter 88 - Nuisances
88-7
acceleration contest or for the purpose of making a speed record, whether
from a standing start or otherwise over a measured or unmeasured
distance, or in a drag race as defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code.
D. Penalties.
1. Violation of this Chapter is declared to be a nuisance and may be abated by
a law enforcement officer of the City by impoundment of the motorcycle
involved by removal to the motor vehicle pound of the City to be returned as
hereinafter provided.
(03-26-1979)
2. Before the owner or persons in charge of such motor vehicles shall be
permitted to remove the same from the motor vehicle pound he shall furnish
evidence of his identity and owner-ship, he shall sign a receipt, and he shall
pay a fee of Ten ($10.00) Dollars to cover the cost of removal, if any, plus
the cost of storage.
3. Violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and any
person or persons found guilty thereof shall be subject to a fine of not to
exceed Five Hundred ($500.00) dollars and/or imprisonment for not more
than ninety (90) days for each such offense.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
24. Municipal Civil Infractions
A violation of sections 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.5, 9.9, 9.13, 9.14, 9.15, 9.17, 9.18, 9.20, and
15 of this Chapter is a Municipal Civil Infraction subject to the provisions of
Chapter 100 of the Code of the City of Troy. Each day that a violation continues is
a separate Municipal Civil Infraction violation. Sanctions for each violation of said
sections shall include a fine of not more than $500, costs, damages and injunctive
orders as authorized by Chapter 100.
(03-01-2006)
(Chapter 88 Amended: 10-05-2009; Effective: 01-01-2010)
Chapter 89 - Weed Control
89-1
Chapter 89-Weed Control of the Code of the City of Troy is deleted by the Council of the City
of Troy, Oakland County Michigan, at a Regular Meeting of the City Council held at City Hall,
500 W. Big Beaver, Troy, MI on the 5th day of October 2009 and is effective January 1st, 2010.
Chapter 90 - Animals
90-1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
90.10.10 Definitions. The following terms when used in this Chapter shall have the
meanings set forth in this Section:
90.10.11 Animal - Any living creature, except humans and plants. Animal includes
any mammal, bird, reptile, snake, turtle, crustacean or any other vertebrate
or invertebrate.
90.10.25 Dangerous Animal - A wild or feral animal, other than a dog or cat, which
because of its size, aggressive nature or other characteristics constitutes a
danger to persons or property.
90.10.30 Domestic Animal - An animal, other than a dog, that is not feral in nature,
including, but not limited to horses, cows, chickens, geese, pigeons, ducks,
steers, ponies, mules, donkeys, sheep, swine, pigs and goats.
90.10.35 House Pet - A non-domestic and non-dangerous small animal normally
kept confined as a pet, including but not limited to hamsters, fish and
parakeets.
90.10.60 Owner - A person or a group of persons who owns, controls, harbors,
keeps, or has a property interest in any animal.
90.10.65 Person - An individual, employee, corporation, partnership or association.
90.10.90 Wild Animal  An animal that is not defined in this Chapter as a
dangerous animal, domestic animal or house pet.
DUTIES OF ANIMAL OWNERS
90.30.50 Possession of Excrement Removal Device. No person, who is
accompanying an animal, shall allow that animal to be on property owned
by another unless the person has in his or her immediate possession, an
appropriate device for the scooping and temporary storage of excrement. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not
more than $500 or both.
90.30.55 Removal of Animal Excrement. No person, who owns or controls an animal
that deposits excrement on property owned by another, shall fail to
immediately remove such excrement and immediately dispose of it in a
receptacle located on the property of the person who owns or controls the
animal and if the person is not aware that the animal deposited excrement
on another property, shall upon being made aware of such fact,
immediately dispose of it in a receptacle located on the property of the
Chapter 90 - Animals
90-2
person who owns or controls the animal. A person who violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for
not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500 or both.
PERMITS
90.70.10 Permit Required for Domestic, Dangerous and Wild Animals. No person
shall own or control a domestic animal or a dangerous animal or a wild
animal, other than a dog, cat or house pet, within the City of Troy, without
having obtained an animal permit from the Clerk for the City of Troy. A
person who violates this section is responsible for a Municipal Civil
Infraction subject to the provision of Chapter 100 of the Code of the City of
Troy. Each day that the violation continues is a separate Municipal Civil
Infraction. Sanctions for each violation shall include a fine of not more than
$500, costs, damages, and injunctive orders as authorized by Chapter 100.
Exception:
a) a permit is not required for a dog, house pet or domestic cat.
b) permits are not required for wild animals if the Housing and Zoning
Inspector determines that the wild animal, because of its size, the
number of animals, temperament or other characteristics does not
create a hazard or nuisance.
90.70.20 Permit Application Process. An applicant for a domestic, dangerous or wild
animal permit shall:
a) furnish the Housing and Zoning Inspector a list of the species of
animals to be kept and the maximum number of each species to be
kept at any one time, and
b) demonstrate that the animals will be treated humanely and will not
be neglected or treated with cruelty, and
c) demonstrate that the animals will be maintained in quarters
constructed to prevent their escape, and
d) demonstrate that reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect
the public from the animals and the animals from the public, and
e) demonstrate that he or she can comply with the ordinance and any
regulations promulgated by the Animal Control Appeal Board, and
f) in the case of domestic animals, demonstrate to the Housing and
Zoning Inspector that the lot or parcel that animals will be kept on is
Chapter 90 - Animals
90-3
three-quarters () of one (1) acre or larger. This requirement may be
waived by the Animal Control Appeal Board if the applicant can
demonstrate circumstances that allow for waiver pursuant to
regulations promulgated by the Animal Control Appeal Board.
Waivers will not be granted for animals that are loud or likely to be
detrimental to the neighborhood.
90.70.30 Issuance of Permit for Domestic, Dangerous or Wild Animal. The Housing
and Zoning Inspector shall issue a domestic, dangerous or wild animal
permit upon showing by the applicant that he or she has obtained the
approval of the Housing and Zoning Inspector and has paid the applicable
fee. The permit shall list with specificity the animals subject to the permit,
the location of the animals in the City of Troy and may contain limitations
and conditions required by the Housing and Zoning Inspector or the Animal
Control Appeal Board.
90.70.40 Duties of Permit Holder. The holder of a domestic, dangerous or wild animal
permit shall:
(a) comply with all present and future ordinances in this Chapter and
comply with the regulations promulgated by the Animal Control
Appeal Board, and
(b) apply for a new permit prior to changing their address or changing
the location of the animals, and
(c) indemnify and hold the City of Troy harmless from any personal
injury or property damage caused by the animal for which the permit
is issued as a result of the negligence of the permittee or any other
person placed in control of the animal by the permittee.
(d) consent to inspection of the applicants facilities by a Housing and
Zoning Inspector before and after the granting of the permit.
90.70.50 Expiration of Permit. A permit shall expire:
a) 5 years from the date of issuance, or
b) when ownership or control of the animal or animals is transferred to
another person, or
c) when the animal or animals are moved to another location, or
d) upon death of the animal for which the permit is issued, unless the
permit specifically provides for replacement of the animal, or
Chapter 90 - Animals
90-4
e) when the terms of the permit require that the permit expires.
90.70.60 Revocation of Permit. A Housing and Zoning Inspector may revoke a
permit:
a) if the permit holder fails to comply with the requirements of this
Chapter, or
b) if the permit holder fails to comply with regulations promulgated by
the Animal Control Appeal Board, or,
c) if a permit holder fails to comply with federal, state or local laws
governing cruelty to animals or the keeping of animals, or
d) if a species of animal not listed in the permit application is acquired,
or
e) the maximum number of animals allowed pursuant to the permit is
exceeded.
90.70.70 Removal of Animals. A person whose permit is revoked or has expired,
shall immediately remove all animals subject to the permit, from the City of
Troy, unless the permit holder has filed a timely appeal with the Animal
Control Appeal Board in which case the revocation shall be postponed
pending the outcome of the appeal.
ANIMAL CONTROL APPEAL BOARD
90.80.10 Animal Control Appeal Board. There is hereby created an Animal Control
Appeal Board.
90.80.20 This Board shall:
a) consist of five (5) members appointed by the City Council for three
(3) year overlapping terms, and
b) annually elect from among its members a Chair, a Vice Chair and a
Secretary.
90.80.30 All Board Members, including the Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary shall
have voting privileges.
90.80.40 The Chair shall preside over meetings of the Board.
90.80.50 The Vice Chair shall preside over meetings of the Board in the absence of
the Chair.
Chapter 90 - Animals
90-5
90.80.60 The Secretary shall record and file with the City Clerk accurate and
complete resolutions, rules and interpretations rendered by the Board.
90.80.70 Duties Of Animal Control Appeal Board. The Animal Control Appeal Board
shall:
a) promulgate regulations regarding dangerous animal permits and
domestic animal permits, and
b) interpret and determine the application of provisions contained in this
Chapter as they relate to specific fact situations presented to the
Animal Control Appeal Board, and
c) adjudicate appeals from a Housing and Zoning Inspectors decision
regarding the issuance or denial of a permit for dangerous animals,
domestic animals and wild animals, and
d) adjudicate appeals from a Housing and Zoning Inspectors decision
regarding the revocation of a permit for dangerous animals, domestic
animals or wild animals.
90.80.80 Procedure for Appeals.
Appeals from the decisions of the Housing and Zoning Inspector to the
Animal Control Appeal Board must be:
a) filed at the office of the Troy Housing and Zoning Inspector on forms
provided, and
b) filed within seven (7) days of the date of the Housing and Zoning
Inspectors decision regarding the issuance or denial of a permit for
dangerous animals or domestic animals, and
c) filed within seven (7) days of the date of the Housing and Zoning
Inspectors decision regarding the revocation of a permit for
dangerous animals or domestic animals.
d) upon acceptance of an appeal, the City Clerk shall provide notice of
the time, date and place of the appeal to all property owners within
300 feet of the appellants property.
90.8.90 Rulings and interpretations of the Animal Control Appeal Board shall be
final.
(Amended: 03/28/2011)
Chapter 91 - Curfew
91-1
1. Loitering of Minors Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of twelve (12) years to loiter, wander,
stroll, play or idle in or upon public streets, highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public
places, places of amusement or entertainment, vacant lots or public unsupervised
places in the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day:
and it shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) to loiter, wander,
stroll, play or idle in or upon the public streets, highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds,
public places, places of amusement or entertainment, vacant lots or public
unsupervised places in the City between the hours of 12:00 o'clock midnight and 6:00
o'clock a.m. of the following day, unless such minors are accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or legal custodian, or adult member of the family. Provided, however, it
shall be lawful for minors to be upon the public streets during the hours aforesaid while
returning home from (1) A party of dance held under the auspices of a public or
parochial school; (2) An entertainment, festival or bazaar held under the auspices of
any duly and lawfully organized ecclesiastical corporation or the Y.M.C.A.; (3) An
entertainment held by any religious, educational or other organization primarily
organized for young people, held under a special permit issued by the City Council
upon recommendation of the Police Chief. In all the foregoing cases, the minor
attending such function must have the permission of his or her parent, guardian, legal
custodian or teacher to attend the party, dance or entertainment and may be required
by any police officer to furnish satisfactory evidence thereof. Any minor shall also have
the right to be on the public streets or other public places of the City during the hours
aforesaid while engaged in the performance of an errand or duty directed by his or her
parent, guardian, or legal custodian, or in cases where the legal employment of such
minor makes it necessary for him or her to be upon the streets, alleys, or other public
places during the hours hereinbefore specified, provided the minor is able to furnish
satisfactory proof of the errand, duty or legal employment requiring such presence.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
9.63 Amusement Places; Responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating a place or places of
amusement and entertainment to permit any minor or minors to enter or remain in such
places of amusement and entertainment during the hours prohibited in this Chapter;
provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply when the minor is
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the legal care
and custody of the minor.
(Rev. 02-11-1971)
9.64 Permit of Police Chief.
If lawful employment, business or other lawful purposes require a minor under the age of
sixteen (16) years to be or remain upon the public streets or other public places between
the hours of 12:00 o'clock midnight and 6:00 a.m., the Police Chief upon written
application by the parent or guardian of such minor, and for good cause shown, may
Chapter 91 - Curfew
91-2
issue a written permit for such minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to be or remain
on the streets or other public places at the time or times specified in such permit. No such
permit shall be issued for a period longer than thirty (30) days from the date of
application.
(Rev. 02-11-1971)
9.65. VioIations of Minor.
Any minor under sixteen (16) years of age violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed a delinquent or neglected child and may be complained against in the Juvenile
Court of Oakland County as such by any police officer or other person having knowledge
of such violation, and such minor shall be dealt with by said Court as provided by law.
(Rev. 02-11-1971)
Chapter 92  Disorderly Conduct
92-1
Chapter 92-Disorderly Conduct of the Code of the City of Troy is rescinded by
the Council of the City of Troy, Oakland County Michigan, at a Regular Meeting of
the City Council held at City Hall, 500 W. Big Beaver, Troy, MI on the 17th day of
December, 2001 and is effective ten (10) days from the date hereof or upon
publication, whichever shall later occur.
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-1
93.00 Adoption of the 2015 International Fire Code by Reference. The International
Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including its appendices, is hereby adopted by reference with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in Section 93.01 of this
Ordinance, as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Troy, regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage,
handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life and property in the occupancy of buildings. This Ordinance and a copy
of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, shall be kept on file with the City Clerk. A
copy of the International Fire Code in its entirety can also be found at:
https://codes.iccsafe.org/public/document/toc/546/ or any subsequent amended link.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
93.01 Additions, Insertions, Deletions and Changes to the International Fire Code,
2015 Edition. The City of Troy adopts the following additions, insertions, deletions and
changes from the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition. Subsequent section numbers
used in this section shall refer to the like numbered sections of the International Fire Code,
2015 Edition. Any provisions of Chapter 93, Section 93.01 which are not amended or
deleted herein shall remain in full force and effect.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Prevention Code of The City
of Troy, hereinafter referred to as this code.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this
code shall include those that are listed in Chapter 80 of the International Fire Code, and
such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to
the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.7.1
and 102.7.2.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
102.7.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between the provisions of this code and the
referenced codes and standards, the provisions which establish the higher standard for
the promotion of the safety and welfare of the public and the protection of the public, or
as otherwise determined by State of Michigan law, shall apply. References to the
International Building Code shall be interpreted as the Michigan Building Code as set
forth in Chapter 79, Section 8.1 of the City of Troy Code. Reference to other International
Code Council codes shall be interpreted as Michigan codes, where applicable, as
amended and adopted by law.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-2
103.1 General. The Troy Fire Department shall be responsible for fire prevention
inspection activities and code enforcement of buildings and occupancies as related to the
risk of fire or explosion within the City of Troy. The department of fire prevention is
established within the jurisdiction under the direction of the fire code official. The function
of the department shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this code and the codes and standards referenced in Chapter 45 of this
code.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
104.11.4 Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department emergency
equipment. A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire official in charge
of said fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach to, climb upon or into,
board, or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in
motion or at rest, operate any emergency warning equipment, or to manipulate or tamper
with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting
devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire
department emergency vehicle.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
104.11.5 Damage/injury to fire department equipment/personnel. It shall be unlawful
for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface, any fire
department emergency vehicle or equipment at any time; or to injure, or attempt or
conspire to injure, fire department personnel while performing departmental duties.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
105.1 General. Permits shall be in accordance with Section 105. Where reference is
made to this section for permits elsewhere in this code and there are no provisions for
issuing said permits by the department of fire prevention, the code official is authorized
to waive the particular permit requirement.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
105.1.2 Types of Permits. There shall be three types of permits as follows:
1. Operational permit. An operational permit allows the applicant to conduct an
operation or a business for which a permit is required by Section 105.6 for either:
1.1 A prescribed period.
1.2 Until renewed or revoked.
2. Construction permit. A construction permit allows the applicant to install or modify
systems of equipment for which a permit is required by Section 105.7.
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-3
3. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit allows the applicant to occupy existing
premises for the purpose of conducting or operating a business for which a permit
is required by Section 105.8.
(Rev. 03-23-2009; Effective 04-02-2009)
105.4.2 Information on Construction Documents. Construction documents shall be
drawn to scale upon suitable material. Electronic media documents shall be submitted as
required by the fire code official. Failure to submit electronic media documents may result
in a reasonable document scanning fee as determined by the fire code official.
Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and
extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this
code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as determined by the fire code
official.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
105.6 Required Operational Permits. The code official is authorized to issue
operational permits for the operations set forth in Sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.46.
Where there are no provisions for issuing said permits, the code official is authorized to
waive the particular permit requirement.
(Rev. 08-25-2008; Effective 09-04-2008)
105.6.14 Special Events. An operational permit is required to operate/conduct all special
events including exhibits, crafts and trade shows.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.6.14.1 Permit Fee. Provided for in Troy City Code Chapter 60.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.6.15 Fireworks. An operational permit is required for ignition, discharge and use of
agricultural or wildlife fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, public display fireworks before a
proximate audience, or special effects fireworks as stipulated in this ordinance.
Application for permits shall be made in writing at least 15 days in advance of the date of
the public display. The possession and distribution of fireworks for such use and display
shall be lawful under the terms and conditions approved with the permit and for only that
purpose. A permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable nor shall any such permit
be extended beyond the time set forth therein unless approved by the fire official.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.6.15.1 Permit Fee. Provided for in Troy City Code Chapter 60.
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-4
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.6.15.2 Documentation. Where required by the fire code official, each application for
a permit shall include documentation as required in 105.6.21.3
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.6.21 Hazardous Materials. An operational permit is required to store, transport on
site, dispense, use or handle hazardous materials in excess of the most restrictive
amounts listed in this code, the EPAs Emergency Planning and Community Right To
Know regulations, and MIOSHAs Firefighter Right To Know requirements.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.6.21.1 Required Amounts for Reporting. Reportable quantities shall be
considered the maximum amount of hazardous material on site at any given time. This
amount is required to be reported to the fire department as indicated in the Troy Fire
Departments HMIS packet as defined in Sections 407.5 and 5001.5.2 of this code.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.6.21.2 Permit Fees. Provided for in Troy City Code Chapter 60.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
105.6.21.3 Required Documentation. Where required by the fire code official, each
application for a permit shall include a Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS)
in accordance with Section 5001.5.2, a site plan drawing in a format acceptable to fire
code official, indicating the location of the identified materials, and an Emergency Contact
List.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.7.1.1 Installations. Before any fire suppression system or component is installed,
enlarged, extended or modified, a permit shall be obtained from the code official. This
shall include any device or relay connected to or controlled by the fire suppression
system. All work must be performed by a qualified installer who is properly licensed
and/or certified to perform such work as determined by the code official. Construction
documents shall be reviewed by the code official prior to the issuance of the permit. Upon
issuance of the permit, the permit must be posted at the job site in plain view.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
105.7.1.2 Permit Fees. Provided for in Troy City Code Chapter 60.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-5
105.7.6.1 Installations. Before any fire alarm or detection system or component is
installed, enlarged, extended or modified, a permit shall be obtained from the code official.
This shall include auxiliary devices such as magnetic locks, electronic locks, or any device
or relay connected to or controlled by the fire alarm or detection system. All work must
be performed by a qualified installer who is properly licensed and/or certified to perform
such work as determined by the code official. Construction documents shall be reviewed
by the code official prior to the issuance of the permit. Upon issuance of the permit, the
permit must be posted at the job site in plain view.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
105.7.6.2 Permit fees. Provided for in Troy City Code Chapter 60.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
105.7.19 Permit issuance. A permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable nor
shall any such permit be extended beyond the time set forth therein unless approved by
the fire official. When work is started without a permit, the permit fee shall be doubled.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.8 Required Occupancy Permit. The fire code official is authorized to issue an
occupancy permit for a business as set forth in Section 105.8.1 through 105.8.5.
(Rev. 03-23-2009; Effective 04-02-2009)
105.8.1 Use Group. An occupancy permit is required for Use Groups, B, F, I, M, S and
U where such use will occupy 1,500 square feet or greater in area, and Use Group A, H
or R of any size.
Exceptions: Multiple DBAs or LLCs in a single occupancy of less than 1,500 square feet
in area, or one and two family dwellings.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.8.2 Required Documentation. Where required by the fire code official, each
application shall include documentation as required in 105.6.21.3.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.8.3 Permit Application. An occupancy permit application shall be filed with the fire
code official prior to occupancy. The fire code official shall review all required
documentation, and conduct any necessary inspections and meetings before an
occupancy permit is issued.
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-6
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
105.8.4 Site and Building Preparation. As part of the occupancy permit, the intended
occupancy shall meet the following requirements:
1. The building and any associated fire protection and life safety features shall comply
with the requirements of this code.
2. Fire apparatus access roads and fire lanes shall be designated and posted in
accordance with Section 503.
3. An address shall be posted in compliance with Troy City Code Chapter 2.
4. A building and/or tenant floor plan shall be provided to the fire code official in an
approved format.
5. A key box, as required by the fire code official, shall be installed in accordance with
Section 506.
(Rev. 03-23-2009; Effective 04-02-2009)
105.8.5 Notification of Changes. Changes in occupancy or use shall be made to, and
approved by the fire code official before such changes occur.
(Rev. 03-23-2009; Effective 04-02-2009)
106.5 Cancellation fees. Handling cost for permits canceled after being issued is 35%
of the permit fee or $10.00, whichever is greater.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
108.1 Board of appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the code official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals as
established in Section 116 of Chapter 79 of the Troy City Code.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail
to comply with any requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, service,
test or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire
code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred (500) dollars or by
imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment as
determined by a judge in a court of law, plus any allowable cost recovery incurred by the
Troy Fire Department or any agency working with the Troy Fire Department that incurred
costs. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-7
SECTION 114
MISCELLANEOUS HAZARDS
114.1 Hazardous materials - Fire Department responsibility. The Troy Fire
Department shall be responsible for gathering and organizing information, identifying
risks, and enforcing codes, standards, and laws relating to the production, storage and
use of hazardous materials within the City of Troy and the notification to fire fighting
personnel of related hazards. The method and frequency shall be determined by the fire
official or his duly authorized representative.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
114.2 Cost Recovery - Hazardous conditions. If upon the expiration of the time
mentioned in a notice of violation, hazardous conditions, including but not limited to,
obstructions or encroachments inhibiting access to or egress from a space or building,
are not removed, the code official shall proceed to remove or have removed the same.
The expense incurred shall be a debt to the City from the responsible person and shall
be collected as any other debt to the City.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
114.3 False alarms. It shall be unlawful for any person to summon, in any way, the fire
department unless a valid reason for their response is present. (See also Troy City Code
Chapter 103 - Alarm Ordinance.)
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
114.4 112.6 Nonstandard Equipment. Equipment and devices which are not in
compliance with recognized standards for design and construction may be approved upon
presentation of satisfactory evidence that they are designed and constructed for safe
operation.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
114.5 Motion Picture & Television Film Production. Motion picture / television film
production and similar entertainment or documentary production activities shall comply
with the requirements of this code and NFPA 140.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
SECTION 202
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-8
BONFIRE. An outdoor fire which burns only seasoned dry firewood or clean untreated
lumber intended to minimize the generation of air contaminants and is utilized for
occasional special events subject to the following provisions:
1. Prior approval of the Troy City Council.
2. Compliance with any special restrictions as determined by the fire official.
3. Payment of costs associated with special fire protection as determined by the fire
official.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
EMERGENCY VEHICLE ACCESS. A passageway, as specified in Section 503.7 of this
code, for fire apparatus and other emergency vehicles to access a street or property in
the event of an emergency.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The fire chief, fire marshal, code enforcement officer, or other
designated authority charged by the applicable governing body with the duties of
administration and enforcement of the code, or duly authorized representative. The term
fire code official may be used interchangeably with code official and fire official in this
code.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic
surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals for the
purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire,
raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department by method(s) approved or
recommended by the fire code official.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
GROUND FIRE. An outdoor fire for the purpose of viewing or warming, or utilized to cook
food for human consumption, or for ceremonial purposes, which burns only seasoned dry
firewood or commercially available charcoal briquettes intended to minimize the
generation of air contaminants.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. High-rise building means a building with an occupied floor
located more than 55 feet (16764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle
access.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-9
NONCOMPLIANT. Refers to alterations, modifications, or other such changes to fire
suppression, protection, detection, alarm, or other related systems, affecting the design,
installation, or proper or intended operation of said system. Does not comply with the
applicable standard or criteria set forth when originally installed, tested, and approved.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
304.2 Storage. Storage of combustible rubbish or other combustible material such as
pallets, crates, boxes, etc., shall not produce conditions that will create a nuisance or a
hazard to the public health, safety or welfare and shall not be within 10 feet (3048 mm) of
a structure.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
307.1.1 Prohibited Open Burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable, as
determined by the fire code official, because of smoke or odor emissions or when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be
prohibited. Burning for purposes of incineration of waste material including paper, leaves,
or any other combustible debris, outside of any structure at any place is prohibited.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
307.2. Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in
accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range
or wildlife management practices, management of prairie grasses and plants, prevention
or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire. Application for such approval shall only be
presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be
kindled or the landowners contracted professional. Bonfires, as defined and set forth in
Section 202, may be permitted if in compliance with Section 307.4.1 and subject to prior
approval of the code official.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
307.3 Extinguishment Authority. The fire code official or police official is authorized to
order the extinguishment by the responsible person, another person responsible, or the
fire department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable
situation.
(Rev. 08-25-2008; Effective 09-04-2008)
307.4.1 Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet (15 240 mm) of a
structure or combustible material unless the fire is contained in a barbecue pit. Conditions
which could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet (15 240 mm) of a structure shall be
eliminated prior to ignition. Once approved, the intended maximum size and duration of
a bonfire shall not be increased unless by City Council and only after it has been
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-10
determined by the fire official that fire safety requirements of the situation and the
desirable duration of burn warrant the increase prior to the bonfire.
(Rev. 08-25-2008; Effective 09-04-2008)
307.4.4 Ground Fires. A ground fire shall be the minimum size for the intended purpose
but not larger than 3 feet (914 mm) in diameter and 2 feet (610 mm) in height and shall
be contained in a safe manner.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
307.6 Fire Department Training. Open burning is allowed for the purpose of training fire
fighters for fire fighting practice, or for the purpose of training the public, including workers
or employees, or for the purpose of demonstration by the fire official or other trained fire
personnel, when such burning is done in accordance with accepted practice.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
312.2 Posts. Fire hydrants, public utility distribution equipment, and/or other fire
protection equipment located in vehicular traffic areas shall be protected against vehicle
damage by the installation of guard posts. These posts shall be installed in accordance
with the City of Troy Development Standards requirements for water mains. It shall be the
property owner's responsibility to provide and maintain this protection.
Guard posts shall comply with all of the following requirements:
1. Constructed of steel, not less than 6 inches (152 mm) in diameter and filled with
Grade B concrete.
2. Spaced not more than 45 inches (1143 mm) between posts on center.
3. Set not less than 3 feet (914 mm) deep in a concrete footing of not less than a 15-
inch (381 mm) diameter.
4. Set with the top of the posts not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above the projected
object/hazard.
5. Located not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the protected object/hazard.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
315.4 Outside storage. Outside storage of combustible materials shall not be located
within 10 feet (3048 mm) of a lot line and shall not be located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of
a structure.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
404.5.2 Format. Fire safety and evacuation plans, general floor plans, seating
arrangements, storage configurations, or other specific plans shall be furnished to the fire
code official in an approved format upon request.
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-11
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
503.1 Where required. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided and maintained
in accordance with Sections 503.1.1 through 503.1.3 and in accordance with City of Troy
Development Standards.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads and fire lanes shall have an
unobstructed width of not less than 18 feet (5486.4 mm), except for approved security
gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not
less than 14 feet (4267.2 mm) or as otherwise approved by the fire code official.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
503.6 Security gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus access
road shall be approved by the fire code official. Where security gates are installed, they
shall have an approved means of emergency operation. The security gates and the
emergency operation shall be maintained operational at all times. Electric gate operators,
where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic
operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of
ASTM F 2200.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
503.7 Emergency Vehicle Access. Emergency vehicle access (EVA) shall be
determined and approved by the fire code official. Unless otherwise required, EVAs shall
be of the following specifications:
1. Minimum of 12 feet (3657.6 mm) wide.
2. Surface capable of supporting the weight of fire apparatus up to 60,000 pounds
GVW.
3. Minimum grade changes to accommodate fire apparatus undercarriage ground
clearances.
4. Mountable curb at entrance/exit with adequate turning radii to and from the
EVA.
5. Standard fire lane signage posted at entrance/exit to EVA.
6. EVA signage posted at entrance/exit of EVA, on both sides of surface, every
50 feet (15240 mm) for length of EVA.
7. EVA signage to withstand snow removal/landscape maintenance efforts.
8. EVA to be kept clear of snow and vegetation.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
505.1 Address Identification. Provided for in Troy City Code Chapter 2.
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-12
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
506.1 Where Required. Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted
because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or
fire-fighting purposes, or where an alarm signaling system or device is installed that may
summon the fire department, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be
installed in an accessible location. The key box shall be of an approved type and shall
contain keys to gain access as required by the fire code official. Any appeal that may
arise shall be referred to the Building Board of Appeals as established in Section 116 of
Chapter 79 of the Troy City Code.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
507.3 Fire Flow. Fire flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings and facilities
shall be determined in accordance with Appendix B and in accordance with City of Troy
Development Standards. An appropriate pressure and flow margin of safety shall be
provided with each fire sprinkler system as required by the code official.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
507.5 Fire Hydrant Systems. Fire hydrant systems shall comply with Sections 507.5.1
through 507.5.6 and shall be in accordance with Appendix C and City of Troy
Development Standards.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
507.5.4.1 Removal of Obstructions. If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a
notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments to a fire hydrant, or to other fire
protection equipment, are not removed, the code official shall proceed to remove or have
removed the same. The expense incurred shall be a debt to the City from the responsible
person and shall be collected as any other debt to the City.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
609.1 General. Commercial kitchen exhaust hoods shall comply with the requirements
of the Michigan Mechanical Code and NFPA 96.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
609.1.1 Exhaust Fans. Exhaust fans for commercial cooking hoods shall be installed so
that the fans are operational at all times cooking is occurring. This may be accomplished
by a temperature monitoring device installed in, on, or near the hood to activate the
exhaust fan(s) at a pre-determined temperature, or as otherwise approved by the code
official.
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-13
(Rev. 08-25-2008; Effective 09-04-2008)
803.3.1 Explosive and Highly Flammable or Combustible Materials. Furnishings or
decorations of an explosive or highly flammable or combustible character shall not be
used.
(Rev. 08-25-2008; Effective 09-04-2008)
806.1.1 Restricted Occupancies. Natural cut trees shall be prohibited in Group A, B, E,
F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4, S, and U occupancies.
Exception: Trees located in areas protected by an approved automatic fire
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 shall
not be prohibited in Groups A, B, E, F, M, R-1, R-2, S, and U.
(Rev. 08-25-2008; Effective 09-04-2008)
807.1 General requirements. In occupancies of Groups A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-4, S,
and U, and dormitories in Group R-2, curtains, draperies, hangings and other decorative
materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance
criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807.2 or be noncombustible.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
901.5 Installation Acceptance Testing. Fire detection and alarm systems, fireextinguishing
systems, fire hydrant systems, fire standpipe systems, fire pump systems,
private fire service mains and all other fire protection systems and appurtenances thereto
shall be subject to inspection and acceptance tests as contained in the installation
standards and as approved by the fire code official. The fire code official shall be notified
before any required acceptance testing is performed in order to schedule, witness and
approve such testing prior to use of said fire protection system or equipment and/or
occupancy of the structure.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
901.6.2.2 Noncompliant Systems. Fire suppression, protection, or other related
systems found to be noncompliant, malfunctioning, or otherwise non-operational in the
manner required, designed, or intended, shall be identified as noncompliant by the
service company or individual performing such service, and the fire code official and the
occupant shall be notified immediately or at the earliest practical time. At no time shall an
approval, compliance, or other indication of operability be affixed to, on, or near such
system(s) so as to give false indication of designed, intended, or expected operation.
(Rev. 08-25-2008; Effective 09-04-2008)
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-14
901.6.3 Anti-Freeze Fire Sprinkler Systems. Fire sprinkler systems designed and
installed to protect areas prone to freezing shall be drained and tested, then refilled and
maintained to insure the solution is operable to -20 degrees F or as otherwise approved
by the code official.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
903.3.5.3 Required Pressure Margin. The code official is authorized to require a
pressure margin of up to ten percent (10%) over the minimum design criteria for installed
automatic fire sprinkler systems. Where this margin cannot be achieved, approved means
shall be taken to provide this margin.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
907.5.2.1.3 Temporal Code-3. Audible alarm notification appliances shall sound in
temporal Code-3 pattern as approved by the code official.
(Rev. 05-09-2011; Effective 05-19-2011)
907.6.3.1.1 Annunciation. Where fire suppression systems exist in multi-tenant
occupancies, i.e., strip malls, separate annunciation, including water flow switch and
inspector test valve, shall be required for each separately addressed tenant space unless
otherwise approved by the code official.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
913.3.2 Precautions to prevent freezing. Precautions shall be taken in all rooms and
areas containing fire sprinkler equipment such as piping, valve(s), and fire pump(s), to
prevent freezing of said equipment during times of extremely cold temperatures. Where
the code official deems necessary, equipment shall be installed to monitor the
temperature of said areas and send a trouble or supervisory signal to an approved
location when the temperature falls below 40 degrees F to warn of freezing conditions so
that the occurrence of frozen and/or broken piping, valve(s), and fire pump(s) can be
prevented.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
914.2.4 Fire department access to equipment. Rooms or areas containing controls for
air-conditioning systems, automatic fire-extinguishing systems, automatic sprinkler
systems or other detection, suppression or control elements shall be identified for use by
the fire department. Fire protection equipment shall be maintained accessible at all times.
No storage or operation is allowed that will obstruct or delay fire department access to
sprinkler risers and valves, or other fire protection control elements.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-15
1004.3.1 Zoning requirements. The number of occupants permitted shall also be
determined in accordance with Chapter 39 of the Troy City Code (zoning).
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
2101.1 Scope. Dry cleaning plants and their operations shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter, NFPA 32, and the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA
207, as amended, or its equivalent.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
2301.1 Scope. Automotive motor fuel-dispensing facilities, marine motor fuel-dispensing
facilities, fleet vehicle motor fuel-dispensing facilities, aircraft motor-vehicle fueldispensing
facilities and repair garages shall be in accordance with this chapter and the
Michigan Building Code, International Fuel Gas Code and the Michigan Mechanical Code,
and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules,
as amended, or their equivalent. Such operations shall include both operations that are
accessible to the public and private operations.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
2306.1 General. Storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance
with Chapters 23 and 57 and Sections 2306.2 through 2306.6.3, and the Michigan
Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, or
their equivalent.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
2306.7.8 Gravity and Pressure Dispensing. Flammable or combustible liquids shall not
be dispensed by gravity from tanks, drums, barrels or similar containers. Flammable or
combustible liquids shall not be dispensed by a device operating through pressure within
a storage tank, drum or container. Approved pumps taking suction from the top of the
container shall be utilized.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
3208.2.2.2 Fire Protection for Movable, Mobile, or Portable Racks. Fire protection for
movable, mobile, or portable racking systems in all occupancies, other than paper
document storage in light hazard occupancies, shall be equipped with wire or perforated
shelves which are acceptable to the fire code official. Perforated shelves shall be noncombustible
and have more than 40% of the horizontal surface open.
Exceptions:
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-16
a. Where the racking system meets NFPA 13 criteria and protection for multiple-row
racks defined in Sections 16 and 17.
b. Where the racking system is equipped with an approved in-rack fire protection
system installed in accordance with NFPA 13.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
5103.2 Identification. Cartons shall be identified on not less than one side with the
classification level of the aerosol products contained within the carton as follows:
LEVEL __________ AEROSOLS
The side of the carton marked shall be clearly visible when stored in configurations of two
or more cartons.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
5601.1.1 Explosive Material Standard. In addition to the requirements of this chapter,
NFPA 495 shall govern the manufacture, transportation, storage, sale, handling and use
of explosive materials, and the Michigan Explosives Law 1970 PA 202, as amended, or
its equivalent.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of
fireworks shall be in compliance with the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act No. 256,
Public Acts of 2011 and any amendments thereto, Troy City Code, Chapter 26; Troy City
Code, Chapter 98; and this ordinance.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
5601.1.4 Rocketry. The storage, handling and use of model and high-power rockets
shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 1122, NFPA 1125, and NFPA 1127, and the
Michigan Model Rocket Law 1965 PA 333, as amended, or its equivalent.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
5601.2.4 Financial Responsibility. Deleted.
5601.2.5 Bond for Public Display: The permit holder shall furnish a bond in an amount
approved by the City of Troy for the payment of all potential damage caused either to the
person or property due to the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the permit
holder or the agent of the permit holder.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-17
5608.1 General. The display of fireworks, including outdoor fireworks displays, proximate
audience displays and pyrotechnic special effects in motion picture, television, theatrical,
and group entertainment productions, shall comply with this chapter, and NFPA 1123 or
NFPA 1126. Approved public displays shall be handled by an approved competent
operator, and the fireworks shall be arranged, located, discharged and fired in a manner
that will not be a hazard to property or endanger any person.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
5701.3 Referenced Documents. The applicable requirements of Chapter 50, other
chapters of this code, the Michigan Building Code, and the Michigan Mechanical Code
pertaining to flammable liquids, and the Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable
and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, or their equivalent shall apply.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
5701.4 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 105.6 and 105.7, and
the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, as amended, or its equivalent.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
5704.2.9 Above-Ground Tanks. Above-ground storage of flammable and combustible
liquids in tanks shall comply with Section 5704.2 and Sections 5704.2.9.1 through
5704.2.9.7.10, and the Michigan Aboveground Storage Tank Rules, or their equivalent.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
5704.2.11 Underground Tanks. Underground storage of flammable and combustible
liquids in tanks shall comply with Section 5704.2 and Sections 5704.2.11.1 through
5704.2.11.5.2, and the Michigan Underground Storage Tank Rules, or their equivalent.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
5801.2 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 105.6 and 105.7 and
the Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, as amended, or its equivalent.
(Rev. 12-01-2014; Effective 12-11-2014)
Chapter 80
REFERENCED STANDARDS
State of Michigan Laws, Rules, or Requirements including but not necessarily limited to
the following with amendments:
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-18
Michigan Fire Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, MCL 29.1 et. seq.
Michigan Explosives Law 1970 PA 202, MCL 29.41 et. seq.
Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act No. 256, Public Acts of 2011, MCL 28.451 et. seq.
Michigan Model Rocket Law 1965 PA 333, MCL 259.781 et. seq.
Michigan Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, available
through State of Michigan Licensing and Regulatory Affairs
Michigan Underground Storage Tank Rules 1999, available through Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality, Underground Storage Tank Authority
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
NFPA National Fire Protection Association
________________________________________________________________
Standard Referenced
Reference in code
Number Title Section number
96-17 Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection 609.1 of
Commercial Cooking Operations
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
140-11 Standard on Motion Picture and Television Production 114.5
Studio Soundstages, Approved Production Facilities, and Production
Locations
(Rev. 12-01-2014)
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-19
Appendix C
FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION
TABLE C102.1
NUMBER AND DISTRIBUTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS
FIRE-FLOW
REQUIREMENT
(GPM)
MINIMUM NO.
OF HYDRANTS
AVERAGE SPACING
BETWEEN HYDRANTS
a,b,c
MAXIMUM DISTANCE
FROM
MOST REMOTE
PORTION OF
(feet) BUILDING ACCESSIBLE
BY FIRE APPARATUS TO
A HYDRANT d
(feet)
1,750 or less 1 500 250
2,000-2,250 2 450 225
2,500 3 450 225
3,000 3 400 225
3,500-4,000 4 350 210
4,500-5,000 5 300 180
5,500 6 300 180
6,000 6 250 150
6,500-7,000 7 250 150
7,500 or more 8 or more e 200 120
For SI: 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 foot = 304.8 mm
a Reduce by 100 feet (30,480 mm) for dead-end streets or roads with dead-end
water main.
b Where streets are provided with median dividers which cannot be crossed by
firefighters pulling hose lines, or where arterial streets are provided with four or
more traffic lanes and have a traffic count of more than 30,000 vehicles per day,
hydrant spacing shall average 500 feet (152.4 m) on each side of the street and
be arranged on an alternating basis up to a fire-flow requirement of 7,000 gallons
per minute (26,495 L/min.) and 400 feet (122 m) for higher fire-flow requirements.
c Where new water mains are extended along streets where hydrants are not
needed for protection of structures or similar fire problems, fire hydrants shall be
provided at spacing not to exceed 1,000 feet (305 m) to provide for transportation
hazards.
d Reduce by 50 feet (15,240 mm) for dead-end streets or roads.
e One hydrant for each 1,000 gallons per minute (3,785 L/min.) or fraction
thereof.
(Rev. 11-13-2017; Effective 11-23-2017)
Chapter 93 - Fire Prevention
93-20
Appendix D
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS
D101.1 Scope. Fire apparatus access roads shall be in compliance with this appendix
and all other applicable requirements of the International Fire Code, and City of Troy
Development Standards.
D103.5 Fire apparatus access road gates. Gates securing the fire apparatus access
roads shall comply with all of the following criteria:
1. The minimum gate width shall be 18 feet (5486.4 mm) unless otherwise
approved by the code official.
2. Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type.
3. Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual operation by one
person.
4. Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and
replaced or repaired when defective.
5. Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire
department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening devices
shall be approved by the code official.
6. Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain and padlock
unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools
carried by the fire department.
7. Locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval to the code
official.
8. Where buildings protected by electric gates are provided with automatic fire
protection and detections systems, gates shall open and remain open upon
initiation of an alarm.
(Rev. 05-03-2004; Effective 05-13-2004)
Chapter 94 - Axle Load Ordinance
94-1
1. No person shall drive or move nor shall the owner or lessee to cause or permit to
be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or vehicles of a size or weight
exceeding the limitations stated in this chapter, or otherwise in violation of this
chapter. The provisions of this chapter governing the weight and load shall not
apply to fire apparatus, or to implements of husbandry incidentally moved upon the
highway, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit issued as
herein provided.
(Rev. 03-18-1971)
9.122. A vehicle shall be deemed every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except
devices moved by human power, or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
Streets and Highways - a street or highway shall be deemed to mean the entire
width between property lines of every way or place open to the use of the public as
a matter of right for foot or vehicular travel.
9.123. In no case, shall the maximum axle load of any vehicle exceed the number of
pounds designated in the following provisions which prescribe the distance
between axles:
(a) When the axle spacing is nine (9) feet between two axles, the maximum
axle load shall not exceed 18,000 pounds for vehicles equipped with highpressure,
pneumatic or balloon tires.
(b) When the axle spacing is less than nine (9) feet between two axles, but
more than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet, the maximum axle load shall not
exceed 13,000 pounds for high-pressure, pneumatic or balloon tires.
(c) When two axles are spaced less than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet apart,
the combined weight thereof shall not exceed the maximum weight, as
specified for a single axle, when spaced nine feet or more apart.
(d) The foregoing shall be known as the normal loading maximum.
9.124. When such normal loading is in effect, the Director of
Public Works may permit heavier loads on designated streets or sections thereof,
where bridges and road surfaces are adequate for heavier loads, which
designation may be revised as needed, on which the maximum tandem axle
assemble loading shall not exceed 16,000 pounds for any axle of such assemble.
9.125. On any legal combination of vehicles, only one tandem axle assemble shall be
permitted, on such designated highways at the gross permissible weight of 16,000
pounds for any such axle, and no other tandem axle assembly in such combination
of vehicles shall exceed a gross weight of 13,000 pounds for any such axle.
Chapter 94 - Axle Load Ordinance
94-2
9.126. The normal size of tires shall be the rated size as published by the manufacturers,
and, in no case shall the maximum wheel load, permissible for any wheel, exceed
700 pounds per inch of width of tire.
9.127. During the months of March, April and May in each year, the maximum axle load
allowable on concrete pavements or pavement with a concrete base shall be
reduced by twenty-five per cent (25%) from the maximum axle loads as specified
heretofore in this Ordinance, and the maximum axle loads allowable on all other
types of roads during these months shall be reduced by thirty-five per cent (35%)
from the maximum axle loads as herein specified. The maximum wheel load shall
not exceed 525 pounds per inch of tire width, on concrete and concrete base, or
450 pounds per inch of tire width on all other roads, during the period the seasonal
road restrictions mentioned herein are in effect.
9.128. The Director of Public Works, with respect to streets under the jurisdiction of the
City of Troy, may suspend the restrictions imposed by this Section when and
where, in his discretion, conditions of the streets so warrant, and he may impose
the restricted loading requirements of this Section on designated streets at any
other time at which the conditions of the street may require.
9.129. A special permit may be issued by the Director of Public Works, or his authorized
representative, to operate or move a vehicle or combination thereof of a size or
weight exceeding the maximum specified in this Ordinance, provided the applicant
shows, to the satisfaction of said director, that such weight or size may be
exceeded, or that such operation may be permitted without endangering the public
safety, and without injury to the surface of the streets and highways. Such special
permit shall be in writing, and it shall specify the time, method, amount of excess
weight, or length permitted, the destination, purpose and route to be followed for
such operation. A special permit may also be issued for building contractors, or
others, for a limited period of time to exceed the size limits provided in this
Ordinance, provided that the person applying for such permit shall furnish a
satisfactory cash bond to the City conditioned upon his saving the City harmless
from any damage or defects to the public streets or highways of the City, including
sidewalks, pavement, street surfaces, drainage, or any other damage caused by
such use.
9.130. Any police officer, or any duly authorized agent of the City of Troy, having reason
to believe that the driver, operator, or, occupant or a motor vehicle is violating any
provision of this Ordinance, is authorized to require, the driver, occupant, or
operator to stop and submit to a weighing of said vehicle by any means available,
and may require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest weighing station for the
purpose of allowing such officer or agent of said City to determine whether such
vehicle is loaded in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
11. Any driver or owner of any vehicle who fails to stop when requested or order to do
so by any police officer, or any duly authorized agent of the State Highway
Department, or an authorized representative or agent of the Oakland County Road
Commission or a representative or agent of the City of Troy authorized to require
Chapter 94 - Axle Load Ordinance
94-3
the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of his vehicle and load is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Rev. 03-18-1971)
Penalty: Any driver or owner violating this section upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars and costs of
prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
12. Fines for Excess Weight. Any owner of any vehicle, or any lessee of the vehicle of
an owner-operator, who causes or allows a vehicle to be loaded and driven or
moved on any highway when the weight of that vehicle violates one or more of the
provisions of Sections 9.123, 9.124, 9.125, 9.126, or 9.127 of Chapter 94, upon
conviction thereof shall be assessed a fine in an amount equal to;
(a) Two (2) cents per pound for each pound of excess load over 1,000
pounds, when the excess is 2,000 pounds or less;
(b) Four (4) cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess
is over 2,000 pounds, but not over 3,000 pounds;
(c) Six (6) cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is
over 3,000 pounds, but not over 4,000 pounds;
(Rev. 03-18-1971)
(d) Eight (8) cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess
is over 4,000 pounds, but not over 5,000 pounds;
(e) Ten (10) cents for each pound of excess load when the excess is over
5,000 pounds.
However, the Court shall have discretionary power as to the amount of the fine
within the aforementioned schedule, and may impose the fine or jail sentence
provided by law where, at the time of the violation, either the motor vehicle, motor
vehicle and semi-trailer, or trailer did not exceed the total weight which would be
lawful for each such unit by a proper distribution of the load upon the various axles
supporting each such unit.
Chapter 95 - Parental Responsibility
95-1
1. Short Title. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Parental Responsibility
Ordinance".
(Rev. 11-14-1970)
2. Authority. This Chapter is adopted under the authority granted to the City Council of the City of
Troy by Act 246 of the Public Acts of 1945 as amended.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
3. Finding of Necessity. The City Council finds that offenses against the laws of the United States,
the statutes of the State of Michigan, and the Ordinances of the City of Troy by minors under the
age of Seventeen (17) years are increasing at an alarming rate; that in a great many of the cases
a lack of proper supervision and control of the minor child by his parents or guardian is evident;
that the increasing problem of criminal offenses by children will not be solved by sanctions
imposed upon the children alone but that it is necessary that sanctions be imposed upon parents
whose neglect of their duty to properly supervise and control their children is a proximate cause of
the delinquency of those children.
(Rev. 03-26-1979)
4. Contributing to Neglect or Delinquency of Children. Any parent, legal guardian or other person
having the care or custody of a minor child under the age of Seventeen (17) years who shall by
any act, or by any word, or by the failure to act, or by lack of supervision and control over said
minor child, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause said minor child to become
neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the Juvenile
Division of the Probate Court as defined in Section 2 of Chapter 12a of Act No. 288 of the Public
acts of 1939, as added by Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of the first extra session of 1944, and any
amendments thereto, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the Probate
Court, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Rev. 11-14-1970)
5. Any parent, legal guardian or other person having the care or custody of any minor child under the
age of Sixteen (16) years who shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage said minor to
violate the provisions of Section 1 and 2 of Act No. 41 of the Public Acts of 1960, as amended,
and as this act is modified by Chapter 91 of the Troy City Code, either by overt act, by failing to
act or by lack of supervision and control over said minor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The fact that
a child under the age of Sixteen (16) is apprehended while on the public streets, highways, alleys
or parks during the hours defined in Act 41 and in Chapter 91 of the Troy City Code, shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section on the part of the parents, legal guardian or
other person having the care or custody of said minor child.
(Rev. 02-11-1971)
Chapter 95 - Parental Responsibility
95-2
6. Penalty. Any person found guilty of a misdemeanor under the terms of this Chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars, or
imprisonment in the County Jail for not to exceed Ninety (90) days, or both said fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the Court.
(Rev. 11-14-1970)
Chapter 96 - Billiard Parlors, Pool Rooms
96-1
1. No person, firm or corporation, that owns or controls the premises where a coin-operated
amusement device as defined in Chapter 97, or similar devices, billiard tables, pool tables
or bowling alleys are located, shall permit the use or occupancy of those premises for
gambling.
2. No person, firm or corporation shall establish, maintain or operate within the City of Troy,
any coin-operated amusement device or devices, billiard parlors, pool rooms or bowling
alley, without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 59 and
Chapter 68 and Chapter 97 of this Code and it shall be unlawful to establish, maintain or
operate any of the foregoing without obtaining the license. The fee for the license shall be
as specified in Chapter 60 of this Code.
3. No licensee shall permit any person to remain on the licensed premises who is nude,
which means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks, and human female breasts below a point above the top of the areola or the
covered human male genitals in a visibly turgid state.
(Rev. 01-18-1982)
Chapter 97 - Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
97-1
1. Short Title. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Coin-Operated
Amusement Devices and Arcades Ordinance.
2. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
"Arcade" means any place, premises or establishment or room open to the public set
aside in a commercial establishment where the income from coin-operated amusement
devices exceeds five (5%) percent of the income of the principal business conducted at
the place, premises, room or establishment.
"Accessory to a principal use" means the commercial use of coin-operated amusement
devices which is not an arcade.
"Coin-operated amusement device" means any machine, instrument, or contrivance,
whether video, electronic, or mechanical, which may be operated or set in motion upon
the insertion of a coin, token, trade token, slug, place, disc, key, card or similar object,
whether the device is activated by insertion of such object, or is activated after paying a
fee, membership fee, or admission price, or their equivalent, which may be operated by
the public generally for use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not
registering a score and whether operated by hand, electrically or by any other form of
power.
"Owner" means any person, corporation, partnership or association who owns, operates
or conducts any place, premises, establishment or room set aside in commercial
establishments in which any coin-operated amusement device or coin-operated music
device may be operated.
"Person" means individuals, clubs, societies, partnerships, association, firms and
corporations.
3. License Required. It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessee or manager, to
establish, operate, conduct or maintain any arcade or coin-operated amusement device
without first obtaining a license for the device, and the arcade, from the City Clerk
pursuant to this Chapter.
4. Location.
A. No arcade is permitted on any property unless the property is zoned B-3
(Commercial) as defined in the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Troy.
B. No arcade, where the income from coin-operated amusement devices exceeds
thirty-five (35%) percent of the income of the principal business is permitted in any
part of a building when the building is within three hundred (300) feet of a
residential zoning district.
Chapter 97 - Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
97-2
C. No arcade, where the income from coin-operated amusement devices exceeds
thirty-five (35%) percent of the income of the principal business, is permitted on
any part of a lot which is within fifteen hundred (1500) feet of a building containing
another arcade where the income from coin-operated amusement devices
exceeds thirty-five (35%) percent of the income of the principal business.
D. No license for an arcade or coin-operated amusement device shall be issued for
any place, premises, establishment or room unless located within a building in
which persons assemble for amusement, entertainment, or recreation, classified
as an Assembly Use Group in the current edition of the Michigan Building Code as
adopted in Chapter 79, Section 8.1 of the City of Troy Ordinance.
(Rev. 05-16-2005)
5. License Application
A. Each applicant for a license under this Chapter shall have attained eighteen (18)
years of age, and shall not have been convicted of an offense involving gambling,
narcotics, sex with a minor, accosting or soliciting, any crime involving moral
turpitude, or violated any of the provisions of this Chapter for a period of five (5)
years prior to the application.
The City Clerk shall refer all applications for licenses under this Chapter to the
Chief of Police or ordinance designee, who shall:
(1) Investigate the qualifications and background of the applicant,
(2) Furnish a written report to the City Clerk, accompanied by a
recommendation from the Chief of Police or ordinance designee whether a
license should be granted or refused. The City Clerk may conduct other
investigations for the purpose of determining whether a license should be
granted to the applicant.
(Rev. 03-17-03)
B. Each person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain an arcade license and licenses
for coin-operated amusement devices as required by this Chapter shall file a
written application with the City Clerk on forms approved by the City Clerk for the
City of Troy, together with a non-refundable application fee in accordance with
Chapter 60, Fees and Bonds of the City of Troy Code of Ordinances. The
application shall include the following information:
(Rev. 03-17-03)
(1) The applicant's date of birth, correct name, post office address and
residence, the length of time the applicant has resided within this State and
the applicant's places of residence for the ten (10) years preceding
application.
Chapter 97 - Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
97-3
(2) Whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime involving gambling, narcotics, sex
with a minor, accosting or soliciting, or any crime involving moral turpitude.
(3) At least five (5) references from reputable citizens of the community wherein the applicant
last resided within this State, and the written recommendations of at least two (2) citizens
of that community reflecting the applicant's moral character.
(4) The type of business and the exact location of the premise for which a license is
requested.
(5) If applicant is a corporation authorized to do business in this State, the application shall
be made by the agent of the corporation who will have principal charge of the premises
established, and the application shall contain all the facts and recommendations required
in the case of an individual. The license issued to a corporation is revocable upon a
change in the agent managing the premise, and a new license may be required by the
City Council of the City of Troy before a new agent may take charge of the premise.
(6) If the applicant is a partnership, each active partner shall join in the application for the
license, and shall furnish the information and recommendations required of an individual
applicant.
(7) A scale diagram of the premise on which the business will be conducted, showing the
location of each coin-operated amusement device on the premise, and each exit from the
premise.
(Rev. 11-08-1982)
6. Inspection.
A. No arcade license shall be issued, until investigation of the applicant and
inspection of the premise is made by the City Building Department, Fire Marshal,
Police Department, and other City departments or agencies necessary to
determine that the applicant and the premise fully comply with all pertinent
ordinances and regulations.
B. No arcade license shall be recommended for approval by those City departments
or agencies until the Police Department and other necessary agencies or
departments determine that the applicant has provided sufficient paved off-street
parking and sufficient aids and improvements for the efficient and safe movement
of vehicular traffic. Minimum off-street parking facilities shall be the same as
required by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Troy.
C. No arcade license shall be recommended for approval by those City departments
or agencies until the Fire Marshal determines that adequate space is provided
between the coin-operated amusement devices to permit safe entry and exit from
the premise. The Fire Marshal shall not permit less space between devices than
specified in this Chapter.
Chapter 97 - Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
97-4
7. Requirements.
A. Each licensee shall at all times open each portion of a licensed premise for the
inspection by law enforcement agencies and any City Department for the purpose
of enforcing any provisions of the Code of the City of Troy.
B. Each licensee shall at all times display the licenses granted in a conspicuous place
near the entrance to the licensed establishment.
C. Each arcade shall have at least one adult operator on the premises at all times
that the premise is open to the public and who has been certified by and registered
with the City Clerk following application. The operator's application shall include the
following information:
(1) The operator's date of birth, correct name, post office address and
residence, the length of time the operator has resided within the State, and
the operator's places of residence for the ten (10) years preceding
application.
(2) Whether the operator has been convicted of any crime involving moral
turpitude.
(3) At least five (5) references from reputable citizens of the community
wherein the operator last resided within this State, and the written
recommendations of at least two (2) citizens of that community reflecting
the operator's moral character.
D. Only one license for each coin operated amusement device per one hundred (100)
square feet of floor area where the coin-operated amusement devices are located
may be issued for a facility, unless the facility is located in a wholly enclosed
shopping mall that contains more than four hundred thousand (400,000) square
feet of gross floor area, as long as the arcade does not have a public entrance
directly to the outside of the shopping mall, and that the shopping mall has a
uniformed security guard on duty at all times, and that the hours of operation of the
arcade do not exceed the hours of operation of the shopping mall. Licenses may
be issued to an arcade located in a wholly enclosed shopping mall as follows:
Floor Area (Sq. Ft.) Licenses
per 100 Sq. Ft. of Floor Area
0-800 1.0
800-1400 1.5
1400 - Up 2.25 (maximum 120 devices)
(Rev. 05-16-2005)
Chapter 97 - Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
97-5
E. If the coin-operated amusement devices are accessory to a principal use, only one
device may be licensed for each 750 square feet of usable floor area of the
premises. Usable floor area does not include accessory unoccupied areas,
restroom areas, storage areas, thickness of walls, bowling lane areas, rink areas,
court areas and the like.
F. Six (6) feet of aisle space is required between coin-operated amusement devices
or groups of devices in all instances.
G. No establishment shall contain more than one-hundred twenty (120) coin-operated
amusement devices.
(Rev. 01-22-1996)
8. Prohibitions.
A. No coin-operated amusement device shall display, expose, produce or emit any
motion picture, printed matter, advertisement, writing, song, recitation, speech,
music or other matter which depict or describe nudity, which means less than
completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, and
human female breasts below a point above the top of the areola or the covered
human male genitals in a visibly turgid state. A female breast is considered
uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and areola only are covered; nor, shall a
device(s) depict or describe:
(1) Sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality,
flagellation or any other act by a person involving the touching or contacting
of the genitals or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law.
(2) The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, pubic region or
genitals or the stimulation thereof by any device, tool, implement or object.
(3) The actual or simulated displaying or exposure or simulations of the pubic
hair, pubic region, anus, vulva, or genitals of humans, brutes, beasts or
animals.
(4) The exposure of the postpubertal female breast. A female breast is
considered exposed if any portion of the breast below a line above the top
of the areola is exposed.
(5) Artificial devices or inanimate objects employed to depict any of the
prohibited activities described above.
B. No license shall permit a person to remain on the licensed premises who is nude,
as defined in this Chapter.
Chapter 97 - Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
97-6
C. No licensee, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent, or employee, shall:
(1) Permit any indecent, immoral, or profane language or indecent, immoral or
disorderly conduct.
(2) Permit the licensed premise to become a resort for disorderly persons.
(3) Permit gambling or the use, possession, or presence of gambling
paraphernalia on the premises. This subsection does not apply to a
redemption game if all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The outcome of the game is determined through the application of
an element of skill by the player.
(b) The award of the prize is based upon the players achieving the
object of the game or otherwise upon the players score.
(c) Only noncash prizes, toys, novelties, or coupons or other
representations of value redeemable for noncash prizes, toys, or
novelties are awarded.
(d) The wholesale value of a prize, toy, or novelty awarded for the
successful single play of a game is not more than $3.75.
(e) The redemption value of coupons or other representations of value
awarded for the successful single play of a game does not exceed
15 times the amount charged for a single play of the game or $3.75,
whichever is less. However, players may accumulate coupons or
other representations of value for redemption of noncash prizes, toys
or novelties of a greater value up to but not exceeding, $250.00
wholesale value.
(Rev. 02-02-1998)
(3.1) As used in subsection (3), redemption game means a single player or
multi-player mechanical, electronic, or manual amusement device involving
a game, the object of which is throwing, rolling, bowling, shooting, placing,
propelling, or stopping a ball or other object into, upon, or against a hole or
other target. Redemption game does not include either of the following:
(a) Games such as roulette, beano, cards, dice, wheels of fortune, video
poker, slot machines, or other games in which wining depends
primarily upon fortuitous or accidental circumstances beyond the
control of the player.
(b) A game that includes a mechanical or physical device which directly
or indirectly impairs or thwarts the skill of the player.
Chapter 97 - Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
97-7
(Rev. 02-02-1998)
(4) Permit intoxicated persons on the premises.
(5) Permit any person under the age of twelve (12) years to be on the premises
unless accompanied by his parent or guardian.
(6) Permit any persons under seventeen (17) years of age to be upon the
premises after 10:30 P.M. (local time) unless accompanied by a parent or
legal guardian.
(7) Permit any persons under sixteen (16) years of age to be upon the
premises from 7:30 a.m. through 2:30 p.m. (local time) on those days when
any school located within any school district in the City of Troy is open for
regular school attendance unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor of any amusement
arcade to prohibit minor children from the premises under the
provisions of subsections (5), (6), and (7) above. Failure to do so
shall be considered a violation of this Chapter.
(Rev. 11-08-1982)
(8) Permit the possession or use of any alcoholic beverage on the premise, nor
shall the licensed premises be accessible with any place where alcoholic
beverages are kept, sold, distributed, or given away unless the licensed
premises possesses a Michigan Liquor Control Commission license.
(Rev. 05-16-2005)
(9) Permit the possession or use of a controlled substance, including
marijuana, on the premises.
(Rev. 05-16-2005)
(10) Permit noise or music to emerge from the licensed premises which is
disturbing to the persons in the surrounding area.
(Rev. 05-16-2005)
(11) Permit the premises to become a nuisance.
(Rev. 05-16-2005)
9. Hours of Operation. No person shall operate or cause to be operated in the City any
mechanical amusement device between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the
official time of the City, except on Sundays when the prohibited hours shall be between
Chapter 97 - Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
97-8
2:00 a.m. and 9:00 am. In establishments other than arcades, the hours of operation shall
coincide with the hours of the principal use.
(Rev. 05-16-2005)
10. Parental Objection. A person who operates or causes to be operated a coin-operated
amusement device arcade shall not permit a minor seventeen (17) years of age or under
to remain in or frequent the arcade, if the parent or guardian of the minor notifies the
person operating the arcade in writing, objecting to the minor's presence on the premises,
and also furnishes a recent snapshot photo of the minor to the person operating the
arcade.
11. License Fee and Expiration.
License fees shall be in accordance with Chapter 60, Fees and Bonds of the City of Troy Code
of Ordinances.
(Rev. 03-17-2003)
C. Any license issued under this Chapter shall expire on December 31 following its
issuance and successive renewals of the license shall require a new application
and license fee for each device and arcade.
D. The City Clerk shall refund to the applicant those pre-paid license fees submitted
with the application for which a coin-operated amusement device license or arcade
license is denied.
E. Any license issued under this Chapter is non-transferable.
(Rev. 11-08-1982)
12. Revocation of License.
A. The City Clerk may issue a notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this
Chapter upon submission of a written report to him by the Police Department for
any violation of the terms of this Chapter or for disorderly or immoral conduct on
the premises or for the violation of any of the rules, regulations, ordinances and
laws applying to the operation of coin-operated amusement devices.
B. The City Clerk may issue a notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this
Chapter upon submission of a written report to him by the Fire Department that the
premises or the conduct of the business on the premises constitutes a fire hazard
or violates the Fire Code or other applicable ordinances, rules or regulations of the
City pertaining to fire prevention or safety.
C. A notice of intention to revoke issued under this section shall be effective fifteen
(15) days from date of issue, unless a hearing is requested by the licensee within
five (5) days following receipt of the notice of intent to revoke.
Chapter 97 - Coin-Operated Amusement Devices and Arcades
97-9
D. A person who timely requests a hearing following receipt of a notice of intent to
revoke license is entitled to a hearing before the City Council at a time and place to
be set by the Council. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
given to the licensee by Certified or Registered mail at least ten (10) days prior to
the hearing.
13. Slot Machines. Nothing herein permits the issuance of a license for any slot machine or
legalizes any coin-operated machine which incorporates any gambling feature, and all
use for gambling is prohibited.
14. Counting Devices. Coin-operated amusement must be equipped with a counting device
so that the amount of revenue from the coin-operated amusement can be ascertained, so
that a determination can be made that the enterprise falls within the five (5%) percent or
thirty-five (35%) percent limitation by correlation of gross receipts there-from with the
financial statement of the business. The licensee shall be required to record, certify and
maintain such records for a period of two (2) years.
(Rev. 05-16-2005)
15. Enforcement Penalties.
A. Violations. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars and the costs of
prosecution, or, in default of the payment thereof, shall be punished by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days for each
offense or by both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court,
together with the costs of such prosecution.
B. Public nuisance per se. Any building or structure which is used in violation of any
of the provisions within this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per
se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Fines, Imprisonment. The owner of any building or structure which is used in
violation of this Chapter, and who has knowledge of such violation shall be guilty of
a separate offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be liable for the fines and
imprisonment herein provided.
D. Each day a separate offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day a violation of this Chapter occurs or continues.
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-1
HEADINGS, DEFINITIONS, PENALTIES AND AID AND ABET
98.01.01 Section Headings and Ordinance Titles. Section headings and ordinance
titles provided in bold are not part of this Chapter and are not to be used in
the interpretation of this ordinance.
98.01.02.1 Definitions. The following definitions are to be used in this Chapter:
Alcoholic liquor includes any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor,
liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented,
and by whatever name called, containing  of 1% or more of alcohol by
volume, which are fit for use for beverage purposes.
Dating relationship means frequent, intimate associations primarily
characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement. This term does
not include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between two
individuals in a business or social context.
(Rev. 04-08-2002)
Domestic assault and battery includes an individual who assaults or
assaults and batters his or her spouse or former spouse, an individual
which whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship, an individual
with whom he or she has had a child in common, or a resident or former
resident of his or her household.
(Rev. 04-08-2002)
"Firearm" includes any weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be
propelled by using explosives, gas or air as a means of propulsion.
Hunt includes seeking, provoking, pursuing or taking any animal.
Normal average retail price is that price at which similar merchandise
was sold during the ninety (90) days immediately preceding a declared
emergency, or at a mark-up which is a larger percentage over wholesale
cost than was added to wholesale cost prior to a declared emergency.
Person includes any individual, co-partnership, corporation, association,
club, joint venture, estate, trust, and any other group or combination
acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit.
Picket or picketing includes, standing, sitting, lying, walking, running, or
otherwise moving, on a public right-of-way, to convey an opinion or
message. These terms also include posting a person at a particular place
to communicate to the public vocally or by any other means an opinion or
message.
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-2
Public place includes any street, alley, park, public building, any place of
business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other
place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access.
Principal is a person who commits an offense punishable by this code.
"School property" includes any public, private, or parochial school building
or any building owned, occupied, or otherwise utilized by any public,
private, or parochial school, and expressly includes the grounds,
outbuildings, fences, trees, shrubbery, equipment, personal property, or
other appurtenances, fixtures, or improvements, attached or in any way
belonging thereto.
Telecommunications device means any instrument, equipment,
machine, or device that facilitates telecommunications, including but not
limited to a computer, computer chip or circuit, telephone, cellular
telephone, pager, personal communications device, transponder, receiver,
radio, modem, or device that enables use of a modem.
Trap includes hunting, confining, taking or entrapping any animal by
means of any trap, snare, bait, hook or other device.
98.01.03 Penalties. In addition to the penalties provided in each section of Chapter
98, the court may impose any sanction or remedial measure provided in
state law for misdemeanor offenses.
98.01.04 Aid and Abet. A person who aids, abets, counsels, commands, or
procures the commission of a violation of this code shall be punished as if
that person were the principal.
ASSAULTS
98.02.01 Domestic Assault and Battery. No person shall commit a domestic
assault or domestic assault and battery on another person. A person who
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
(Rev. 04-08-2002)
98.02.02 Assault and Battery. No person shall commit an assault or an assault and
battery on another person. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
(Rev. 04-08-2002)
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-3
98.02.03 Assault and Battery on a Police Officer. No person shall commit an
assault and battery on any police officer, animal control officer, police
service aide or peace officer in the performance of his or her duties. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
INDECENT CONDUCT
98.03.01 Indecent Exposure. No person shall make any indecent exhibition or
exposure of his or her person. A person who violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not
more than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.03.02 Indecent Conduct. No person shall engage in any indecent or obscene
conduct in any public place. A person who violates this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.03.03 Obscene Language. No person shall utter vile, profane or obscene
language in any public place. A person who violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not
more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.03.04 Urinate in Public Place. No person shall urinate in any public place other
than a designated lavatory. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.03.05 Window Peeping. No person shall peep in the windows of any inhabited
place without the consent of the occupant. A person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
98.03.06 Prostitution. No person shall engage in prostitution. A person who violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
98.03.07 Maintain Gaming Room. No person shall keep or maintain a gaming
room, gaming tables, or any policy or pool tickets, used for gaming. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-4
98.03.08 Permit Gaming Room on Premises. No person shall knowingly permit a
gaming room, gaming tables, or any policy or pool tickets to be kept,
maintained, played or sold on any premises occupied or controlled by him
or her. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or
by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.03.09 Engage in Illegal Business. No person shall engage in prostitution,
gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor, or any other illegal or
immoral business or occupation. A person who violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for
not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.03.10 Transport to Place of Illegal Acts. No person shall knowingly transport
any person to a place where prostitution or gambling is practiced,
encouraged, or allowed for the purpose of enabling a person to engage in
gambling, prostitution, or any illegal or immoral act. A person who violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
98.03.11 Frequent Place of Illegal Business. No person shall knowingly attend,
frequent, operate or be an occupant or resident of any place where any
illegal business or occupation is permitted or conducted by the owner or
occupant of the premises. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.03.12 Solicit Illegal Acts. No person shall solicit or accost any person for the
purpose of inducing the commission of any illegal or immoral act. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
98.04.01 Malicious Destruction of Property. No person shall willfully destroy,
remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his or
her own. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or
by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.04.02 Tamper With Water Meter. No person shall disturb, tamper with,
disconnect or damage any City water meter without proper authority. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-5
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.04.03 Tamper With Drinking Fountain. No person shall disconnect or deface
any drinking fountain. Nor shall a person deposit any harmful substance in
a drinking fountain or pollute the water in the basin of any fountain. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.04.04 Malicious Destruction of Turf and Shrubs. No person shall maliciously,
destroy, or injure any tree, shrub, grass, turf, plant, crop, or soil of another
person. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or
by a fine of not more than $500, or both
98.04.05 Malicious Interference with Closed Circuit Television Cameras. Except
when permitted by proper authority, no person shall knowingly touch,
alter, damage, obstruct, or otherwise interrupt the normal operation of any
closed circuit television camera. This shall include placing any object over
the lens or altering the direction of the camera. A person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
98.04.06 Tamper Or Meddle With Motor Vehicle. Except where authorized by the
owner, no person shall:
a) Enter any motor vehicle or open any door, trunk, hood or window of a
motor vehicle.
b) Start the motor of any vehicle or shift or change the starting device or
gears of any motor vehicle.
c) Release the brake of any motor vehicle.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
98.05.01 Trespass by Willful Entry. No person shall willfully enter upon the lands or
premises of another, without lawful authority, after having been forbidden
to do so by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or
occupant. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-6
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or
by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.05.02 Trespass by Refusing to Depart. No person, except a person with lawful
authority, shall neglect or refuse to depart from the land or premises of
another, after having been notified to depart by the owner or occupant, or
agent or servant of either. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.05.03 Enter Without Permission. No person shall enter an occupied dwelling or
garage, whether attached or unattached, without permission of the owner,
owners agent or occupant. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.05.04 Fight in Public. No person shall engage in any disturbance or fight in any
public place. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or
by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.05.05 Loud Conduct. No person shall disturb the peace and quiet by loud,
boisterous or vulgar conduct. A person who violates this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.05.06 Permit or Allow Loud Conduct. No person shall permit or allow any noisy,
boisterous, or disorderly persons to be in any place occupied or controlled
by him or her. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.05.07 Furnish or Provide Location for Illegal Purposes. No person shall furnish
or provide any location for another person with reason to know that the
location may be used to commit an illegal act, including but not limited to
the illegal use or possession of a controlled substance or alcohol. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.05.08 Congregate for Illegal Purpose. No person shall collect or stand in a
crowd or encourage others to stand or collect in a crowd for an illegal
purpose in any public place. A person who violates this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-7
98.05.09 Roughly Crowd Another Person. No person shall intentionally push or
bump or roughly crowd another person in any public place. A person who
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.05.10 Obstruct Passage of Another Person. No person shall intentionally
obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of another person in any
public place. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or
by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.05.11 Obstruct Traffic. No person shall play any game or congregate on any
public street or sidewalk so as to interfere with the regular flow of traffic. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.05.12 Throw Object From Vehicle. No person shall throw or propel any
snowball, missile or object from any moving motor vehicle. A person who
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.05.13 Throw Object at Vehicle. No person shall throw or propel any snowball,
missile or object at a motor vehicle. A person who violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for
not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.05.14 Spit in Public. No person shall spit on any floor or seat of any public
carrier, or on any floor, wall, seat or equipment of any place of public
assemblage. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.05.15 Contribute to Delinquency of Minor. No person shall by act, or word,
encourage, contribute to, cause or tend to cause, any person under the
age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent. A person who violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
98.05.16 See Section 98.15.01 (Rev. 06-17-13)
98.05.17 Beg in Public. No person shall beg in any public place. A person who
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-8
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.05.18 Targeted Residential Picketing. The City Council declares that:
a. The protection and preservation of the home is fundamental to
democratic government.
b. The public health, safety and welfare and good order of the
community require that residents of the City be able to enjoy a
feeling of well-being, peacefulness, tranquility, safety, and privacy
in their homes, and when absent from their homes carry with
them the sense of security inherent to the assurance that they
may return to the enjoyment of their homes.
c. Protecting the safety of the occupants of each home and their
guests as they enter their home is of paramount importance.
d. The practice of picketing in front of or about residences causes
emotional disturbance and distress to the occupants and guests,
as well as to the occupants of adjacent residences, and obstructs
and interferes with the free use of public sidewalks and that such
practice destroys the well being, peacefulness, tranquility, safety,
and privacy associated with the home and neighborhood.
e. The picketing of residences has as its object the harassing of
occupants, and without resort to picketing of residences full
opportunity exists under the terms and provisions of this
ordinance, for the exercise of freedom of speech and other
constitutional rights.
f. The practice of picketing directed or focused at a particular
residence, has by its nature as its true objective the harassing of
occupants, which is not consistent with a citizens right to privacy
or the governments interest in ensuring peaceful and safe
residential neighborhoods.
No person shall engage in picketing in front of, about or adjacent to a
residence. Nothing in this section shall prohibit picketing, to the extent that
such activity is protected under the Michigan or United States
Constitutions. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from
proceeding in a residential area along a defined route provided the person
does not stop at or repeatedly pass any particular residence. A person
who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-9
98.05.19 Price Gouging During Declared Emergency. No person, during an
emergency declared by City Council or the City Manager, shall charge
more than the normal average retail price for any merchandise sold. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
HINDER, OBSTRUCT, RESIST POLICE
98.06.01 Hinder, Obstruct or Resist Police. No person shall willfully obstruct, resist,
hinder or oppose any police officer, animal control officer, communication
supervisor, police service aide or any other peace officer in the legal
performance of his or her duties. A person who violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for
not more than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.06.02 Hinder Police by False Identification. No person shall make
misrepresentations as to his or her identity, whether by statement, through
the use of false, forged or altered identification or the use or presentation
of identification of another, with intent to hinder or obstruct any police
officer, animal control officer, communication supervisor, police service
aide or any other peace officer in the legal performance of his or her
duties. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or
by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.06.03 False Statement or Report to Police. No person shall willfully make any
false statement or report, to any police officer, animal control officer,
communication supervisor, police service aide or any other peace officer
in the legal performance of his or her duties, with the intent to mislead the
peace officer or obstruct an investigation. A person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
98.06.04 Falsely Summon Public Services. No person shall summon the police
department, fire department or any public or private ambulance without
good reason. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.06.05 Injure Police Dog. No person shall willfully or knowingly torture, torment,
beat, kick, strike, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the City of Troy
Police Department or interfere with or meddle with any police dog in the
performance of its duties. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-10
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
HUNTING
98.07.01 Hunting. No person shall hunt any animal. A person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
Exception. Police Officers and Animal Control Officers and any other
individuals given written authorization by the Police Chief or his/her
designee who are in compliance with the Citys policy are authorized to
use shell crackers or other noise making devices to control geese and
migratory waterfowl.
98.07.02 Trapping. No persons shall trap any animal. A person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
Exceptions: This section shall not apply to the following:
a. Persons may trap small rodents such as mice, rats and moles
with any type of trap.
b. Persons licensed by the State to trap may trap subject to the
following:
1. Only live traps that cannot kill or injure animals or persons
may be used.
2. All traps must be permanently marked with the owners
name and a telephone number where the owner or owners
agent can be contacted 24 hours a day.
3. All traps must be checked at least every 24 hours.
c. Persons authorized by State law or regulation may trap
animals.
d. Police Officers and Animal Control Officers are authorized to
use traps to capture wild or domestic birds or animals that
are running at large or have become a public nuisance.
THEFT AND FRAUD OFFENSES
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-11
98.08.01 Larceny. No person shall commit the offense of larceny by stealing the
personal property of another. A person who violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not
more than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.08.02 Retail Fraud. No person shall commit the offense of retail fraud. A person
who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity is guilty
of retail fraud:
a. While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes
and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at
which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for
the property or to pay less than the price at which the property
is offered for sale.
b. While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store
that is offered for sale.
c. With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or
property from the store as a refund or exchange for property
that was not paid for and belongs to the store.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.08.03 Receive and Conceal Stolen Property. No person shall buy, receive,
conceal, aid in the concealing, possess or transport, any money, goods,
or property of another, knowing the same to have been stolen, embezzled
or converted. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.08.04 Fail to Pay for Goods or Services. No person shall, with the intent to
defraud, procure services, goods, accommodations, or entertainment from
another person or establishment without paying such person or
establishment. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.08.05 Obtain Goods or Services by Fraud. No person shall obtain money,
property or services by fraud or false pretense. A person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-12
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICES
98.09.01 Illegal Use of Telecommunications Devices. No person shall use any
electronic telecommunications device with the intent to:
a. Terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten physical harm or
damage to property, harass or disturb the peace and quiet of
any other person. A person who violates this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail
for not more than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or
both.
b. Falsely and deliberately report that any person has been
injured, taken ill, died, been the victim of a crime, or in an
accident. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for
not more than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or
both.
c. Communicate any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive
language or suggest any lewd or lascivious act to a person who
has not consented to the communication. A person who violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or by
a fine of not more than $500, or both.
ALCOHOL
98.10.01 Public Intoxication. No person shall be intoxicated in a public place and
endanger another person or property or act in a manner that causes a
public disturbance. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.10.02 Consume Alcohol in Public. No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed in a
public place, unless the public place possesses a Michigan Liquor Control
Commission license for the premises. A person who violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail
for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.10.03 (1) Under 21  Purchase, Consume or Possess Alcohol. A person less
than 21 years of age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic
liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or
attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content. A
person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction or guilty
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-13
of a misdemeanor as follows:
a. For the first violation, the person is responsible for a civil infraction
and shall be fined not more than $100.00, and the court may order
all applicable sanctions and programs provided in the State of
Michigan minor in possession of alcohol statutes. A person may be
found responsible or admit responsibility only once under this
subsection.
b. If a violation of this section or a local ordinance or state law which
substantially corresponds to this section occurs after 1 prior
judgment, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
not more than $200.00 and the court may order all applicable
sanctions and programs provided in the State of Michigan minor in
possession of alcohol statutes.
c. If a violation of this section or a local ordinance or state law which
substantially corresponds to this section occurs after 2 or more
prior judgments, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than $500.00 and the court may order all applicable
sanctions and programs provided in the State of Michigan minor in
possession of alcohol statutes.
(2) Prior judgment as used in this section means a conviction, juvenile
adjudication, finding of responsibility, or admission of responsibility for any
of the following, whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to a law of this state, a law of the United
States substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of
another state substantially corresponding to a law of this state:
a. This section or a local ordinance or state law which substantially
corresponds to this section, MCL 436.1701 or 436.1707.
b. Section 624a, 625b or 625 of the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA
300, MCL 257.624a, 257.624b, and 257.625.
c. Section 80176, 81134, or 82127 of the natural resources and
environmental protection act, 1994 PA 451, MCL 324.80176,
324.81134, and 324.82127.
d. Section 167a or 237 of the Michigan penal code, 1939 PA 328,
MCL 750.167a and 750.237.
(3) A police officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person less
than 21 years of age has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily
alcohol content may request the person to submit to a preliminary
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-14
chemical breath analysis. If a person under 21 years of age does not
consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not
be administered without a court order, but a police officer may seek to
obtain a court order. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis
or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a civil infraction
proceeding or criminal prosecution to determine whether the person has
consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol
content.
(4) A police officer who witnesses a violation of this ordinance may stop
and detain the person for purposes of obtaining satisfactory identification,
seizing illegally possessed alcoholic liquor, and issuing an appearance
ticket.
(5) This section does not prohibit a person less than 21 years of age from
possessing alcoholic liquor where permitted by state law.
(Revised 12-18-2017; Effective 01-01-2018)
98.10.04 Under 21 - PBT Refusal.
(Deleted: 11-23-2009)
98.10.05 Person Under 21 - Transport Alcohol in Motor Vehicle. A person under 21
years of age shall not knowingly transport or possess alcoholic liquor, in a
motor vehicle, unless authorized by law. A person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500 or
both.
98.10.06 Furnish or Sell Alcohol to Person Under 21. No person shall willfully give,
furnish or sell alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21, except
pursuant to a prescription from a licensed physician. Except as set forth in
Section 98.10.14, a person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
(Rev. 08-11-2008)
98.10.07 Furnish False ID. No person shall furnish identification to any person
under the age of 21 where the person knows or should know that the
identification is to be used for fraudulent purposes. A person who violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-15
98.10.08 Use of False ID. No person shall use fraudulent identification to purchase
or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor. A person who violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail
for not more than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.10.09 Purchase Alcohol by Intoxicated Person. No person who is intoxicated or
impaired by alcohol or drugs shall purchase or solicit any other person to
purchase alcoholic liquor on his or her behalf. A person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
98.10.10 Sell Alcohol to Intoxicated Person. No person employed by, or any agent
or owner of, any business or establishment that sells, serves, distributes,
or gives away alcoholic liquor, shall sell, serve, furnish, or give away
alcoholic liquor to any visibly intoxicated person. A person who violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
98.10.11 Fail to Inquire as to Age. No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor to
any person less than 21 years of age and no person shall fail to make
diligent inquiry as to whether a person attempting to obtain alcoholic liquor
is less than 21 years of age. Except as set forth in Section 98.10.14, a
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
(Rev. 08-11-2008)
98.10.12 Bring Alcohol into Licensed Liquor Establishment. No person, other than
the owner, licensee or agent of a licensed liquor establishment, shall bring
any alcoholic liquor into any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic liquor.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.10.13 Display of Alcohol. No person shall display spirits, containing an alcoholic
content of over 21 percent by volume, in an area that is open to persons
under the age of 21. Such displays shall be behind a counter or similar
fixture. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or
by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.10.14 Furnishing, Sale To Persons Under 21 and/or Failure to Inquire As To Age
During Enforcement Action. If an employee, clerk, or agent of an
establishment that has been issued a license to sell or serve alcoholic
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-16
liquor by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission violates either Section
98.10.06 or 98.10.11, and those violations result from an undercover
operation in which the minor is under the direction of the Troy Police
Department as part of an enforcement action, then that employee, clerk,
or agent is responsible for a Civil Infraction and may be ordered to pay a
civil fine of not more than $100.
(08-11-2008)
DRUGS
98.11.01 Possession or Use of Marijuana. No person shall knowingly or
intentionally possess or use marijuana except as authorized by state law.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-17
98.11.02 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. No person shall possess a
hypodermic syringe or needle or any other instrument or implement
adapted for the use of narcotic or dangerous drugs. A person who violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.
Exceptions. This section does not apply to the following:
a. Possession where authorization was issued by a licensed
physician within a period of one (1) year.
b. Manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical
technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research or
teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors,
osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians,
pharmacists and embalmers in the normal legal course of their
respective business or profession.
98.11.03 Loiter with Intent to Use or Sell Drugs. No person shall loiter, frequent or
live in any place with the intent to use, sell, dispense, furnish, give away,
store or keep illegal drugs, hypodermic syringes, needles, empty gelatin
capsules or narcotic paraphernalia. A person who violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for
not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.11.04 Unlawful Possession of Chemical Agent. No person shall possess a
chemical agent, including nitrous oxide, with the intent to breath, inhale, or
ingest for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, elations,
euphoria, dizziness, or dulling of the senses or for the purpose of
changing, distorting, or disturbing the audio, visual, or mental processes.
This section shall not prohibit the possession of a chemical agent,
including nitrous oxide, for the purpose of administering anesthesia for
medical or dental purposes by a licensed practitioner. A person who
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.11.05 Unlawful Use of Chemical Agent. No person shall intentionally breath,
inhale or ingest any chemical agent, including nitrous oxide, for the
purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, elations, euphoria,
dizziness or dulling of the senses or for the purpose of, in any manner,
changing, distorting, or disturbing the audio, visual, or mental processes.
This section shall not prohibit the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical
or dental purposes administered by a licensed practitioner. A person who
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-18
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.11.06 Unlawful Delivery of Chemical Agent. No person shall possess a chemical
agent, including nitrous oxide, with the intent to deliver to another person
knowing or having reason to know that the other person will use the
chemical agent in violation of Section 98.11.04 or 98.11.05. A person who
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
TOBACCO
98.12.01 Person Under 18 - Possess or Purchase Tobacco. No person under the
age of 18 shall purchase, attempt to purchase, possess or use tobacco in
any form or any product that is used for the formation of a smoking
device. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense.
98.12.02 Sell or Furnish Tobacco to Person Under 18. No person shall sell,
furnish, give or deliver tobacco in any form or any product that is used for
the formation of a smoking device to any person under the age of 18. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense.
FIREARMS
98.13.01 Transport or Possess Firearms. No person shall transport or possess a
firearm in a vehicle unless the firearm is unloaded in both barrel and
magazine and carried in the luggage compartment of the vehicle. A
person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
Exception. This section does not apply to persons authorized by federal or
state law to transport or possess firearms.
98.13.02 Firearms in Public. No person shall carry a firearm in any public place
unless it is unloaded in both barrel and magazine and in a case. A person
who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
Exception. This section does not apply to persons authorized by federal or
state law to carry firearms.
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-19
98.13.03 Person Under 18 - Purchase Firearms. No person under 18 years of age
shall purchase, carry or transport a firearm in any public place. A person
who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.13.04 Sell Firearms to Person Under 18. No person shall sell a firearm to any
person under 18 years of age. A person who violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not
more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.13.05 Discharge of Firearms. No person shall discharge any firearm or bow and
arrow in the City. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
Exception. This section does not apply to persons lawfully acting in the
defense of persons or property or the enforcement of law or as otherwise
authorized by this Chapter, or at an established range that has been
approved by the Troy City Council.
SCHOOL PROPERTY
98.14.01 Cause Disturbance on School Property. No person shall willfully or
maliciously make or assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper
diversion by which the peace and quiet or good order of any class,
gathering or other function in any school building is disturbed. A person
who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
98.14.02 Profane Language on School Property. No person shall use profane,
indecent, vulgar, or immoral language or indulge in indecent or immoral
conduct on school property. A person who violates this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.14.03 Unauthorized Use of School Property. No person shall enter or remain on
school property for any purpose other than a purpose related to school
business and activities, unless authorized by law or a school
administrator. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.14.04 Use or Possession of Alcohol on School Property. No person shall use or
possess alcoholic liquor on school property unless authorized by law or a
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-20
school administrator. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
98.14.05 Tobacco Products on School Property. No person shall use any tobacco
product on school property. A person who violates this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00.
Exception. This section does not apply to those parts of school property
consisting of outdoor areas including, but not limited to, an open-air
stadium, during either of the following time periods:
a. Saturdays, Sundays, and other days on which there are no
regularly scheduled school hours.
b. After 6 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled
school hours.
98.15.01 Fireworks. An individual shall not fire, discharge, display, or possess any
fireworks, except as permitted by state law and this ordinance. There
shall be no ignition, discharge or use of consumer fireworks on all days
except for the following days:
 December 31 until 1 am on January 1
 The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day
 June 29 to July 4
 July 5, if that date is a Friday or a Saturday
 The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day
On these dates only, persons are permitted to ignite, discharge, or use
fireworks between the hours of 11:00 am to 11:45 pm, except as set forth
above, in accordance with state and local law. A person who ignites, uses
or discharges a consumer firework at any time except as set forth above
is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, which is punishable by a fine
of up to $1000, with $500 required to be remitted to the Troy agency
enforcing the ordinance. A person who violates any other portion of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine or not more than $500,
or both.
(Rev. 06-06-2019; Effective 06/13/2019)
98.15.02 Ignition, Use, Discharge of Fireworks While Under Influence of Alcohol or
Controlled Substances. An individual shall not discharge, ignite, or use
consumer fireworks or low impact fireworks while under the influence of
alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic
Chapter 98  Criminal Code
98-21
liquor and a controlled substance, which are defined under the Michigan
vehicle code, 1949 PA 300 and any amendments. A person who ignites,
uses, or discharges fireworks in violation of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
(Rev. 06-17-13)
98.15.03 Discharge of Fireworks on Public Property. An individual shall not ignite,
discharge, or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property,
church property, or the property of another person without that
organizations or persons express permission to use those fireworks on
those premises. A person who ignites, uses or discharges fireworks in
violation of this section is guilty of a municipal civil infraction, punishable
by a fine of up to $500.
(Rev. 06-17-13)
EFFECTIVE DATE
98.16.01 Effective Date. This Chapter shall become effective at 12:01 a.m. on
February 1, 2001.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-1
1. Definitions:
For the purpose of the provisions of this Chapter, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the
context that a different meaning is intended.
(a) Employee means any person other than a massage therapist, who
renders any service in connection with the operation of a Massage Facility
and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons.
This includes a leased employee or subcontractor.
(b) Licensee means the person to whom a license has been issued to own
or operate a Massage Facility as defined herein.
(c) Manager means a person who is employed by a Massage Facility to act
as a manager or supervisor of employees, independent massage
therapists, or independent contractors, or is otherwise responsible for the
operation of the business.
(d) Massage means the application of a system of structured touch,
pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the human body in
which the primary intent is to enhance or restore the health and well-being
of the client. Massage includes complementary methods, including the
external application of water, heat, cold, lubrication, scrubs, body wraps,
or other topical preparations; and electromechanical devices that mimic or
enhance the actions possible by the hands. For purposes of this Chapter,
the terms bodywork, acupressure, and acupuncture are included in
the definition of massage.
(e) Massage facility means any individual, group of individuals, person or
business which engages in the practice of massage as defined in
subsection 1(d), and which has a fixed place of business where any
person, firm, association, partnership, limited liability company or
corporation carries on any of the activities as defined in subsection 1(d).
Massage Facility also includes a Turkish bath parlor, steam bath, sauna,
magnetic healing institute, health club, health spa, or physical fitness club
or business that offers massages on occasion or incidental to its principal
operation.
(f) Massage therapist means any person who engages in the practice of
massage as defined in subsection 1(d). Use of the word massage
therapist in this Chapter shall include massage therapist, masseurs,
masseuses and all others engaged in massage.
(g) Patron means any person who receives a massage under such
circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she shall pay
money or give any other consideration for the massage.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-2
(h) Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock,
company, limited liability company, corporation or combination of
individuals or business entities of whatever form or character.
2. Facility License Required:
(a) Except as set forth in Section 3, no person shall operate a Massage
Facility without obtaining a valid Massage Facility License for each
separate office or place of business address. A Massage Facility License
shall be renewed on an annual basis and cover the licensing period of
January 1st to December 31st of each year.
(b) Based on past investigations and articulated health, safety and welfare
concerns, the City intends to issue a maximum of 18 Massage Facility
Licenses each year. As of November 1, 2017, all existing Massage
Facilities that are properly licensed shall be considered a Current
Facility. Current Facilities are eligible to able to apply for annual
renewal(s), even if the issuance of a license temporarily results in more
than 18 Massage Facilities in the City. If a license is revoked, rescinded
or suspended, or if there is a change in ownership or location, or if the
licensing requirements of Section 11 and 13 are not satisfied, then the
Massage Facility is no longer qualified as a Current Facility.
(c) If the City has issued less than the maximum of 18 Massage Facility
licenses for any one year, after processing all of the Current Facility
renewal applications, then the City can consider new applications. If there
are more applications than licenses available, then a City Administrative
committee, comprised of representatives from the City Managers Office,
City Clerks Office, Planning Department, Building Inspections
Department, Police, and City Attorneys Office will evaluate and prioritize
the applications, based on the following factors:
(1) The applicants experience in operating other similarly licensed
businesses.
(2) The applicants general business management experience.
(3) The applicants general business reputation.
(4) The applicants moral character.
(5) Past convictions of the applicant for any of the following:
(i) A felony.
(ii) A crime involving any of the following:
A) Gambling.
B) Prostitution.
C) Weapons.
D) Violence.
E) Tax evasion.
F) Fraudulent activity.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-3
G) Controlled substances.
H) Serious moral turpitude.
I) A misdemeanor of such a nature that it may impair the
ability of the applicant to operate a licensed business in a
safe and competent manner.
(6) The history of non-payment or late payment of taxes by the
applicant and/or property owner.
(7) The need for proposed business in the particular area.
(8) The proximity of the proposed business to other similarly licensed
businesses.
(9) The proximity of the proposed business to a residentially zoned or
used zoning
(10) The overall fit and compatibility with the Master Plan of the City.
(11) The impact of the business on police and code enforcement.
(12) The effect that the issuance of a license would have upon the
economic development of the surrounding area.
(13) The effect that the proposed business would have upon the
surrounding neighborhood and/or business establishments,
including impacts upon residential areas, churches, schools, and
public parks.
(14) The overall benefits of the proposed establishment to the City.
(15) Any other factors that may affect the health, welfare, and/or safety
of the general public.
(16) Any other factors that the City may deem proper, provided such
considerations are reasonable under all of the circumstances.
(17) Proposed uniform attire
3. Exemptions for Massage Facility Licensing:
The following facilities are exempt from the requirement of a Massage Facility
License:
(a) Hospitals, medical facilities, medical offices where massage therapists
engage in the performance of massage under the supervision of and in
conjunction with the professional practices of physicians, surgeons,
chiropractors, osteopaths, physical therapists or other recognized medical
professionals who are fully licensed to practice their respective
professions in the State of Michigan.
(b) Hospitals, medical facilities, medical offices, or other facilities where
nurses who are registered and licensed under the laws of the State of
Michigan perform massages.
(c) A facility which, as its primary function, is a gymnasium, fitness center with
weight lifting/body building/body strengthening equipment, a sports
training facility, or a sports or fitness facility in which massage therapy is
an integral part of the relaxation and/or treatment of muscle groups for
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-4
sports or fitness conditioning.
(d) A facility, including a school of cosmetology and/or beauty school that
administers massage to the face, head, neck and shoulders only as part of
cosmetic or beautifying processes.
4. Application for Massage Facility License; Fees:
Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a Massage Facility
shall file an application with the City Clerks office upon the form provided by the
City of Troy and pay the nonrefundable application fee, which is set forth in
Chapter 60. The applicant shall provide the following information, the truthfulness
of which shall be sworn to under oath:
(a) A description of services to be provided.
(b) The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers for the massage
facility.
(c) The name and permanent residential address of the applicant(s).
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, the names and permanent
residential addresses of each of the officers, directors and resident
agents of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more
than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation; the address of
the corporation itself, if different from the address of the massage
facility; and the name and address of a resident agent in Oakland
County, Michigan.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the names and permanent
residential addresses of each of the partners and limited partners
and of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the
massage facility; and the name and address of a resident agent in
Oakland County, Michigan.
(d) Each applicants two (2) immediately preceding addresses.
(e) Proof that each individual applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(f) The height, weight, sex and color of eyes and hair of each individual
applicant or each partner of a partnership applicant.
(g) A copy of identification, such as drivers license or government issued
identification, which bears a date of birth for each individual applicant or
each partner for a partnership applicant, or each officer, director,
stockholder and resident agent for a corporation applicant.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-5
(h) One front face current portrait photograph of the individual applicant(s),
which is at least two inches by two inches (2 x 2), and a complete set of
the individual applicant(s) fingerprints, which shall be taken by the Chief of
Police or his agent.
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, one front face current portrait
photograph, which is at least two inches by two inches (2 x 2), of
all officers and resident agents of said corporation and a complete
set of the same officers, directors and resident agents fingerprints,
which shall be taken by the Chief of Police or his agent.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, one front-face current portrait
photograph, which is at least two inches by two inches (2 x 2) in
size of each partner, including a limited partner in said partnership,
and a complete set of each partner or limited partners fingerprints,
which shall be taken by the Chief of Police or his agents.
(i) The business, occupation, or employment of the applicant(s) for the three
(3) years immediately preceding the date of application.
(j) The massage or similar business history of the applicant(s);
(k) A statement of whether or not the applicant(s) currently operates or
previously operated a massage business in this or another municipality or
state;
(l) A statement of whether or not the applicant(s) had a business license of
any kind revoked or suspended and the reason for the suspension or
revocation;
(m) All of the individual applicants criminal convictions (other than
misdemeanor traffic violations not involving a controlled substance or
alcohol), and the dates of conviction(s), the nature of the crime(s) and
court or tribunal where the matter was adjudicated.
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, the criminal convictions (other than
misdemeanor traffic violations not involving a controlled substance
or alcohol), and the dates of conviction(s), the nature of the crime(s),
and the court or tribunal where the matter was adjudicated for all of
the officers and resident agents of the corporation.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the criminal convictions (other than
misdemeanor traffic violations not involving a controlled substance
or alcohol), and the dates of conviction(s), the nature of the crime(s),
and the court or tribunal where the matter was adjudicated for each
partner, including a limited partner in the partnership.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-6
(n) The names, addresses, and birth dates for each massage therapist, as
well as a photo copy of each massage therapists drivers license,
government issued identification, , or work VISA, and a copy of a State of
Michigan massage license.
(o) The names, addresses, and birth dates for each employee or independent
contractor who is not a massage therapist but who is or will be employed
in the Massage Facility, as well as a photo copy of each employee or
independent contactors drivers license, government issued identification,
or work VISA. In addition, the employee or independent contractors
responsibilities or job titles must also be identified.
(p) The name and addresses of any massage businesses facility or other
facility owned operated or managed by any person whose name is
required to be given in subsection 4(c).
(q) A description of any other business(es) to be operated on the same
premises or on adjoining premises which are managed, owned or
controlled by the applicant(s).
(r) An authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information
and conduct an investigation to verify the veracity of the information
contained in the application and the qualifications of the applicant(s),
including but not limited to authorization to conduct a LEIN records check
of all applicants, employees, officers, directors, managers, resident agents
or stockholders.
(s) The names, current addresses, phone numbers and notarized written
statements of at least three (3) bona fide permanent residents of the
United States that attest that the applicant is of good moral character. If
possible, the notarized statements should be furnished from residents of
the City of Troy. If the applicant verifies that he/she cannot provide these
notarized statements from residents of the City of Troy, then the applicant
can submit these required notarized statements from Oakland County
residents. If the applicant verifies that he/she cannot provide these
notarized statements from residents of Oakland County, then the required
notarized statements could be from residents of the State of Michigan. If
the applicant attests that he/she cannot obtain notarized statements from
Michigan residents, then the City has the option to accept notarized
statements or references from persons residing in the United States in
satisfaction of this requirement. These notarized statements or references
must be from persons other than applicants relatives and business
associates.
(t) Evidence of current valid premises liability, workers compensation and
general liability insurance for the massage facility, in an amount of two
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or more.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-7
(u) All information required by this section shall be provided at the applicants
expense.
At any time either before or after the issuance of a license, if there is any change
to the above required information the Massage Facility licensee is required to
notify the City of Troy of each such change immediately, but in no event more
than ten (10) days after such change occurs. Any such change may result in a
revocation of the Massage Facility License for failure to satisfy the Citys license
requirements.
5. License Procedures:
(a) Any applicant for a Massage Facility license pursuant to this Chapter shall
present to the City Clerks office the application containing the
aforementioned and described information. Once a fully completed
application has been received by the City Clerk, it shall be referred to the
Chief of Police or his/her designee, who shall have sixty (60) days in
which to investigate the application and the background of the
applicant(s). Based on such investigation, the Chief of Police, or his/her
designee shall render a recommendation as to the approval or denial of
the license to the City Clerk.
In making this determination, the Chief of Police shall consider:
(1) The criminal or penal history of the applicant(s), including but not
limited to actual criminal convictions for all or each of the
applicants, massage therapists, employees, managers and
independent contractors; civil judgments against all or each of the
applicants, massage therapists, employees, managers and
independent contractors; the circumstances of those convictions or
judgments; and the demeanor of the applicant, massage therapists,
employees, managers and independent contractors subsequent to
his or her conviction or judgment.
(2) The license history of the applicant(s), including but not limited to
whether such person(s) has previously operated in this City or
State, or in another state under a license, and has had such license
or a permit revoked or suspended.
(3) In addition, a Massage Facility will also be inspected for compliance
with the requirements of this Chapter and compliance with all City
ordinances and State laws by one or more City representatives,
including but not limited to representatives of the Police
Department, Fire Department, Building Inspections and/or Planning
Department or their agents. Any inspection reports shall be
forwarded to the City Clerk within forty five (45) days of the receipt
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-8
of a fully completed application.
(4) Any other considerations that the Chief of Police and/or his/her
designee deems proper, provided such considerations are
reasonable under the circumstances.
6. Issuance of License for a Massage Facility:
The City Clerk shall issue Massage Facility license if all requirements described
in this Chapter are met, unless the City Clerk determines:
(a) The number of Massage Licenses issued in the calendar year meets or
exceeds the maximum number of Licenses permitted under Section 2 of
this Chapter.
(b) The Chief of Police recommends that the application be denied, based on
a review of the factors considered in Section 5(a) of this Chapter.
(c) The correct license fee has not been tendered to the City and/or, a check,
or bank draft, given to the City has not been honored with payment upon
presentation.
(d) The operation, as proposed by the applicant(s), if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the Citys
building, zoning and health regulations.
(e) Conviction of any of the following crimes by the individual applicant(s), or
any of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of
the corporation; or any of the officers, directors or resident agents, if the
applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the holder of any lien, of any
nature, upon the business; or the manager or other person principally in
charge of the operation of the business; or any employees or independent
contractors:
(1) A felony offense involving the use of force or violence upon another
person.
(2) A misdemeanor or felony sexual misconduct offense, including but
not limited to prostitution.
(3) A felony offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous
weapons.
(f) The applicant(s) knowingly made any false or fraudulent statement of fact
in the license application or in any document required by the City in
conjunction therewith.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-9
(g) The applicant(s) ever had a massage business facility or other similar
license denied, revoked, rescinded or suspended by the City or a similar
business license or permit denied by any other municipal entity and the
denial, revocation, or suspension was based on criminal activity, fraud or a
violation of the healthy, safety and welfare provisions of a municipal
ordinance or State law.
(h) If any massage therapist(s), employee(s), applicant(s), officer(s), directors,
resident agent(s) partner(s), are under the age of eighteen (18) years.
7. Approval or Denial of Application:
The City Clerk shall act to approve or deny a completed Massage Facility
License application within than sixty (60) days from the date that said application
was accepted by the City Clerks office.
Every license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be valid for one year and
must be renewed as required by this Chapter.
Applicant(s) denied a license, pursuant to these provisions, may appeal the
denial to the City Council by submitting a written document that states the
reasons why the license should be granted. Such appeal shall be filed within 28
days of the City Clerks mailing of a written notification of denial. Upon receipt of
an appeal, the City Clerk shall present the applicants appeal and any additional
responsive information from City Administration. After consideration of all
submitted documentation, City Council shall vote on the appeal at a regularly
scheduled City Council meeting. The City Council may affirm or reverse the
denial of a license or take any other warranted action. City Councils decision
shall be final.
8. Administrative Inspections of Facility.
(a) A licensed massage facility may be inspected by City representatives at
reasonable hours without prior notice to insure continued compliance with
all City ordinances and State laws. These inspections can be completed
by one of more City representatives, including but not limited to
representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, Building
Inspections Department and/or Planning Department or their agents.
(b) It is unlawful for any Massage Facility Licensee or employee or manager
or partner or agent to refuse or fail to allow such inspection or to hinder
such officer or inspector in any manner. Such refusal may constitute
sufficient grounds for immediate suspension of a license granted under
the provisions of this Chapter, based on the discretion of the City Official,
and subject to the Due Process provisions outlined in Section 11.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-10
9. Posting of License:
Every Massage Facility licensed under this Chapter shall display the license in a
prominent place at the Massage Facility.
10. Records of Employees:
(a) The licensee shall maintain a register of all persons employed or engaged
as massage therapists for the licensee and/or on the licensed premises,
and also of any volunteer or independent contractor or agent rendering
any services, and identify the role and responsibilities of each such
person. Such registry shall be maintained at the Massage Facility and
made available upon request of representatives of the City of Troy.
(b) Each licensee is responsible for updating the information that is required
under Section 4; including but not limited to the hiring of any new
employees or massage therapists after the license has been issued. City
Clerk approval of any new employee, massage therapist, volunteer or
independent contractor is required before they can work or render any
type of services at the Massage Facility.
(c) It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure that each person
employed or engaged in such business as a massage therapist shall have
first obtained a valid massage therapist license pursuant to P.A. 471 of
2008, MCL 333.17951 et. seq. Any licensee who allows such person to
perform, operate or practice without a license shall be in violation of this
Chapter, and will be subject to suspension and/or revocation as
enumerated in Section 11.
(d) No person shall practice of engage in the business of a massage therapist
within the City without first having obtained a license pursuant to P.A. 471
of 2008, MCL 333. 17951 et. seq.
11. Suspension or Revocation of License; Notice and Hearing:
(a) When any of the provisions of this Chapter are violated by the licensee,
an employee, manager, massage therapist, employee or independent
contractor of the massage facility; and/or when any licensee, employee,
manager, massage therapist, employee or independent contractor of the
licensee is engaged in any conduct which violates any State law or City
ordinance; or upon notification from the Oakland County Health
Department that the Massage Facility is being managed, conducted, or
maintained without regard to proper sanitation and hygiene; or for any
good cause; the City Council of the City of Troy may suspend or revoke
the Massage Facility License after notice and a due process hearing, as
set forth below.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-11
(b) For conditions posing an immediate threat to the public health, safety and
welfare of the community, patrons, employees or others, the City
Manager or his/her designee has the authority to immediately suspend
any license granted hereunder, without notice or a hearing; provided,
however, that City Administration shall make good faith efforts to provide
written notice of the suspension to the licensee within seventy-two (72)
hours of ordering the suspension, with the effective date and time of
such suspension. This notification shall be hand delivered to the owner,
of if the owner is not local, to the manager or other person in charge of
the facility and also sent by first class mail to the licensees last known
address. A copy of the notice shall also be posted on the front door of the
facility.
(c) If the Massage Facility License is suspended pursuant to Section 11(a) or
(b), then within 14 days of written notification, the licensee may submit a
written request for a due process hearing before the Troy City Council.
Upon receipt of such a request, the City Clerk shall schedule the
requested hearing for the first available regular City Council meeting.
There should be at least seven days between the receipt of the written
hearing request and the regular City Council meeting, and also time to
comply with any notice requirements of City Charter, City ordinance and
State law.
(d) Upon the scheduling of a due process hearing, the City Clerk shall send a
written notice of the date and time of the hearing to the licensee at the
licensees last known address. Additionally, a copy of the notice of the
hearing shall also be posted on the front door of the Massage Facility. The
notice of hearing shall indicate that the City of Troy City Administration has
initiated suspension and/or revocation proceedings, and shall state the
reason for the suspension or requested revocation. The notice shall state
the date, time and the location for the hearing, and shall notify the licensee
that they are entitled to attend and provide City Council with any testimony
or documentation to demonstrate why the Massage Facility License
should not be suspended or revoked.
(e) At the due process hearing, City staff and/or other concerned individuals
will have the opportunity to present evidence and testimony supporting the
suspension or requested revocation. The licensee should then be allowed
to present evidence and testimony as to why the license should not be
suspended or revoked. City Administration would then be permitted to
provide any response to the licensees testimony or documentation.
Afterwards, the Troy City Council will issue a decision, which may revoke
the Massage Facility License; suspend the Massage Facility License;
reverse a City Administration ordered suspension; deny the requested
revocation; or take any other action that is warranted. If City Council
suspends the Massage Facility License, then City Councils resolution
shall clearly specify the length of the suspension, as well as any
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-12
conditions that must be satisfied or corrective action that must be taken
prior to restoration of the Massage Facility License.
(f) If the licensee fails to satisfy Councils articulated conditions for restoration
of a suspended Massage Facility License within the time allocated to the
licensee, then Council can revoke the Massage Facility License, without
the need for a new hearing.
(g) A City Council decision ordering revocation is final, and licensees ability
to appeal is only through the filing of a case in the Oakland County Circuit
Court. Any such appeal must be filed within 21 days of the final decision
and shall be governed by the Michigan Court Rules applicable to an
appeal from an administrative agency under MCLA 660.631.
12. Reporting of Violations by Massage Therapists
In addition to the provisions of Section 11, when any of the provisions of this
Chapter are violated, upon receipt of this information, the City Clerk shall report
the incident to the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, and
request that proper action be taken by the Regulatory agency.
13. Renewal of Massage Facility License:
An application to renew a license to operate a Massage Facility shall be filed at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of license expiration. Such renewal shall
be annual and shall be accompanied by the application fee.
(a) The applicant(s) shall present the following information to the City Clerks
office for the renewal application:
(1) A sworn affidavit by the applicant(s) stating that the information
contained in the original application has not changed, or if it has
changed, specifically identifying the changes that have occurred.
(2) The names, addresses, birth dates and drivers license numbers of
each massage therapist and each employee or independent
contractor who is or will be employed or located in the Massage
Facility.
(3) The names, addresses, birth dates and drivers license numbers of
each individual who will be a manager, acting manager or in charge
of each Massage Facility.
(b) The application shall be referred to the Chief of Police who shall
investigate the criminal history of the applicant(s) and any massage
therapists, employees, managers and independent contractors listed as
set out above.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-13
(c) The City Clerk may decide not to renew a license based upon a
determination by the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, or Building Official and/or
their designee that any of the following exist:
(1) Violations of state laws or local ordinances, including applicable
codes and regulations, concerning health, safety, moral conduct, or
public welfare, by any licensee or employee of a licensee.
(2) Any advertising, promotion, or activity in connection with the
licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates, or
contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinances, or laws.
(3) Failure to permit an inspection pursuant to Section 8 of this
Chapter.
14. Massage Facility Requirements:
No Massage Facility License shall be issued unless the appropriate inspectors
from the Police Department, Fire Department or any other appropriate
department of the City of Troy confirm that the Massage Facility complies with
each of the following minimum requirements:
(a) All provisions of the City codes and State law have been complied with,
including but not limited to building, mechanical, plumbing, electrical and
fire codes.
(b) Adequate and appropriate bathing, dressing, locker, and toilet facilities are
provided for patrons.
(c) Rooms used for steam baths and showers shall be waterproof, and shall
be constructed of approved waterproof materials and shall be installed in
accordance with the City of Troy codes, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Floors, walls and ceilings of steam rooms and shower
compartments shall be waterproofed with a smooth, readily
cleanable, nonabsorbent material.
(2) Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to
one or more floor drains properly connected to the sanitary sewer.
(3) A source of hot water must be available within the immediate
vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.
(d) The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-14
massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be
disinfected after use on each patron.
(e) Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen,
towels and other materials used in connection with administering
massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept
separate from the clean storage areas. No common use of towels or
linens is permitted.
(f) A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each Massage
Facility for the use of employees of any such Facility. The basin shall
provide soap or detergent and hot and cold water at all times, and shall be
located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the
performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at
each washbasin sanitary single-use towels placed in permanently installed
dispensers.
15. Operating Requirements:
(a) Every portion of the Massage Facility, including appliances and apparatus,
shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
(b) The price rates for all services at the Massage Facility shall be
prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all
prospective customers.
(c) The Massage Facility shall not be made available as sleeping quarters
and/or accommodation for any person. No beds, water mattresses, cots,
or equipment designed for sleeping shall be permitted on the premises.
(d) All massage therapists and independent contractors massaging and/or
attending patrons shall be clean and wear clean appropriate clothing.
Scrub uniforms are preferred, but in any event, all clothing shall consist of
non-transparent, washable or disposable material and shall be kept in a
clean condition. Such clothing shall cover the persons pubic area,
perineum, buttocks, natal cleft and the entire chest up to the collarbone. Vneck
scrub tops are permitted, so long as the top covers the entire chest
up to a height of four (4) inches below the collarbone. All employees and
independent contractors giving massages shall wear slacks and a blouse
or shirt, or a one-piece pants suit or coverall. Skirts or dresses shall not be
permitted unless worn over opaque leg covering that covers waist to ankle
or toe.
(e) All massage facilities shall be supplied with and provide clean laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity. Sheets and towels shall be
laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-15
(f) Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam and vapor
cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly
cleaned each day the business is in operation.
(g) Massage Facility Licensees shall not place, publish, distribute or cause to
be placed, published, or distributed any advertisement, picture, or
statement which is known to be false, deceptive, or misleading or through
the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or
misleading, in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any
professional massage services.
16. Persons under Age Eighteen Prohibited on Premises:
No person shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come
or remain on the premises of any Massage Facility as a massage therapist,
employee, volunteer or independent contractor. A patron under the age of
eighteen (18) years shall be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or have
in his or her possession a signed parental or legal guardian consent form,
consenting to his or her presence at the Massage Facility premises for the
purpose of receiving a massage.
17. Hours:
Massage Facilities shall not be operated or kept open for any purposes between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
18. Unlawful Acts:
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person in a Massage Facility to place his or her
hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in
any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital part of any other person.
Sexual or genital parts shall include the genitals, pubic area, buttocks,
anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person in a Massage Facility to expose his or
her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other person. It
shall also be unlawful for any person in a Massage Facility to expose the
sexual or genital parts, or any portions thereof, of any other person.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other
person in a Massage Facility, to fail to conceal the sexual or genital parts
of his or her body with a fully opaque covering.(d)It shall be unlawful for
any person owning, operating or managing a Massage Facility, or any
agent, employee, or any other person under his or her control or
supervision to perform such acts or allow the performance of such acts
that are prohibited in subsections 18 (a), (b) or (c).
Chapter 98-A  Massage Facility License
98A-16
(d) Any violation of this Section may constitute sufficient grounds for
immediate suspension of a license granted under the provisions of this
Chapter, based on the discretion of the City Official, and subject to the
Due Process provisions outlined in Section 11.
19. Sale, Transfer or Change of Location:
The Massage Facility License shall not be sold or transferred to another. Any
sale, transfer, or relocation of a Massage Facility requires compliance with the
application process under the provisions of this Chapter, and the Massage
Facility License is null and void upon the transfer, sale, or relocation. All
licensees having knowledge of the sale, transfer or relocation of a Massage
Facility are required to immediately report such sale, transfer or relocation to the
City Clerks office. Failure to do so within thirty (30) days of the sale, transfer or
relocation shall result in an immediate suspension of all business.
20. Name and Place:
No person granted a license pursuant to this Chapter shall operate a Massage
Facility under a name that is not specified in their Massage Facility License, nor
shall they conduct business under any designation or location that is not
specified in their Massage Facility License.
21. Violation and Penalty:
Any person, whether acting as an individual, owner, manager, employee of the
owner, or whether acting as an agent or independent contractor for the owner,
employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way directly or
indirectly who operates a Massage Facility who violates any provisions of this
Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days and/or a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs, at the discretion of the Court.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. This
penalty is separate from any suspension or revocation of a Massage License, as
enumerated in Section 11.
(Adopted: 10/23/2017; Enacted: 11-02-2017)
Chapter 99  Payment in Lieu of Taxes Ordinance
99-1
99.01 This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the enactment of
Chapter 99, Payment in Lieu of Taxes Ordinance (PILOT) of the Code of
the City of Troy. The City has previously incorporated and approved a
PILOT Agreement for Magnolia Gardens Housing Development Project
Ordinance Agreement No. 87, established by Resolution #97-885-C-21,
adopted on December 15, 1997. It also incorporates a previously City
approved PILOT Agreement for Oakland Grand Haven Limited Dividend
Housing Association LLC (Oakland Park Towers), (Ordinance Agreement
No. 55-1, dated November 22, 1976. It allows for the Troy City Council, in
its sole discretion and on a case by case basis, to approve additional
service charge in lieu of taxes for housing projects for low income persons
and families financed with a federally-aided or Authority aided mortgage
loan or an advance or grant from the Authority as PILOT projects for
Oakland Park Towers II and also any future new construction projects that
satisfy the criteria with a resolution.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
99.02 Purpose. The City of Troy has determined that providing housing for elderly
persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the City will be
benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same
by providing certain real estate tax exemptions for such housing is a valid
public purpose. The City of Troy is authorized, under the State Housing
Development Authority Act, Public Act 346 of 1966 of the State of Michigan
(Mich. Comp. Laws Section 125.1401 et. seq.), as amended, to establish or
change the service charge to be paid in lieu of property taxes by any or all
classes of housing exempt from taxation under the Act at any amount it
chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. The
continuance of the provisions of this Ordinance during the period
contemplated in this Ordinance are essential to the determination of
economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and
financed in reliance on such tax exemption.
99.03 Definitions. The following definitions are to be used in this Chapter:
(1) Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being
Public Act 346 of 1966 of the State of Michigan (Mich. Comp. Laws
Section 125.1401 et. seq.), as amended.
(2) Annual Shelter Rent means the total collections during the agreed
annual period from or paid on behalf of all occupants of a housing
development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of
Utilities.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
(3) Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
Chapter 99  Payment in Lieu of Taxes Ordinance
99-2
(4) Contract Rents means the total Contract Rents, as defined by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations
promulgated pursuant to Section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937,
as amended, received in connection with the operation of a housing
project during an agreed annual period, exclusive of Utilities
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
(5) Elderly Persons means a single person who is 55 years of age or
older or a household in which at least one member is 55 years of
age or older and all of the members are 50 years of age or older.
(6) Housing Development means a newly constructed or renovated or
rehabilitated development where there is new investment of at least
$8,000,000, which contains a significant element of housing for
elderly persons of low income and such elements of other housing,
commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational
facilities as the Authority determines improved the quality of the
development as it relates to housing for elderly persons of low
income.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
(7) LIHTC Program means the Low Income Housing Tax Credit
Program administered by the Authority pursuant to Section 42 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
(8) Mortgage Loan means a loan to be made by the Authority to the
Sponsor for the construction, permanent financing, or refinancing of
the Housing Development secured by a mortgage on the Housing
Development.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
(9) Sponsor means a person or entity that receive or assume a
Mortgage Loan.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
(10) Utilities means charges for gas, electric, water, sanitary sewer
service and other utilities furnished to the occupants that are paid by
the Housing Development.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
99.04 Class of Housing Developments. The class of eligible Housing
Developments qualifying for payments in lieu of taxes under this
Ordinance is limited to housing for Elderly Persons of low income, where
there is new construction or rehabilitation with a minimum investment of
$8,000,000, which are financed with a Mortgage Loan. Oakland Park
Chapter 99  Payment in Lieu of Taxes Ordinance
99-3
Towers and Magnolia Gardens have previously been determined to fall
within the eligible class of Housing Developments.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
99.05 Establishment of Annual Service Charge. Housing Developments
within the eligible Class set forth in Section 99.04 and the property on
which they are or will be located shall be exempt from all ad valorem
property taxes from and after the commencement of construction or
rehabilitation. The City acknowledges that the Sponsor and the Authority
in the case of a Sponsor receiving an Authority financed Mortgage Loan,
or the Sponsor and the mortgage lender, in the case of a Sponsor
receiving a Federally aided Mortgage Loan, have established the
economic feasibility of the housing project in reliance upon the enactment
and continuing effect of this Ordinance, and the qualification of the
housing projects for exemption from all ad valorem property taxes and a
payment in lieu of taxes as established in this Ordinance. Therefore, the
City will accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in
lieu of all ad valorem property taxes. The annual service charge shall be
equal to a percentage of the Annual Shelter Rents or Contract Rents
actually collected by the housing project during each operating year, as
established by a Resolution adopted by the City Council. Except as
otherwise provided below, an annual service charge of 10% of 95% of the
Annual Shelter Rents actually collected will apply to any future
agreements under the provisions of this Ordinance.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
99.05.01 Magnolia Gardens. Pursuant to Ordinance Agreement 87, (December
15, 1997), the contract which is incorporated herein, the Sponsor of the
Housing Development identified as Magnolia Gardens agreed to pay to
the City of Troy, on account of the Housing Development, an annual
service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes from and
after the commencement of construction of the Housing Development, so
long as the Mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the
Authority has any interest in the property. Pursuant to Ordinance
Agreement No. 87, incorporated herein, the annual service charge for the
Magnolia Gardens Housing Development is 4% of the difference between
the Annual Shelter Rents actually collected and annual Utilities. This
service charge is to be paid on or before April 15 of each calendar year.
Ordinance Agreement No. 87, incorporated herein, also required the
Sponsor to provide transportation for the residents of Magnolia Gardens,
and to make a $140,000 contribution to improvements to Grand Haven
Avenue.
99.05.02 Oakland Park Towers. Pursuant to Ordinance Agreement No. 55
(November 22, 1976), the contract which is incorporated herein, the
Sponsor of the Housing Development identified as Oakland Park Towers
Chapter 99  Payment in Lieu of Taxes Ordinance
99-4
agreed to pay to the City of Troy, on account of the Housing
Development, an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all
property taxes from and after the commencement of construction of the
Housing Development, so long as the Mortgage loan remains outstanding
and unpaid or the Authority has any interest in the property, and for a
period not longer than 40 years. Pursuant to Ordinance Agreement No.
55, incorporated herein, the annual service charge for the Oakland Park
Towers Housing Development is 10% of 95% of the total rental or
occupancy charges collected or to be collected by the Mortgagor annually
as to each of the living units within the Development. This service charge
is to be paid on or before August 15 of each calendar year. Ordinance
Agreement No. 55 may be replaced by a subsequent agreement
concerning the same property.
99.06 Resolution; Contractual Effect. A resolution of the City Council granting
tax exempt status and establishing the annual service charge, as provided
in this Ordinance, shall be adopted for each housing project qualified
under the terms and provisions of this Ordinance. Notwithstanding the
provisions of section 15 (a)(5) of the Act to the contrary, in the case of a
housing project receiving an Authority-financed Mortgage Loan, a contract
between the City and the Sponsor with the Authority as third party
beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept
payments in lieu of taxes , as previously described, will be effectuated
upon adoption of such a Resolution by the City Council.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
99.07 Limitation on the Payment of Annual Service Charge. Notwithstanding
Section 99.05, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for
the part of the Housing Development which is tax exempt and which is
occupied by the other than low income persons or families shall be equal
to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the
Housing Development if the Housing Development were not tax exempt.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
99.08 Payment of Service Charge. The annual service charge in lieu of taxes
as determined under the Ordinance shall be payable in the same manner
as general property taxes are payable to the City and distributed to the
several units levying the general property tax in the same proportion as
prevailed with the general property tax in the previous calendar year. The
annual payment for each operating year shall be paid on or before March
1 of the following year, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or
by City Council resolution.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
99.09 Duration. This Ordinance shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so
long as a Mortgage Loan, entered into with reliance on the enactment and
Chapter 99  Payment in Lieu of Taxes Ordinance
99-5
continuing effect of the Ordinance and the qualification of the Housing
Development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu
of taxes as established in this Ordinance, remains outstanding and
unpaid, and the Housing Development remains subject to income and rent
restrictions under the LIHTC Program, but shall not exceed (40) years.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
99.10 Severability. The various sections and provisions of this Ordinance shall
be deemed to be severable, and should any section or provision of this
Ordinance be declared by any court or competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole or any section or provision of this Ordinance other
than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Amended 08-27-2018; Effective 09-06-2018)
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-1
100.01 Definitions. The following definitions are to be used in this Chapter:
100.01.01 "Authorized City Official" means a Police Officer, a Building Department
Inspector Supervisor, a Housing and Zoning Inspector, a Police Service
Aide or other personnel of the City legally authorized by ordinance to
issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction
violation notices.
100.01.02 Bureau means the Municipal Civil Infractions Bureau established by this
Chapter.
100.01.03 "Citation" means a written complaint or notice to appear in court upon
which an authorized City official records the occurrence or existence of
one or more municipal civil infractions by the person cited.
100.01.04 Municipal Civil Infraction Action means a civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for violating an ordinance
designated as a municipal civil infraction.
100.01.05 "Municipal Civil Infraction Determination" means a determination that a
defendant is responsible for a municipal civil infraction by one of the
following:
(a) An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction.
(b) An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
"with explanation".
(c) A finding of responsibility by a preponderance of the evidence
at an informal hearing, as set forth in Section 100.07, or at a
formal hearing, as set forth in Section 100.08.
d) The entry of a default judgment for failing to appear at a
scheduled informal hearing or a scheduled formal hearing, or
as otherwise directed by a citation or court notice.
100.01.06 Municipal Ordinance Violation Notice means a notice, other than a
citation, directing a person to appear at the Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau in the City of Troy, and to pay the fine and costs
prescribed by ordinance for the violation.
100.02 Commencement of actions; jurisdiction; time and place for appearance.
100.02.01 A municipal civil infraction action is commenced upon the issuance of a
citation. The City of Troy is the plaintiff in cases involving a violation of the
City of Troy ordinances.
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-2
100.02.02 The 52-4 Judicial District Court shall have jurisdiction over municipal civil
infraction actions committed in the City of Troy.
100.02.03 The citation shall set an appearance date within a reasonable time of the
issuance of the citation.
100.02.04 The place specified in the citation for appearance shall be the 52-4 District
Court.
100.03 Citations; form; modification; signature
100.03.01 Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and be in a form as
approved by the state court administrator.
100.03.02 The original citation shall serve as the complaint and notice to appear,
and shall be filed with the 52-4 District Court.
100.03.03 A copy of the citation shall be retained by the City of Troy, and the third
copy shall be given to the alleged violator.
100.03.04 If the citation contains a statement I declare under the penalties of
perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information,
knowledge, and belief and this statement is included immediately above
the date and signature of the authorized City official, then the citation shall
be treated as made under oath.
100.03.05 A citation shall contain the name of the plaintiff, the name and address of
the defendant, the alleged municipal civil infraction violation, the location
where the defendant is required to appear in court, the telephone number
of the court, the time by which the appearance shall be made, and the
additional information required by this section.
100.03.06 The citation shall inform the defendant that he or she may do one of the
following:
(a) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person, or by representation, at or prior to the time specified
for appearance.
(b) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with
explanation" by mail, in person, or by representation at or prior
to the time specified for appearance.
(c) Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction.
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-3
100.03.07 The citation shall also inform the defendant of all of the following:
(a) If the defendant desires to deny responsibility or admit
responsibility "with explanation", the defendant must apply to
the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation
within the time specified for appearance and obtain a
scheduled date and time for an appearance.
(b) A hearing will be scheduled as an informal hearing unless
either the defendant or the authorized city official specifically
requests a formal hearing.
(Rev.07-07-08)
(c) At an informal hearing the defendant must appear in person
before a District Court Judge or Magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
(c) At a formal hearing the defendant must appear in person
before a District Court Judge with the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney.
100.03.08 The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the
defendant to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time
scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in
entry of a default judgment against the defendant on the municipal civil
infraction.
100.03.09 The return of the citation with an admission of responsibility and with full
payment of applicable civil fines and costs, the return of the citation with
an admission of responsibility with explanation, or timely application to the
court for a scheduled date and time for a formal hearing or an informal
hearing constitutes a timely appearance.
100.04 Issuance of citations; witnesses; investigation; personal service; actions
involving land, buildings, or structures;
100.04.01 An authorized city official shall issue a municipal civil infraction citation
when the official witnesses the named person violate a City of Troy
ordinance that is designated as a municipal civil infraction.
100.04.02 An authorized city official may issue a municipal civil infraction citation
under the following circumstances:
(a) An authorized city official has reasonable cause to believe that the
named person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, based
upon investigation.
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-4
(b) When an authorized city official has reasonable cause to believe
that the named person is responsible for a civil infraction, based
upon the investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed alleged municipal civil infraction, as long as the City
Attorney or an Assistant City Attorney approves of the issuance of
the citation in writing.
100.04.03 Except as otherwise provided in section 100.04.04, the authorized City
official shall personally serve a copy of the municipal civil infraction
citation upon the alleged violator.
100.04.04 If a municipal civil infraction involves the use or occupancy of land or a
building or other structure, service may be made upon the owner or
occupant of the land, building or structure by posting a copy of the citation
on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition to
the posting, a copy of the citation shall also be sent by first-class mail to
the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known
address. A citation served in this manner shall be processed in the same
manner as a citation served personally upon a defendant.
100.05 Appearances; in person, by representation, or by mail; admission with
explanation; denial of responsibility, informal or formal hearing
100.05.01 A person to whom a citation is issued under section 100.04 shall appear
by the time specified in the citation and may respond to the allegations in
the citation as provided in this section.
100.05.02 If the defendant wishes to admit responsibility for the municipal civil
infraction, the defendant may do so by appearing in person, by
representation, or by mail. If appearance is made by representation or
mail, the court may accept the admission with the same effect as though
the defendant personally appeared in court. Upon acceptance of the
admission, the court may order any of the sanctions permitted under
section 100.11.
100.05.03 If the defendant wishes to admit responsibility for the municipal civil
infraction "with explanation", the defendant may do so in either of the
following ways:
(a) By appearing by mail.
(b) By contacting the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by
representation to obtain from the court a scheduled date and time
for an appearance, at which time the defendant shall appear in
court in person or by representation.
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-5
100.05.04 If a defendant admits responsibility for a municipal civil infraction "with
explanation" under section 100.05.03, the court shall accept the
admission as though the defendant has admitted responsibility under
section 100.05.02 and may consider the defendant's explanation by way
of mitigating any sanction that the court may order under section 100.11.
If appearance is made by representation or mail, the court may accept the
admission with the same effect as though the defendant personally
appeared in court, but the court may require the defendant to provide a
further explanation or to appear in court.
100.05.05 If the defendant wishes to deny responsibility for a municipal civil
infraction, the defendant shall do so by appearing for an informal or formal
hearing. If the hearing date is not specified on the citation, the defendant
shall contact the court in person, by representation, by mail, or by
telephone, and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for an
informal or formal hearing. If the hearing date is specified on the citation,
the defendant shall appear on that date. The hearing shall be an informal
hearing, unless a formal hearing is requested by the defendant or the
plaintiff as provided by section 100.06. If a hearing is scheduled by
telephone, the court shall mail the defendant a confirming notice of that
hearing by regular mail to the address appearing on the citation or to an
address that is furnished by the defendant. An informal hearing shall be
conducted pursuant to section 100.07, and a formal hearing shall be
conducted pursuant to section 100.08.
100.06 Formal hearings; requests; time; notification of parties
100.06.01 The court shall schedule a formal hearing if either the defendant or the
plaintiff expressly requests a formal hearing as provided by this section.
100.06.02 A request for a formal hearing must be received by the court at least 10
days before a scheduled informal hearing date. The request may be made
in person, by representation, by mail, or by telephone.
100.06.03 The party requesting a formal hearing shall notify the other party or parties
of the request. Notification of the request must be received by the other
parties at least 10 days before the scheduled informal hearing date. The
notification of a request for a formal hearing may be made in person, by
representation, by mail, or by telephone.
100.07 Informal hearings; Magistrate or Judge, procedure; no represent-ation by
attorneys; notice of hearing, witnesses; preponderance of the evidence
standard; appeals
100.07.01 An informal hearing shall be conducted by a District Court Magistrate, if
authorized by the Judges of the District Court, or by a Judge of the District
Court. A District Court Magistrate may administer oaths, examine
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-6
witnesses, and make findings of fact and conclusions of law at an informal
hearing. The Judge or District Court Magistrate shall conduct the informal
hearing in an informal manner so as to do substantial justice according to
the rules of substantive law, but is not bound by the statutory provisions or
rules of practice, procedure, pleading, or evidence, unless the rules of
practice relate to privileged communications, which shall be binding.
There shall not be a jury at an informal hearing. A verbatim record of an
informal hearing is not required.
100.07.02 At an informal hearing, the parties shall not be represented by an
attorney.
100.07.03 Notice of a scheduled informal hearing shall be given to the plaintiff. The
plaintiff and defendant may subpoena witnesses. Witness fees are not
required to be paid in advance to a witness. Witness fees for plaintiffs
witness(es) are payable by the district control unit of the District Court for
the place where the hearing occurs.
100.07.04 If the Judge or District Court Magistrate determines by a preponderance
of the evidence that the defendant is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction, the Judge or Magistrate shall enter an order against the
defendant as provided in section 100.11. Otherwise, a judgment shall be
entered for the defendant, but the defendant is not entitled to any costs of
the action.
100.07.05 The plaintiff and/or defendant are entitled to appeal an adverse judgment
entered at an informal hearing. An appeal shall be de novo in the form of
a scheduled formal hearing as follows:
(a) The appeal from a Judge of the District Court shall be heard by
a different Judge of the district.
(b) The appeal from a District Court Magistrate shall be heard by a
Judge of the district.
100.08 Formal hearing; Judge; representation of defendant by attorney;
representation of plaintiff by City Attorney, witnesses; no jury trial;
preponderance of the evidence standard
100.08.01 A formal hearing shall be conducted only by a Judge of the District Court.
100.08.02 In a formal hearing, the defendant may be represented by an attorney, but
is not entitled to counsel appointed at public expense.
100.08.03 Notice of a formal hearing shall be given to the City Attorney. The City
Attorney or Assistant City Attorney shall appear in court for a formal
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-7
hearing and shall issue a subpoena to each necessary witness for the
plaintiff. The defendant may also subpoena witnesses. Witness fees need
not be paid in advance to a witness. Witness fees for Plaintiffs
witness(es) are payable by the district control unit of the District Court for
the place where the hearing occurs.
100.08.04 There shall not be a jury trial in a formal hearing.
100.08.05 If the Judge determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the
defendant is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, the Judge shall
enter an order against the defendant as provided in section 100.11.
Otherwise, a judgment shall be entered for the defendant, but the
defendant is not entitled to recover any costs incurred in defending the
action.
100.09 Admissions or denial of responsibility; arrest warrants
100.09.01 If an authorized City official issues a citation under section 100.04, the
court may accept an admission with explanation or an admission or denial
of responsibility upon the citation without the necessity of a sworn
complaint. If the defendant denies responsibility for the municipal civil
infraction, further proceedings shall not be held until a sworn complaint is
filed with the court. A warrant for arrest for failure to appear on the
municipal civil infraction citation under section 100.10 shall not be issued
until a sworn complaint relative to the municipal civil infraction is filed with
the court.
100.10 Failure to appear, default judgment
100.10.01 If the defendant fails to appear as directed by the citation or other notice
under section 100.05, at a scheduled informal hearing, or at a scheduled
formal hearing, the court shall enter a default judgment against the
defendant.
100.11 Not a lesser included offense; civil fines, costs, damages, expenses;
collection of defaults in payment; failure to comply with judgment; failure
to answer citation, misdemeanor
100.11.01 A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a criminal
offense or an ordinance violation that is not a municipal civil infraction.
100.11.02 If a defendant is determined to be responsible or responsible "with
explanation" for a municipal civil infraction, the Judge or District Court
Magistrate may order the defendant to pay a civil fine and costs. The civil
fine, costs, and damages and expenses are due immediately. However,
the Judge or District Court Magistrate may grant a defendant an extension
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-8
of time to pay a civil fine, costs, and damages and expenses or may grant
permission for a defendant to make installment payments.
100.11.03 If a defendant is ordered to pay a civil fine under section 100.11.02, the
Judge or District Court Magistrate shall summarily tax and determine the
costs of the action, which is defined as all expenses that plaintiff has
incurred directly or indirectly in pursuing the municipal civil infraction to the
entry of judgment. Costs of not more than $500 shall be ordered. Except
as otherwise provided by law, costs shall be payable to the general fund
of the plaintiff.
(Rev. 07-07-08)
100.11.03A In addition to any fine or cost ordered to be paid under sections 100.11.02
and 100.11.03, the Judge or District Court Magistrate shall order the
defendant to pay a justice system assessment of $10.00. Upon payment
of the assessment, the clerk of the court shall transmit the assessment
collected to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Justice System Fund
created in MCL 600.181.
(Rev. 07-07-08)
100.11.04 In addition to ordering the defendant to pay a civil fine and costs, the
Judge or District Court Magistrate shall have equitable jurisdiction and
may issue a writ or order as provided under state law.
100.11.05 A District Court Magistrate shall impose the sanctions permitted under
sections 100.11.03 and 100.11.04 only to the extent expressly authorized
by the Chief Judge of the District Court.
100.11.06 The District Court may establish a schedule of civil fines and costs to be
imposed for municipal civil infractions that occur within the City. If a
schedule is established, it shall be prominently posted and readily
available for public inspection at the Court. A schedule need not include
all municipal civil infractions. A schedule may provide for exclusions from
the scheduled fines in cases where the defendant has a prior record of
municipal civil infraction violations.
100.11.07 A judgment may be collected by any means authorized for the
enforcement of a judgment under State law.
100.11.08 If a defendant fails to comply with an order or judgment issued pursuant to
this section within the time prescribed by the court, the court may proceed
under section 100.12 or 100.13, as applicable.
100.11.09 A defendant who fails to answer a citation or notice to appear in court for
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-9
a municipal civil infraction is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
100.12 Default in payment of fines, costs, damages, or expenses; civil contempt;
imprisonment
100.12.01 If a defendant defaults in the payment of a civil fine or costs, or any order
allowing installment payments, then the court may issue a summons,
show cause order or a bench warrant, requiring defendant to show cause
why the defendant should not be held in civil contempt. Plaintiff can file a
motion seeking this relief, or the Court can grant the relief on its own
motion.
100.12.02 If a corporation or an association is ordered to pay a civil fine or costs, the
individuals authorized to make disbursement on behalf of the corporation
or association shall pay the fine, costs, damages or expenses, and the
failure to do so shall be civil contempt.
100.12.03 Unless the defendant shows that the default was not an intentional refusal
to obey the order of the court, the court shall find that a default constitutes
a civil contempt and may order the defendant or authorized representative
committed until all or a specified part of the amount due is paid in
accordance with sections 100.12.05 and 100.12.06.
100.12.04 If it appears that the default in the payment of a fine, costs, damages or
expenses does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an order
allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount
of payment or of each installment, or revoking the fine and costs.
100.12.05 The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine
or costs shall be specified in the order of commitment, and shall not
exceed one day for each $30.00 due. A person committed for
nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, damages or expenses under this chapter
shall be given credit toward payment for each day of imprisonment at the
rate of $30.00 per day.
100.12.06 A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for nonpayment
of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall not be discharged from
custody until one of the following occurs:
(a) The defendant is credited with the total amount of the
outstanding fines, costs, damages or expenses under
section 100.12.05.
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-10
(b) The amount due is collected through execution of process or
otherwise.
(c) The amount due is satisfied pursuant to a combination of
subdivisions (a) and (b).
100.12.07 The civil contempt shall be purged upon discharge of the defendant from
incarceration once the indebtedness has been satisfied.
100.13 Violations involving land, buildings, or structures; failure to pay fine or
costs, liens; notice of lien; enforcement and discharge; priority; action for
collection of fines and costs; period of lien
100.13.01 In a municipal civil infraction action brought for a violation involving the
use or occupation of land or a building or other structure, if a defendant
does not pay a civil fine or costs or an installment ordered under section
100.11 within 30 days after the date on which payment is due, the plaintiff
may obtain a lien against the land, building, or structure involved in the
violation by recording a copy of the court order requiring payment of the
fine and costs with the register of deeds for the county in which the land,
building, or structure is located. The court order shall not be recorded
unless a legal description of the property is incorporated in or attached to
the court order. The lien is effective immediately upon recording of the
court order with the register of deeds.
100.13.02 The court order recorded with the register of deeds shall constitute notice
of the pendency of the lien. In addition, a written notice of the lien shall be
sent by the plaintiff by first-class mail to the owner of record of the land,
building, or structure at the owner's last known address.
100.13.03 The lien may be enforced and discharged by the City in the manner
prescribed by the City Charter or by the State General Property Tax Act.
100.13.04 A lien created under this section has priority over any other lien unless
one or more of the following apply:
(a) The other lien is a lien for taxes or special assessments.
(b) The other lien is created before the effective date of this ordinance.
(c) Federal or state law provides that the other lien has priority.
(d) The other lien is recorded before the lien under this section is
recorded.
100.13.05 Any attempt by the City to collect fines or costs by any process does not
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-11
invalidate or waive the lien upon the land, building, or structure.
100.13.06 A lien provided for by this section shall not continue for a period longer
than five years after a copy of the court order imposing a fine or costs is
recorded, unless an action to enforce the lien is commenced within the
five year period.
100.14 Costs incurred in compelling appearance of defendant
100.14.01 If the defendant in a municipal civil infraction action is determined
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, the Judge or District Court
Magistrate, in addition to any fine and costs imposed under section
100.11, may assess additional costs incurred in compelling the
appearance of the defendant. Any recovered additional costs shall be
returned to the general fund of the City.
100.15 Municipal Civil Infraction Notice
100.15.01 Instead of issuing a citation, an authorized City official may issue and
serve a Municipal Ordinance Violation Notice under the same
circumstances and upon the same persons as provided in this ordinance.
If an authorized City official issues and serves a Municipal Ordinance
Violation Notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the
civil fine and costs prescribed by ordinance for the violation are not paid at
the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau, a citation may be filed with the
court and a copy of the citation may be served by first-class mail upon the
alleged violator at his or her last known address. The citation filed with the
court pursuant to this subsection need not comply in all particulars with
section 100.03, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the
allegations stated in the Municipal Ordinance Violation Notice.
100.16 Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau; establishment; location;
supervision; employees; rules and regulations; disposition of violations;
scope of authority; appearance; payment of fines and costs
100.16.01 There is hereby established a Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau
(Bureau), to accept admission(s) of responsibility for municipal civil
infractions and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed.
100.16.02 The Bureau shall be located at City Hall and shall be under the
supervision and control of the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall
adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the Bureau and appoint
any necessary qualified City employees to administer the Bureau.
100.16.03 The Bureau may accept admission(s) of responsibility and payment for
Municipal Ordinance Violation Notices that have been properly issued and
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-12
for which a fine has been scheduled. The Bureau is not required to accept
admission(s) of responsibility and payment for municipal ordinance
violations when an authorized City official has issued a municipal civil
infraction citation. The parties shall not be restricted or prohibited from bypassing
the Bureau and having a violation processed before a court of
appropriate jurisdiction.
100.16.04 The Bureaus authority is limited to accepting admission(s) of
responsibility (without explanation) for municipal ordinance notices and
collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those
admissions. The Bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any
person who denies having committed the noticed offense. The Bureau
shall not determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact
or matter relating to an alleged violation.
100.16.05 A defendant receiving a Municipal Ordinance Violation Notice shall either
appear at the Bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the
time specified for appearance in the Municipal Civil Infraction Violation
Notice or shall inform the Bureau that he or she denies responsibility and
will not pay the fines and costs. An appearance may be made by mail, in
person or by representation. If a defendant does not pay the fine and
costs, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the District
Court and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the
alleged violator at the alleged violators last known address. The citation
filed with the Court does not need to comply with all requirements for
citations as provided in Section 100.03, but shall consist of a sworn
complaint containing the allegations stated in the Municipal Ordinance
Violation Notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond
to the citation.
100.16.06 The City Treasurer or other designated city official/employee shall retain a
copy of all Municipal Ordinance Notices and shall account to the City
Council once a month or at such other intervals as the City Council may
require concerning the number of admissions and denials of responsibility
for ordinance violations within the jurisdiction of the Bureau and the
amount of fines/costs collected with respect to such violations. The civil
fines/costs collected shall be deposited in the general fund of the City.
100.17 Schedule of municipal civil infraction fines and costs
100.17.01 Unless a different schedule of civil fines is provided for by an applicable
Ordinance, the civil fines payable to the Bureau upon admission(s) of
responsibility shall be as follows:
Chapter 100  Municipal Civil Infractions
100-13
1st violation within 3-year period* ....................................... .$ 65.00
2nd violation within 3-year period* ......................................... 125.00
3rd violation within 3-year period* ......................................... 250.00
4th or subsequent violation within 3-year period* .................. 500.00
*determined on the basis of the date of violation(s).
(Effective: September 30, 2004)
Chapter 101  Liquor Licenses
101-1
1. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in this Chapter.
a. Alcoholic Liquor shall mean any beverages or compounds containing one-half of
one percent or more of alcohol by volume, which is used for human consumption.
For purposes of this chapter, the term includes beer, wine, and spirits.
b. Assembly or Convention Center shall mean a facility that provides a demonstrated
public purpose which is equipped with a bona fide restaurant or food service and
seating capacity that accommodates more than 1,000 persons in banquet style.
c. License shall mean a license issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission to
sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on or off the premises.
d. Licensee shall mean all persons, including their agents, servants and employees,
holding a license to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on or off the premises.
e. Licensed Premises shall mean the location where the licensee is authorized to sell
alcoholic liquor on or off the premises.
f. Persons shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership,
association, limited liability company, or corporation.
g. Premises shall mean the location for which a license has been issued by the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
h. Quota License shall mean one of a specific number of licenses available to the City
of Troy based on population which may be issued by the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission to sell alcoholic liquor.
i. Related Permit shall mean any permit issued by the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission to a licensee for entertainment or other activities at the licensed
premises, which legally require such a permit.
j. Sale shall mean, the exchange, barter, traffic, furnishing, or giving away of
alcoholic liquor which is regulated by the Michigan Liquor Control Act and this
Chapter.
k. SDD shall mean Specially Designated Distributor which is a person engaged in an
established business licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission to
distribute spirits and mixed spirit drink in the original package for consumption off the
premises.
l. SDM shall mean Specially Designated Merchant which is a person to whom the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission grants a license to sell beer or wine, or both, at
retail for consumption off the premises.
Chapter 101  Liquor Licenses
101-2
2. Liquor License Required. No person shall engage in the business of selling alcoholic
liquor for consumption on or off the premises in the City of Troy or elsewhere without
first obtaining the appropriate liquor license as set forth in the Michigan Liquor Control
Act.
3. City Council Approval; Applications for New and Transferred Licenses.
a. No person shall sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises in the City of
Troy without obtaining the approval of City Council of the application for a new or
transferred license.
b. City Council may deny approval of an available quota license if it is in the best
interest of the public. This determination may include consideration of future
development opportunities.
c. City Council approval is not necessarily required for new or transferred applications
for special licenses, club licenses, 24 hour licenses, or off- premises SDM or SDD
licenses. However, each club license request and each SDM or SDD license request
shall be submitted to Troys Liquor Advisory Board for a recommendation to the Troy
City Council. City Council may then make a recommendation of approval or denial or
highlight special concerns about each such license application to the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission.
4. City Council Approval; Gas Stations and/or Businesses with Fuel Pumps.
a. Both of the following shall be established for any applicant seeking City Council
approval for a liquor license for a gas station and/or a business with fuel pumps:
1) The site of payment and selection of alcoholic liquor shall be at least 50 feet
from that point where motor fuel is dispensed; and
2) The applicant must establish that one or both of the following conditions exist
and will continue to exist:
(i) The applicant or licensee is located in a neighborhood shopping center
composed of one or more commercial establishments organized or
operated as a unit which is related in location, size, and type of shop to
the trade area that the unit serves, which provides not less than 50,000
square feet of gross leasable retail space, and which provides five
private off-street parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable retail space; and/or
(ii) At all times, the applicant or licensee maintains a minimum inventory on
the premises of not less than $250,000.00 (at cost) of those goods and
merchandise customarily marketed by approved types of businesses,
excluding alcoholic liquor and motor vehicle fuel.
Chapter 101  Liquor Licenses
101-3
A) Services, prizes, offers, contests, coupons, and other items which
require purchase before a cash value attaches shall not be
considered inventory.
B) The applicant or licensee shall allow inspection of the inventory at the
licensed premises during regular business hours by the Director of
Building and Zoning or his/her designee, the Treasurer or Finance
Director or his/her designee, or the Troy Police Department.
C) Upon a verbal or written request of the City, the applicant or licensee
shall produce documents and/or records of the cost of inventory on
the premises on a specific date. If the applicant or licensee fails to
produce such documents or records, or if the documentation
presented does not contain enough information to determine if the
inventory is based on cost, within 3 days of the request, then there
shall be a rebuttable presumption that the inventory on that specific
date was below the $250,000 minimum requirement of this Chapter,
which can be raised in any legal proceeding.
b. Failure to satisfy the requirements of sub-section 1) and sub-section 2), as set forth
above, will result in a denial recommendation from the Troy City Council. In the
event that a gas station or business with gas pumps is granted a liquor license by
the State of Michigan, the failure to continuously satisfy the requirements of subsection
1) and sub-section 2), as set forth above, will result in a recommendation for
revocation or other adverse action against the liquor license.
5. City Council Approval; Related Permits.
No person shall engage in entertainment, dancing or other activities at the licensed premises
within the City of Troy without first having obtained the recommendation of approval of City
Council of the application for the related permit, and obtaining any necessary permits from the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission. City Council shall take action on all requests for
entertainment, dance, topless activity, or banquet facility permits, and shall forward its
resolution to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
6. Application; Application Requirements; Administrative Review.
a. The applicant shall submit to the Police Department a fully completed City of Troy
Liquor License Application on the form that is prepared and furnished by the Police
Department.
b. The application shall include at least the following information:
(i) Name and address of applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the
name and address of each partner shall be provided, and a copy of any
partnership agreement attached. If the applicant is a privately held
corporation, the name and address of each corporate officer, member of
board of directors, and stockholder shall be provided, and a copy of the
Chapter 101  Liquor Licenses
101-4
articles of incorporation attached. If the applicant is a publicly held
corporation, the name and address of each corporate officer, each
member of the board of directors and each stockholder who owns five
percent or more of the corporate stock shall be provided. If the applicant
is a limited liability company, the name and address of each member,
manager and assignee of membership interest shall be provided, and
the articles of organization attached.
(ii) Type of license or related permit(s) desired.
(iii) Address of the property where the license or permit activities will occur.
(iv) Three (3) written references as to the applicants character, experience,
and financial ability to meet the obligations and business undertakings
for which the license is to be issued.
(v) Any other information pertinent to the applicant and operation of the
proposed facility.
(vi) The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application
and investigation fee, in the amount that is set forth in Chapter 60 of the
City of Troy Ordinances.
c. By submitting an application to the City of Troy, the applicant is agreeing to a
complete background investigation, including, but not limited to: fingerprinting of
applicant and any individual listed in Section 6.b.; an investigation of any criminal
activities; civil actions; actions or investigations by other governmental bodies; moral
character; business reputation; or any other background areas deemed necessary
by the Troy Police Department investigators.
d. City Council shall not take any action on a liquor license or related permit application
until the application for said license or related permit has been timely reviewed by
the following:
(i) Police Department
(ii) Fire Department
(iii) Treasurer
(iv) Building Inspection Department
(v) Planning Department
e. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall coordinate the administrative review
process, and shall submit the documentation to the Liquor Advisory Committee for a
recommendation, pursuant to Section 13 of this Chapter. Within 60 days of the
Liquor Advisory Committee recommendation, the application and supporting
documentation shall be forwarded to the Troy City Council for action.
Chapter 101  Liquor Licenses
101-5
7. Criteria for Approving Liquor Licenses and Related Permits.
City Council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to approve a new or
transferred liquor license or related permit:
a. The applicants experience in operating other similarly licensed businesses.
b. The applicants general business management experience.
c. The applicants general business reputation.
d. The applicants moral character.
e. Past convictions of the applicant for any of the following:
(i) A felony.
(ii) A crime involving the excessive use of alcoholic liquor.
(iii) A crime involving any of the following:
A) Gambling.
B) Prostitution.
C) Weapons.
D) Violence.
E) Tax evasion.
F) Fraudulent activity.
G) Controlled substances.
H) Serious moral turpitude.
I) A misdemeanor of such a nature that it may impair the ability of the
applicant to operate a licensed business in a safe and competent
manner.
f. The applicants excessive use of alcoholic liquor.
g. The history of non-payment or late payment of taxes by the applicant.
h. The type of service, menu, or entertainment offered.
i. The overall theme, atmosphere, or ambience of the proposed business.
j. The proposed hours and days of operation.
k. The need for proposed business in the particular area.
l. The proximity of the proposed business to other similarly licensed businesses.
m. The proximity of the proposed business to a residentially zoned or used zoning
district.
Chapter 101  Liquor Licenses
101-6
n. The diversification or uniqueness of the proposed business in the City.
o. The overall fit and compatibility with the Master Plan of the City.
p. The compatibility of the proposed business with surrounding uses.
q. The impact of the business on police and code enforcement.
r. The effect that the issuance of a license would have upon the economic
development of the surrounding area.
s. The effect the establishment will have upon vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
t. The effect that the proposed business would have upon the surrounding
neighborhood and/or business establishments, including impacts upon residential
areas, churches, schools, and public parks.
u. The overall benefits of the proposed establishment to the City.
v. Whether the proposed activities on the premises will have a deleterious effect on the
surrounding neighborhood.
w. Any other factors that may affect the health, welfare, and/or safety of the general
public.
x. Any other factors that City Council may deem proper, provided such considerations
are reasonable under all of the circumstances.
8. Restrictions on Licenses and Related Permits.
a. No license or related permit shall be issued to:
(i) A person whose previous liquor license and/or related permit(s) were
revoked for cause.
(ii) A person who does not meet the ordinance requirements, even if
previously granted a liquor license and/or related permit(s).
(iii) A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership
qualify to obtain a license.
(iv) A corporation if any officer, manager or director or a stock owner or
stockholders owning more than 5 percent of the stock of such
corporation would not be eligible to receive a license or related permit.
(v) A person whose place of business is operated by a manager or agent,
unless such manager or agent possesses qualifications similar to those
required of the licensee.
Chapter 101  Liquor Licenses
101-7
(vi) A person who has been convicted or found responsible for a violation of
any federal, state, or local law involving moral turpitude, fraud, violence,
controlled substances, or alcoholic liquors.
(vii) A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought
or does not have a lease therefore for the full period for which the
license is issued.
b. No license or related permit shall be issued when there exists a violation of the
applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, or fire prevention codes,
applicable zoning regulations, or applicable public health regulations.
c. Prior to the issuance or transfer of any liquor license and/or related permit by the
State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the applicant or transferee shall sign
a contract with the City of Troy agreeing to assure compliance with any and all
restrictions and/or conditions placed on the licenses and/or related permit and
compliance with statutes and regulations of the State of Michigan and the City of
Troy Code of Ordinances, regulations and conditions. The licensee or holder of any
permits shall post the restrictions and/or conditions with the license and/or permits
issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission in a conspicuous place within the
facility.
9. Required Restaurant Operation Affiliation. On-premises license or related permit
applications must be in connection with and incidental to a bona fide restaurant
operation, or an assembly or a convention center use which shall be determined by the
Troy City Council in its sole discretion.
10. Annual License Review. City Council may undertake an annual review of any license for
purposes of making recommendations to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission
regarding renewal or revocation of any license. City Council may also review a license
more frequently if warranted by the circumstances.
11. License Revocation. Each licensed premises within the City shall be operated and
maintained in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. Upon
any violation of any federal or state law or regulation, or any city ordinance, the City
Council may, after a notice and hearing, request the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission revoke such license or refuse to renew such license, as set forth below.
12. Procedure for License Review.
a. Before filing any objection to renewal or request for revocation of a license or related
permit with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, City Council shall serve the
licensee with a notice of hearing, sent by first class mail at least seven days prior to
hearing, which notice shall contain the following:
Chapter 101  Liquor Licenses
101-8
(i) Notice of proposed action.
(ii) Reasons for the proposed action.
(iii) Date, time and place of hearings.
(iv) A statement that the licensee may present evidence, testimony,
and/or confront adverse witnesses.
b. This hearing shall be open to the public and notice of said public hearing shall be
mailed to each residence and business within 500 feet of the boundary line of the
property of the licensed establishment, and shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Troy.
c. Following the hearing, City Council shall submit to the licensee and the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission a written statement of its findings and determination.
13. Criteria for Review. After a public hearing, City Council may recommend non-renewal or
revocation of a license or related permit to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission
upon a determination, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that any of the
following exist:
a. Violation of any of the restrictions on licenses set forth in any law or ordinance or
statute or the administrative rules or any provision of the Michigan Liquor Control
Act.
b. Maintenance of a nuisance upon the licensed premises, including, but not limited to,
any of the following:
(i) Existing violations of building, zoning, plumbing, mechanical, electrical,
health, fire prevention or regulatory codes.
(ii) A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed
establishment which is in violation of the law or disturbs the peace, order
and tranquility of the neighborhood.
(iii) The failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed
establishment by allowing litter, debris, and/or refuse to be deposited on
the property or adjoining properties.
(iv) Providing entertainment without the required permit or entertainment
which disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood.
(v) Any advertising, promotion or activity which by its nature causes, creates
or contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinances or laws, or
contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the
neighborhood of the licensed establishment.
Chapter 101  Liquor Licenses
101-9
c. An off- premises licensee has sold alcoholic liquor on at least 3 separate occasions
in a single calendar year to a person who is less than 21 years of age.
d. An on- premises licensee has sold alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21
years of age.
14. Liquor Advisory Committee.
a. It is the responsibility of the City of Troy Liquor Advisory Committee to make a
recommendation to City Council as to whether it should approve a liquor license or
related permit. In making its recommendation, the Liquor Advisory Committee shall
follow the rules, guidelines, and procedures set forth in this ordinance.
b. City Council may grant the Liquor Advisory Committee authority to conduct review or
revocation hearings by a resolution. If such authority is granted, the Liquor Advisory
Committee shall follow the procedures as set forth in sections 10 thru 13 of this
Chapter.
(i) Upon completion of the hearing, the Liquor Advisory Committee shall
make a written statement of its findings and submit to City Council a
recommendation as to renewal or revocation within 14 days after the
hearing.
(ii) Upon receiving the Liquor Advisory Committees recommendation, and
reviewing its written statement of findings, City Council shall pass a
resolution, which shall either:
A) Accept the recommendation of the Liquor Advisory Committee.
B) Reject the recommendation of the Liquor Advisory Committee.
C) Hold another hearing at a later date to be determined by City Council.
If another hearing is held, City Council shall follow all rules set forth in
Sections 11 and 12 of this chapter, and the decision made by City
Council shall be final.
(Enacted: 08/11/2008)
Chapter 102  Cost Recovery
102-1
1. Short Title: This chapter shall be known and cited as the Cost Recovery
Ordinance.
2. Purpose. The City of Troy finds that a significant and continuous potential
exists for extraordinary response situations based upon prior events which
have taken place in the City, including those involving specialized
response resources, that have and will continue to place a substantial
financial and operational burden upon police protection services, fire
protection services, emergency medical services, public works services,
and other emergency health and safety services. The City finds that this
Ordinance is necessary to protect the City from excessive expense
resulting from the utilization of City resources in response to defined
extraordinary situations and to fairly allocate the costs resulting from
incidents among those responsible for them. The City further finds that the
use of municipal personnel for certain responses interferes with the
provision of routine and necessary public services to the residents of the
City. The City has also determined that in traffic accidents involving drivers
who are operating under the influence there is a greater likelihood of
personal injury and property damage. The City further finds that this
Ordinance is necessary to authorize the imposition of charges and to
establish a policy and set forth the methods by which the City will recover
actual costs incurred in making extraordinary responses and providing
services in connection with the same.
3. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives
shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context otherwise
requires:
A. Accident, including natural disaster, means an unforeseen or
unexpected happening or occurring which of itself causes great harm or
damage, or which creates the potential for great harm or damage to
individuals and/or property, and which requires immediate and prudent
securing and monitoring by the City and/or agents of the City, to reduce
the potential for such damage, but not including an extraordinary
response.
B. Assessable costs means those costs for services (including police, fire,
rescue, emergency medical services, emergency or municipal personnel,
public works, and any other health and safety services) at the scene of an
extraordinary response, incurred by the City, or a private person,
corporation, or other assisting governmental agency, operating at the
request or direction of the City. The term assessable costs includes but is
not limited to the costs of providing:
1) Disposable materials and supplies acquired, consumed and
expended specifically for the purpose of the extraordinary
response;
Chapter 102  Cost Recovery
102-2
2) All salaries, wages, and compensation of responding, supervising,
investigating, reporting, and testifying City personnel where such
services are required by an extraordinary response, the
investigation of an extraordinary response incident, or any
prosecution or civil action brought in connection with such an
incident. This shall include, but not be limited to the actual labor
costs of the City (including without limitation: employee wages
including overtime, fringe benefits, and administrative overhead,
whether or not the services are provided by the City or by a third
party at the request of the City, including, but not limited to any
mutual aid association or party to an interlocal agreement);
3) All salaries, wages including overtime, and compensation of
responding, supervising, investigating, reporting and testifying
personnel of any assisting governmental agency, including, but not
limited to, any mutual aid association or party to an interlocal
agreement, or consultant or contractor acting at the request or
direction of the City where such services are required by an
extraordinary response, the investigation of any extraordinary
response situation, or any prosecution and/or civil action brought in
connection with such an incident.
4) Costs for the use of City owned vehicles and/or equipment, but only
if the use of the vehicle and/or equipment would not have been
necessary but for the extraordinary response situation.
5) Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the
extraordinary response (such as, but not limited to: protective
equipment or clothing, scientific and technical equipment);
6) The actual replacement costs for equipment that is contaminated
beyond reuse or repair during an extraordinary response;
7) Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the
extraordinary response;
8) Special technical services specifically required for the extraordinary
response (such as costs associated with the time and efforts of
technical experts or specialists);
9) Other special services specifically required for the extraordinary
response;
10) Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the
extraordinary response;
11) Costs of cleanup, storage, or disposal of hazardous materials;
Chapter 102  Cost Recovery
102-3
12) Costs associated with the services, supplies and equipment
procured for a specific evacuation;
13) Medical expenses incurred as a result of extraordinary response
activities, including ambulance conveyance to a hospital;
14) Service charges and interests;
15) The cost of any type of chemical testing for blood alcohol content or
for the presence of controlled substances and for videotaping of the
driver, if applicable;
16) Related administrative costs, which shall be fifteen percent (15%)
of the actual cost charged by the City, accruing after the occurrence
of an extraordinary response;
17) Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the
extraordinary response situation, including efforts to recover
expenses pursuant to this Ordinance, attorneys fees, expert
witness fees, litigation costs, court costs, charges, fines, or
penalties to the City imposed by any court or other municipal, state
or federal governmental entities;
18) Costs incurred in accounting for the extraordinary response
expenditure, including billing and collection costs.
C. Bomb threats means the verbal or written threat of a bomb or other
explosive device, which if discharged as threatened would violate a
federal, state or local law.
D. Emergency assistance means extraordinary response by emergency
and/or other municipal personnel.
E. Emergency personnel means police protection services, fire protection
services, emergency medical services, public works services, other
emergency health and safety services, and any other City personnel,
consultant, or contractor provided by the City or by a private entity,
corporation, expert, consultant, or other assisting governmental agency
operating at the request or direction of the City or the State of Michigan at
the request of the City, including but not limited to any mutual aid
associations or party to an interlocal agreement.
F. Extraordinary response means the providing, sending, and/or utilizing of
emergency or municipal personnel to or at an incident of a serious and/or
urgent threat to human life, public safety and welfare, or to real or
personal property.
Chapter 102  Cost Recovery
102-4
G. Extraordinary response situations means situations requiring
extraordinary response by municipal personnel, rendered in response to:
1) Excessive and/or repeated requests for response to incidents which
are determined by the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief to be nonhazardous
or not dangerous to an individual or the public;
2) A dangerous or hazardous materials incident, emergency, or release;
3) An illegal fire;
4) A bomb threat;
5) A threat of harm to oneself or others;
6) A structure demolition;
7) Any building fire or other building matter that requires extraordinary
response by emergency or municipal personnel;
8) Any motor vehicle accident that requires extraordinary response by
emergency or municipal personnel;
9) Any motor vehicle fire that requires an extraordinary response by
emergency municipal personnel;
10) Any confined space, trench rescue, or similar incident requiring
extraordinary response by emergency or municipal personnel;
11) The providing, sending and/or utilizing emergency or municipal
personnel by the City to an accident involving a motor vehicle where
one or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while
under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or any controlled substance
or the combined influence of an alcohol liquor and any controlled
substance, or the making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police
officer when the driver was operating a motor vehicle while under the
influence of an alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a
combination of both;
12) Any investigation by emergency or municipal personnel that results in
the issuance of a complaint and arrest warrant for Filing a False
Police Report or Hindering and Obstructing a Police Officer by
Providing False Identification.
13) Abatement of any nuisance as included in the City Code of
Ordinances or abatement of any other matter required to protect and
maintain the health, safety and welfare of the Citys residents;
Chapter 102  Cost Recovery
102-5
14) Any other extraordinary situation whereby extraordinary response
was taken by the City which is above and beyond normal or routine
emergency standards.
H. Extraordinary use of municipal personnel means the use of emergency
or municipal personnel at special events such as athletic events, religioussponsored
events, school functions, charitable events, or any private
sector gatherings or events when the holders and/or sponsors of an event
have not made pre-arrangements in writing with the City for use of
emergency or municipal personnel. This term does not include those
special events which are pre-arranged, and there is a separate agreement
covering the costs of municipal personnel.
I. Hazardous or dangerous material means those elements, substances,
wastes or by-products, including but not limited to, combustible liquid,
flammable gas, explosive flammables, poisons, organic peroxides,
oxidizers, pyrophorics, unstable or reactive matter, water reactive matter,
petroleum products, anti-freeze, polychlorinated biphenyls and asbestos,
or materials similar to those listed, which are or could be potentially
harmful to the environment or human or animal life, or which pose an
unreasonable or imminent risk of life, health or safety of persons or
property, or to the essential balance of the environment as determined by
the Fire Chief or his designee or the senior official of the City in charge at
the scene. The term hazardous materials also includes hazardous
materials defined by MCLA 286.452.
J. Hazardous or dangerous materials incident or emergency means any
occurrence, incident, activity, accident or emergency where a release of
hazardous materials has occurred, or is reasonably imminent to occur,
and where the Fire Chief or his designee has declared such activity,
accident or emergency a hazardous or dangerous material incident or
emergency.
K. Illegal fire means a fire set, or determined to have been set, in violation of
any federal, state or local law, and shall include, but not be limited to: an
arson fire, a fire set in violation of a No burning ban or order, or a fire
proximately caused by illegal fireworks. An illegal fire does not include an
unintentional fire or a fire caused by an act of God (for example, a
lightning storm).
L. Municipal personnel means police protection services, fire protection
services, emergency medical services, public works services, other
emergency health and safety services, and other City personnel,
consultants, or contractors provided by the City or by a private entity,
corporation, expert, consultant, or other assisting governmental agency
operating at the request or direction of the City, including but not limited to
a mutual aid association and any parties to an interlocal agreement.
Chapter 102  Cost Recovery
102-6
M. Release means any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or
dispensing of hazardous materials into the environment (including but not
limited to: the air, soil, surface waters or groundwater, which causes
danger or harm to the public health or environment), or the abandonment
or discarding of barrels, containers, and other closed receptacles
containing hazardous material.
N. Responsible party means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, governmental
entity or any other legal entity responsible for an extraordinary response
situation. Any owner, tenant, occupant or party, including the estate, heirs,
successors and assigns of that responsible party who is in control of real
or personal property from which, onto which, or related to a hazardous
materials release. Responsible party will also include the individual or
entity which requests an extraordinary use of municipal personnel.
O. Operating under the influence means the operation of a motor vehicle
while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or controlled substance
or while visibly impaired by intoxicating liquor and/or a controlled
substance, or with unlawful alcohol content by weight of alcohol,
regardless of whether such person is charged or convicted of any crime
relating to the incident causing the extraordinary response.
1) It shall be presumed that a person who was less than twenty-one (21)
years of age was operating a motor vehicle under the influence if
chemical analysis of the drivers blood, breathe, or urine, indicates an
alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per
210 liters of breathe, or per 67 milliliters of urine. The term any bodily
alcohol content means the presence of any alcohol within the drivers
body which is due to consumption of intoxicating liquor other than
consumption which was part of a recognized religious ceremony.
2) It shall be presumed that a person who was operating a commercial
motor vehicle was under the influence if chemical analysis of the
drivers blood, urine or breathe indicates the presence of any amount
of a controlled substance or that the alcohol content in the drivers
blood, breathe, or urine contained 0.04 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breathe, or 67 milliliters of urine.
3) Other than in subsections 1) and 2) of this definition, it shall be
presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle under the
influence if chemical analysis of the drivers blood, breathe, or urine
indicates the presence of any amount of a controlled substance or that
the alcohol content in the drivers blood, breathe, or urine was in
excess of 0.08 grams or more per 100 milliliters, per 210 liters of
breathe, or 67 milliliters of urine.
Chapter 102  Cost Recovery
102-7
P. Specialized response resources means equipment, supplies, vehicles,
and specially-trained personnel that may be utilized to provide
extraordinary response services or mitigation in connection with a
specialized response.
Q. Structure demolition means the tearing down of a structure damaged by
Fire, explosion, or by other means which must be properly demolished in
order to protect public safety, in the opinion of the Fire Chief and/or the
Director of Building and Zoning, or their designees.
R. Threat of harm to oneself or others means the verbal or written threat of
harm to oneself, to another or to anothers property, which, if carried out,
would be in violation of any federal, state or local law.
4. Cost Recovery Authorization and Procedure. The City may recover all
assessable costs in connection with extraordinary response situations from
any or all responsible parties, jointly or separately. The City may recover all
assessable costs in connection with extraordinary use of municipal personnel
from the person, entity or organization necessitating the extraordinary
services. For all other extraordinary response situations, the City Manager, or
his/her designee, shall determine the total assessable costs and shall, in
consultation with other City personnel involved in responding to an
extraordinary response situation, determine whether to assess all or part of
such costs against any of the responsible parties. In making such a
determination, the following will be considered:
A. The total assessable costs;
B. The risk that the extraordinary response situation imposed on the City
residents and their property;
C. Whether there was any injury or damage to person or property;
D. Whether the extraordinary response situation required evacuation;
E. The extent the extraordinary response situation required an unusual or
extraordinary use of municipal personnel and equipment; and
F. Whether there was any damage to the environment.
After consideration of the above listed factors, the City Manager may allocate
assessable costs among responsible parties, including allocating all or some of
such costs jointly and severally against all parties, rather than one responsible
party, regardless of whether a responsible party has legal liability therefore or is
legally at fault. If the City Manager determines not to assess all or part of
Chapter 102  Cost Recovery
102-8
assessable costs against a responsible party, such determination shall not in any
way limit or extinguish the liability of the responsible party to other parties.
5. Hazardous Materials Release.
A. Duty to Remove. It shall be the duty of the responsible party who
causes or controls leakage, spillage or any other dissemination of
dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to immediately
remove such hazardous substances or materials and complete a
cleanup of the area of the release to insure that the hazardous
substances or materials are fully removed and the area is fully
restored to pre-release condition.
B. Failure to Remove. In the event that the responsible party fails to
immediately and completely comply with Section 5.A., the City, its
employees, agents, contractors, or consultants, may enter the
property where the release occurred and conduct a cleanup, at the
cost of the responsible party.
C. Charges Imposed Upon Responsible Party. Where there is a
hazardous materials release, which requires an extraordinary
response by municipal personnel, all assessable costs incurred by the
City may be imposed upon the responsible party.
6. Billing and Collection of Assessable Costs and Late Payment Fees.
A. Upon a determination to assess costs incurred under this Ordinance,
the City will submit an itemized invoice, by first class mail or personal
service, to each responsible party. Such invoice shall be due and
payable within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing, and any
amounts unpaid, including any previously imposed, shall pay a late
payment fee equal to one and one-half (1%) percent per month.
B. A determination not to assess costs pursuant to this Ordinance shall
in no way limit, extinguish or constitute a defense to the liability of any
responsible party to any third party.
C. If the responsible party appeals assessable costs pursuant to Section
7 below, such costs, if upheld in whole or in part, shall be due and
payable thirty (30) days from the date of determination of the appeal
and late payment fees shall apply thereafter.
7. Procedure for Appealing Assessable Costs.
A. Any responsible party who receives an invoice for assessable costs
shall have the opportunity to meet with the City Manager, or his/her
designee, to request modification of the assessable costs. The
Chapter 102  Cost Recovery
102-9
responsible party shall request such a meeting in writing within seven
(7) calendar days of the date of the invoice assessing the costs.
B. If after the meeting with the City Manager or his/her designee, the
responsible party contests the assessed charges; he or she may
request an opportunity to appear before City Council to further request
a modification of the assessable costs. A responsible party who
desires to appear before City Council must first meet with the City
Manager or his/her designee, as provided above, and shall file a
written request to appear before City Council with the City Clerk within
seven (7) calendar days of the meeting with the City Manager.
C. Upon receipt of a request to appear before City Council, the City Clerk
will place the challenge to the assessed cost on the agenda of the
next regularly-scheduled City Council meeting, as long as there are at
least fourteen (14) calendar days after the date on which the
responsible party files the request to appear.
D. The filed request to appear before City Council shall specifically
identify and explain all reasons why the responsible party believes the
assessed costs should be modified. The responsible party has the
burden of proving by a preponderance of relevant facts that the
determination is erroneous in whole or in part. Any reasoning, basis or
argument for modification of assessable costs not set forth in the
request to appear before City Council shall be deemed waived by the
responsible party. Failure to timely file a written request to appear
before City Council shall constitute a waiver of the responsible partys
right to appear before City Council and shall further constitute the
responsible partys agreement to pay the assessable costs invoiced.
E. Once the responsible party has been given the opportunity to appear
before it, City Council shall, within a reasonable time, affirm, reverse,
or modify all or a portion of the payment of the assessable costs
invoiced. Failure of the responsible party to appear before City
Council on the appeal shall constitute a waiver of that partys
objections to the assessable costs. The decision of City Council shall
be final.
8. Assessable Costs Constitute a Lien Upon Property. Any assessable costs
which have been assessed but not paid when due, including any late
payment fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real property of the responsible
party in the City, from which, upon which or related to which an extraordinary
situation occurred. Such a lien shall be of the character and effect as the lien
created by state statute for General Tax Law for City real property and shall
include accrued interest and penalties. The City Treasurer shall verify on
March 1 of each year and certify to the City Assessor the fact that such
assessable costs are delinquent and unpaid. The City Assessor shall then
Chapter 102  Cost Recovery
102-10
enter the delinquent amount on the next general ad valorem tax roll as a
charge against the affected property, and the lien thereon shall be enforced in
the same manner as provided and allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid
real property taxes.
9. Other Remedies. In addition to the remedy set forth in Section 8 above, the
City shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy or may institute any
appropriate court action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction as
permitted by law to collect assessable costs from a responsible party.
10. No Limitation of Liability. The recovery of assessable costs pursuant to this
Ordinance does not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable
federal, state or local law.
11. Preemption by Federal or State Statute. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be
construed to prevent a federal or state statute from preempting this
Ordinance if the federal or state statute provides an absolute defense to
liability of a responsible party due to the acts of a third party and that statue
expressly or impliedly provides the federal or state government with the
authority to regulate the a specific area of the law, or the pervasiveness of
federal or state regulation or the nature of the regulation demonstrates the
need for exclusive regulation by the federal or state government, including,
but not limited to NREPA, MCLA 323.101, et. seq. and CERCLA 42 USC
9601, et. seq.
(Enacted: 12-21-2009)
Chapter 103  Alarm Ordinance
103-1
1. PURPOSE.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide a registration and permit process, with
appropriate regulations to facilitate the reduction of false alarm activations, establish
procedures for administration of the ordinance, and to advance the disciplined use and
maintenance of alarm systems.
2. DEFINITIONS.
A. Alarm Monitoring Service. Any person or entity whose business, purpose, or
function is to monitor fire, security, or medical alarm systems and notify the Troy
Police and Fire Communications Center of alarm activations.
B. Alarm System. Either a security alarm system or fire alarm system, or medical
alarm system or combination security, fire or emergency alarm system as herein
defined.
C. Alarm User. The owner, occupant, or person in control of premises where an
alarm system is maintained within the City.
D. Emergency Alarm. Any device or assembly of equipment and devices which
upon activation warns the occupants of the premises of emergency situations
involving hazardous materials or otherwise summons the fire department to
respond.
E. False Alarm Activation. Any alarm condition which is reported to the Troy Police
and Fire Communications Center resulting from a situation for which the alarm
was intended.
F. False Alarm Activation Notification. A written notification to the alarm user, on
a form determined by the City, of the occurrence of a false alarm activation.
G. Fire Alarm Provider. Any person or entity whose business, purpose, or function
is to install or service fire alarm systems and is licensed as an electrical contractor
or a fire alarm specialty contractor.
H. Fire Alarm System. A device or assembly of devices and equipment that detects
and annunciates the presence of smoke, heat, or fire and, which upon activation,
warns the occupants of the premises that a fire emergency exists, or summons
the fire department to respond. In this Chapter, the term Fire Alarm System
includes but is not limited to the following: Fire Protective Signaling System;
Automatic Fire Detection System; Automatic Sprinkler System; Manual Fire
Alarm System; Water Flow Alarm; Smoke Alarm/Detector; Gas Detection
Alarm; Carbon Monoxide Alarm/Detector; and Emergency Alarm.
Chapter 103  Alarm Ordinance
103-2
I. Security Alarm Provider. Any person, individual, co-partnership, corporation,
association, club, joint adventure, estate, trust, and any other group or
combination action as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit,
whose business, purpose, or function is to install, service, or monitor security or
medical alarms.
J. Security Alarm System. A device or assembly of equipment and devices
arranged to signal the presence of a condition such as, but not limited to: a holdup,
a burglary, home or property or business invasion, or a medical emergency
which is intended to summon an emergency police response and/or emergency
medical service, or employs an audible signal emitting sounds or flashing lights
or beacon designed to signal persons outside of the premises. The term
Security Alarm System shall include but is not limited to the following:
automatic holdup alarm system, burglar alarm system, intrusion alarm
system, medical alarm system, panic alarm system, personal emergency
response system, or any other alarm system that results in the summoning of
the police department or emergency medical service.
EXCEPTION: False vehicle alarms which are addressed in Chapter 88, Section
9.5, Subsection (a) of the Troy City Code.
3. AUTOMATIC ALARM DIALERS.
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance to disrupt and/or interfere with the telephone
communication system of the Troy Police and Fire Department by allowing alarm systems
which, when activated, connect with the communication facility of the Troy Police and Fire
Department by means of the Department's telephone system.
A. No person engaged in the business of providing such services and facilities shall
use or operate, attempt to use or operate or cause to be used or operated, or
arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide or install any device or combination
of devices that will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other
automatic means initiate the intra-state calling, dialing or connection to any
telephone number assigned to any subscriber by a public telephone company,
without the prior written consent of such subscriber.
B. The term "telephone number" includes any additional numbers assigned by a
public utility company engaged in the business of providing communications
services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to connect
with the subscriber to such primary number when the primary telephone number
is in use.
4. SECURITY ALARM INSTALLATION.
A. Upon completion of a security alarm installation, the security alarm provider shall
thoroughly instruct the alarm user in the proper operation, testing, and
maintenance of the system.
Chapter 103  Alarm Ordinance
103-3
B. The security alarm provider shall use only dual action holdup devices and
eliminate using 1 + duress keypad coding and money clips.
C. The security alarm provider shall implement procedures to prevent or cancel
exit/entry false alarms. (Extend delay times, enable delays before dialing, enable
panel cancel code, etc.)
D. Security alarm systems shall contain a battery back-up system in case of a power
surge or loss of power.
E. Alarm users and security alarm providers shall assign access codes to premise
users that are unique to the individual.
F. In commercial security alarm applications, the alarm user shall display a phone
number, designated for alarm verification, adjacent to the alarm code access
panel.
5. SECURITY ALARM SHUT-OFF DEVICES.
A. Security alarm systems equipped with audible signals, e.g. bells, horns, or sirens
intended to be heard by person(s) outside the protected premise shall be
equipped with a shut-off device that automatically silences the audible signal
within ten minutes of activation.
B. Security alarm systems equipped with audible signals that are not fitted with a
shut-off device shall be subject to deactivation by the police department. The
alarm user shall be assessed a shut-off fee and any applicable false alarm or
unregistered alarm fees in accordance with Chapter 60 of the Code.
6. FIRE ALARM SYSTEM PERMITTING.
A. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, and operate a fire alarm system without
having first obtained the necessary permit(s) and inspection(s), and without
having registered as provided for in this Chapter.
B. Individuals failing to obtain a fire alarm installation permit as required by Chapter
93 of the Code shall be assessed a double permit fee and associated civil
infraction fees and penalties.
7. FIRE ALARM SYSTEM INSTALLATION.
A. Installation of a fire alarm system shall be reviewed, permitted, and inspected by
the Troy Fire Prevention Division with applicable permit and inspection fees paid
prior to installation as required in Chapter 93 and Chapter 60 of the Code.
EXCEPTION: Fire alarm systems installed in single family residential
occupancies.
Chapter 103  Alarm Ordinance
103-4
B. Upon completion of a fire alarm installation, the fire alarm provider shall
thoroughly instruct the alarm user in the proper operation, testing, and
maintenance of the system.
8. FIRE ALARM PROVIDER LICENSING.
The fire alarm provider contracted to install and/or maintain a fire alarm system must
possess a license as required in MCL 338.881 et. seq. (PA 1956 No. 217 and PA 1992
No. 130).
9. FIRE AND SECURITY ALARM SYSTEM REGISTRATION.
A. Alarm systems shall be registered with the City within fourteen (14) days of being
connected to an alarm monitoring service or audible signal.
B. Alarm providers shall advise alarm users with whom they do business that the
alarm user must register the alarm system with the City.
C. The alarm user shall pay an annual registration fee for each alarm system at each
separately addressed operating location in accordance with Chapter 60 of the
Code.
EXCEPTION: Residential alarm users shall pay a single registration fee at each
separately addressed operating location for a combination security, medical,
and/or fire alarm system control panel.
D. All registrations are valid for one (1) year.
E. Registrations shall be renewed with the City annually prior to the last business
day of the anniversary month of the first alarm registration and shall be updated
upon change of information or conditions. Individuals or businesses who have
registered their alarms prior to December 1st, 2009, will continue to have an
anniversary date of January 31st.
F. It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity to
use, own or lease an alarm system, or to be in control of a premise wherein an
alarm system is operated or maintained, without having registered the system as
required in this Chapter.
G. Any alarm user whose alarm system is not registered with the City shall be
assessed a fine in accordance with Chapter 60 of the Code. In addition, all alarm
activations, including both valid and false alarm activations from security alarms
or fire alarms as defined in this Chapter, shall also be assessed a fine, as set
forth in Chapter 60 of the Code, when the alarm is not registered.
Chapter 103  Alarm Ordinance
103-5
10. SECURITY AND FIRE ALARM REGISTRATION FORM.
A. Alarm System Registration forms shall contain the following information:
i. Applicants full legal name, address, and telephone number.
ii. Name, address and telephone number of the premises where the alarm
system is located.
iii. Type of alarm system.
iv. Contact information, including addresses and telephone numbers, for
three individuals who will respond to the alarm location in the event of an
emergency to reset or deactivate the alarm system, or contact the alarm
user if the alarm user is not at the alarm location.
v. The name, address, telephone number, and state license number (if
applicable) of the person or company that installed the alarm system.
vi. The name, address and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for the maintenance and repair of the alarm system (if
applicable).
vii. The alarm monitoring service name, phone number and address.
viii. Any additional information as considered necessary by the City.
B. Registration is complete upon receipt and processing of the registration form by
the City.
C. Incomplete registration forms will not be accepted and/or processed by the City.
11. FIRE AND SECURITY ALARM ACTIVATION REPORTING.
A. The alarm monitoring service shall notify the Troy Police and Fire
Communications Center of all alarm activations unless prior notification has been
made for testing, maintenance, or like circumstances. There is no requirement for
an alarm monitoring service to notify the Troy Police and Fire Communications
Center of a false or unintentional activation by an alarm user if that alarm
activation is strictly as a result of testing or maintenance between the alarm
monitoring service and the alarm user.
B. The alarm monitoring service shall notify the Troy Police and Fire
Communications Center of all verified alarm cancellations if an alarm notification
has been made to the Troy Police and Fire Communications Center.
Chapter 103  Alarm Ordinance
103-6
12. FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION- SECURITY AND FIRE ALARMS.
A. The alarm user shall be sent a false alarm notification form after the occurrence
of each verified false alarm activation.
B. The alarm user shall return the completed false alarm notification form to the City
within thirty (30) days of the false alarm notification date.
C. Failure to return the form shall initiate automatic billing of the false alarm fee.
13. FALSE FIRE ALARM NOTIFICATION- MAINTENANCE AND DOCUMENTATION.
Upon notification of all false fire alarm activations, the fire alarm user shall be required to
have the fire alarm system inspected and serviced by a fire alarm provider when it is
determined that the false fire alarm activation was due to a malfunction with the system, a
lack of maintenance, or when the reason for the activation cannot be determined.
Documentation of inspection service shall be provided to the Troy Fire Prevention Division
within thirty (30) days of said inspection.
14. FALSE ALARM ACTIVATION PROHIBITED  FINES AND PENALTIES.
A. The following acts are misdemeanors punishable by a fine of not more than
$500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both fines and
imprisonment:
i. Any person who knowingly or willfully initiates a false alarm activation.
ii. Any person, including a fire alarm provider or other trade contractor who,
because of work affecting the fire alarm system, either directly or indirectly
initiates a false fire alarm activation without providing prior notification to
the Troy Police and Fire Communications Center.
iii. A fire alarm monitoring service who initiates a false fire alarm after having
been notified of work affecting the fire alarm system.
iv. Any willful misrepresentation by a fire alarm provider as to inspection,
maintenance, or repair services rendered to a fire alarm system.
B. In addition to the above fines and penalties, false alarm activations in a calendar
year shall be assessed a penalty fee to be paid to the City in accordance with
Chapter 60 of the Code.
Except as provided in Section 15, the Troy Police Department and/or the Troy
Fire Department shall prepare an invoice of total charges for each premise and
forward those invoices to the City Treasurer. Within ten (10) days after receipt of
an invoice, the City Treasurer shall forward to the owner on the last local
assessment or tax roll an invoice of the total charges assessed against each
Chapter 103  Alarm Ordinance
103-7
premises. Thirty (30) days from the date each statement was mailed, payment
shall be made. If the invoice is not paid within forty (40) days, the total amount
charged shall become an assessment against the land and a lien against the
property where the alarm is located.
C. No fine shall be assessed for an alarm activation that was activated by conditions,
events, or circumstances for which the alarm was intended.
15. FALSE ALARM FINE(S) APPEAL PROCESS.
A. The City shall inform the registered alarm user, in writing, of each instance
wherein the police department or the fire department has recorded a false alarm
activation. The alarm user shall have the opportunity, within thirty (30) days from
the date of the alarm activation notification, to submit in writing, an explanation of
the alarm activation to the Troy Fire Department or Police Department, as
appropriate. The City Manager or his/ her designee has the ability to waive the
false alarm fee for good cause, such as a malfunction or equipment failure, as
long as proof of service or maintenance is provided.
B. Documentation provided to the City of maintenance or repair to the alarm system
within thirty (30) days from the date of the alarm activation notification may be
considered during the appeal process for possible waiving of the false alarm fee.
C. Severe weather, power outages, transmission line malfunctions, malicious acts of
person(s) not under the control of the alarm user, may be considered in
determining whether or not punitive action will be taken against the alarm user as
provided for in this ordinance.
D. The City Manager and his/her designee shall not waive more than two false alarm
fees per applicant for each registration year.
16. NO LIABILITY OF THE CITY.
A. The City assumes no liability for any defects in the operation of any alarm system,
as defined in this ordinance; for any failure or neglect of any person associated
with the installation, operation, or maintenance of any alarm system; for any
failure or neglect of any alarm user; for the transmission or receipt of alarm
signals; or any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of an alarm activation
from any source.
B. In the event the City finds it necessary to provide for the disconnection or removal
of any alarm system or component, the City shall have no liability for such action.
C. No special duty, other than that owed to the general public, shall be created by
virtue of this ordinance, or by virtue of registering or permitting an alarm system.
Chapter 103  Alarm Ordinance
103-8
17. VIOLATIONS.
Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, a person, individual, partnership, firm,
corporation, organization, institution or agency of government that violates this ordinance is
responsible for committing a Municipal Civil Infraction subject to the provisions of Chapter
100 of the Code. Each day a violation continues is a separate Municipal Civil Infraction
Violation. Sanctions for violation shall include a fine of not more than $500.00, costs,
damages, and injunctive orders as authorized by Chapter 100.
(Enacted: 11-09-2009)
Chapter 104  Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License Ordinance
104-1
1. Purpose and Intent.
 It is the intent of this Ordinance to give effect to the intent of the Michigan
Medical Marihuana Act (Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421, et seq.), as
approved by the electors of the State of Michigan.
 It is further the intent of this Ordinance to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare of persons and property, and to license certain locations as
specified in this Ordinance.
 It is further the intent of this Ordinance to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of law enforcement officers and other persons in the community, and also to
address and minimize reasonably anticipated effects upon children, other
members of the public, and upon significant areas of the community, that would
be reasonably likely to occur in the absence of the provisions of this Ordinance.
 This Ordinance is designed to recognize the fundamental intent of the Michigan
Medical Marihuana Act to allow the creation and maintenance of a private and
confidential patient-caregiver relationship to facilitate the statutory authorization
for the limited cultivation of marihuana for medical use, and to regulate in a
manner that does not conflict with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, but
addresses issues that would otherwise expose the community and its residents
to significant adverse conditions and secondary effects including but not limited
to the following:
o adverse and long-term influence on children;
o substantial serious criminal activity;
o danger to law enforcement and other members of the public;
o discouragement and impairment of effective law enforcement with regard to
unlawful activity involving the cultivation, distribution, and use of marijuana;
o the creation of a purportedly lawful commercial enterprise involving the
cultivation, distribution and use of marihuana that is not reasonably
susceptible of being distinguished from serious criminal enterprise; and,
o the uninspected installation of unlawful plumbing, mechanical, and electrical
facilities that create dangerous health, safety, and fire conditions.
 With the States recent allowance of medical marihuana facilities pursuant to the
Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act (MMFLA), MCL 333.27101 et. seq., it
is expected that neighboring communities will have medical marihuana facilities,
providing greater access to medical marihuana and marihuana products for
registered patients.
 Additionally, the MMFLA requires safety and purity testing for marihuana and
marihuana products before sale or distribution, and this same testing is not
required for caregiver grow operations. Based on this, there are health, safety
and welfare concerns that further justify a limit to the number of caregiver
operations in the City.
 Furthermore, the MMFLA requires registered caregivers to choose between
continuing a caregiver grow operation or being involved in a medical marihuana
facility grow operation under the MMFLA. As a result, it is expected that there
will be a reduction in caregiver grow operations in the City.
Chapter 104  Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License Ordinance
104-2
 This Ordinance does not permit or allow licensed Medical Marihuana Facilities,
as defined by the MMFLA, in the City.
 Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as allowing persons to engage in
conduct that endangers others or causes a public nuisance, or to allow use,
cultivation, growth, possession or control of marihuana contrary to the provisions
of the Act and this Ordinance.
 Furthermore, nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to undermine or
provide immunity from Federal Law as it may be enforced by the Federal or State
Government relative to the cultivation, distribution, or use of marijuana.
 The authorization of activity and/or approval of a license under this Ordinance
shall not have the effect of superseding or nullifying Federal Law applicable to
the cultivation, distribution, and use of marijuana.
2. Definitions:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Act: The Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.
Caregiver or Primary Caregiver: A caregiver or primary caregiver as defined in the Act,
with a current and valid registration.
Chief Law Enforcement Officer: The Chief of Police of the City of Troy or his or her
designee.
Grow Operation: Any location where the cultivation of marihuana by a patient or
caregiver, as defined in the Act, takes place in the City of Troy.
Licensee. The individual listed as an applicant on the application for a Medical
Marihuana Grow Operation license, or a person in whose name a license to operate a
Medical Marihuana Grow Operation has been issued, as set forth in the Act.
Licensing Officer. The Clerk of the City of Troy or his or her designee.
Patient. A patient as defined in the Act, with a current and valid registration.
Plant. Any living organism that produces its own food through photosynthesis and has
observable root formation or is in growth material.
Principal Residence. The place where a person resides for more than one half of the
calendar year
3. License Required; Application Fee; Investigation Fee; License Fee:
A. The cultivation of marihuana by a caregiver or a patient shall be permitted as
allowed under the Act, provided that no grow operation shall be allowed within
Chapter 104  Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License Ordinance
104-3
the City of Troy at a location unless such location has been licensed under this
Ordinance.
B. Based on past history and articulated health, safety and welfare concerns, and
the increased availability of marihuana for patients through the MMFLA, the City
intends to issue a maximum of 36 Medical Marihuana Grow Operation Licenses
each calendar year. All existing caregiver operations that as of January 1, 2018
were issued a City certificate of occupancy as part of the building permit process,
with modifications specific to the growth, cultivation or storage of medical
marihuana will be considered a current facility, and any current facility is eligible
to apply for a Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License, even if the issuance
of such a license temporarily results in more than 36 Medical Marihuana Grow
Operation Licenses in the City for the calendar year. However, in order to remain
eligible, any current facility must apply for a license within 30 days of the effective
date of this Ordinance, and satisfy the criteria to be eligible for a license.
Additionally, any revocation, suspension, business interruption or rescission
renders an applicant ineligible for a Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License.
C. Applicants for a Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License shall pay an
application fee as set by Chapter 60 of the Ordinances of the City of Troy.
Applicants requesting a renewal of an annual license shall submit a complete
renewal application at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the current license,
and shall also submit the fees as set forth in Chapter 60 of the Ordinances of the
City of Troy.
D. In the event an application or a renewal application for a Medical Marihuana
Grow Operation license is withdrawn or denied, the application fee shall be
forfeited. Fees are not transferrable.
E. All existing caregiver operations that as of January 1, 2018 were issued a City
certificate of occupancy as part of the building permit process, with modifications
specific to the growth, cultivation or storage of medical marihuana, do not have a
vested right or nonconforming use right, and are required to comply with this
Ordinance.
F. No Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License is required if a maximum of one
patient per residential unit grows, cultivates or stores marihuana for their own
personal consumption at the patients principal residence, as long as the growth,
cultivation or storage is in compliance with the Act, and there is no prohibition in
any lease or rental agreement or other binding legal document.
G. If a Medical Marihuana Grow Operation is in a home, all requirements for a
Home Occupation, as set forth in Chapter 39, Section 7.10 of the City of Troy
Ordinances must be met.
4. License Application:
A. Every applicant for an initial or an annual renewal of a Medical Marihuana Grow
Operation License shall file an application with the City Clerks Office on the form
provided by the City of Troy and pay the nonrefundable application fee(s) set
forth in Chapter 60. The information obtained as a result of the license
application process shall be used only for administrative purposes, and the
information shall not be disclosed pursuant to any Freedom of Information Act
Chapter 104  Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License Ordinance
104-4
request under MCL 15.231. The applicant shall provide all of the following
information, the truthfulness of which shall be sworn to under oath:
1. The name of the caregiver or patient(s), the total number of patients assisted
by a caregiver applicant, and a copy of the current and valid State of Michigan
Registry Identification Card(s), issued pursuant to the Act.
2. The marihuana grow operation history of the applicant; including but not
limited to disclosure of any revocation or suspension of any business license
in the State of Michigan or any other State in the United States, the reason for
such revocation or suspension, and the type or nature of the business
license, and applicants business activity or occupation subsequent to such
suspension or revocation.
3. The address of the premises for the proposed growth, cultivation or storage of
marihuana, and evidence of property ownership.
4. If the premises is not owned by the applicant, the landlord/owner of the
premises must sign the application or provide a written statement
acknowledging that she or he is aware of and consents to the proposed
growth, cultivation or storage of marihuana plants on the premises.
5. The name and address of the place where all unused portions of the
marihuana plants cultivated in connection with the medical use of marihuana
will be disposed, and the manner of disposition.
6. A description of how the applicant satisfies the requirement that the
marihuana for each patient is kept in a fully enclosed locked facility including
the location in the building, including but not limiting to precise measurements
of the floor dimensions and the height (in feet), and the security devices
employed.
7. Detailed specifications of all lights, equipment, building, electrical, mechanical
and plumbing permit requirements and modifications and operations for the
proposed cultivation or storage of marijuana, including but not limited to the
proposed methods for odor and light control.
8. A phone number or other means for the City to contact the applicant or his or
her designee on a seven day, twenty four hour basis in the event that there is
an urgent situation that requires immediate response or action.
B. Applicants for a license under this Ordinance shall have a continuing duty to
promptly supplement the above referenced application information required by
this section to the City Clerk when there is any change. The failure to comply
with this continuing duty within fifteen (15) days from the date of any such
change shall be grounds for the suspension, revocation or denial of a Medical
Marihuana Grow Operation License.
Chapter 104  Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License Ordinance
104-5
5. Investigation:
On receipt of a properly completed application and the payment of the application fee,
the City Clerk shall simultaneously submit the relevant documentation to the Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, the Zoning
Administrator, or his or her designee, the City Treasurer or his or her designee, and the
Building Official or his or her designee.
The Chief of Police or his or her designee is responsible for investigating the
background of each individual applicant, and shall provide the background report to the
City Clerk or his or her designee within 21 business days
The Zoning Administrator or his or her designee shall review the documentation to
determine if the proposed location of the Grow Operation complies with the locational
requirements of this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance, and shall provide the zoning
report to the City Clerk or his or her designee within 21 business days.
The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall issue a report determining whether or not the
proposed Grow Operation complies with the applicable fire codes, and this report shall
be submitted to the City Clerk or his or her designee within 21 business days.
The City Treasurer or his or her designee is responsible for checking to verify that the
applicant and the property does not have any overdue payment of City taxes, fines,
fees, or penalties owing to the City.
The Building Official or his or her designee shall issue a report determining whether or
not the proposed Grow Operation complies with applicable building codes. The Building
Official shall issue his or her report within 21 business days.
6. Approval/Denial of License:
A. The application of any applicant shall be approved or denied by the City Clerk 30
business days of the date the complete application is officially filed with the City
Clerk. The City Clerk shall deny a license for one or more of the following:
1. The applicant is under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age;
2. The applicant has made a false statement upon the application or has given
false information in connection with an application;
3. The applicant has had a business license revoked or suspended anywhere
within the State of Michigan or any other state in the United States within one
(1) year prior to the application;
4. The applicant has operated a medical marihuana grow operation which was
determined to be a public nuisance in the State of Michigan or any state,
Chapter 104  Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License Ordinance
104-6
county, city or any other governmental subdivision in the United States within
one (1) year prior to the application;
5. The applicant is overdue in the payment of City taxes, fees, fines or penalties
assessed against him or her.
6. The applicant has been convicted of any felony or drug related misdemeanor
conviction.
B. In the event the City Clerk denies a license, he/she shall notify the applicant of
the denial in writing by first class mail to the address on the application and shall
specify the reason(s) for the denial. In the event of a denial, the applicant shall
have the right to appeal to the City Manager as set forth in this ordinance. Any
written appeal request must be submitted to the City Manager within fourteen
(14) days of the date on the denial notice sent by the City Clerk. The City
Manager shall promptly review all appeal materials.
1. The City Manager may request information from representatives of the Police
Department, the City Clerk, the Zoning Administrator, the Building Official, the
Fire Chief, City Treasurer, Code Enforcement, the applicant or other
interested parties, or any other individual who may have information relevant
to the denial of the license. The City Manager may accept written
documentation or hear statements and consider other evidence offered which
is relevant to the denial by the City Clerk.
a. If after this review, the City Manager determines that the applicant remains
ineligible for a license under this ordinance, he/she shall notify the
applicant in writing at the address on the application within fourteen days
after receipt of the appeal or any requested materials, whichever is later,
and shall state the reason(s) for the decision.
b. If after this review, the City Manager determines that that a Medical
Marihuana Grow Operation license should be issued to the applicant, the
City Manager shall notify the City Clerk of this decision, and the City Clerk
shall process the application within fourteen days of notification.
c. The City Managers decision is the Citys final decision. Failure of an
applicant to timely meet the filing deadlines as set out in this Ordinance
constitutes a waiver of any right the applicant may otherwise have to
contest the denial of the application.
7. Number of Plants/Secure Facility:
A caregiver who obtains a license for a Medical Marihuana Grow Operation under this
Ordinance shall not cultivate more than twelve plants at any one time per registered
patient, and in no event grow more than 72 plants at any one time. The caregiver shall
cultivate each individual registered patients plants in a separate locked facility that is
Chapter 104  Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License Ordinance
104-7
enclosed on all sides with a floor, walls, and a ceiling or roof, and accessible only to the
registered caregiver and registered patient.
8. Location of Grow Operations:
A. Medical Marihuana Grow Operations requiring a license under this ordinance
may only be permitted in locations that are zoned IB, Integrated Industrial and
Business District under the City of Troy Zoning Ordinance.
B. No Medical Marihuana Grow Operation shall be located within 1000 feet of a
public or private elementary school, vocational, or secondary school or a public
or private college, junior college or university or a library or a public outdoor
playground, as defined in 21 USCA Section 860 (e)(1). Measurements for
purposes of this section shall be made from property boundary to property
boundary.
9. Additional Requirements for Medical Marihuana Grow Operations.
A. All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and other permits shall be obtained
for all improvements used to facilitate the cultivation of marihuana plants.
B. Signage identifying the location of a Medical Marihuana Grow Operation is
prohibited.
C. The consumption of medical marihuana or alcoholic beverages on the licensed
premises is prohibited.
D. A license issued under this Ordinance is only for the location identified in the
application for the license and cannot be transferred to another location.
E. A license issued under this Ordinance is only for the applicant identified in the
application for the license, and cannot be transferred to another person.
F. Licensees must maintain air cleaning systems or scrubbers or exhaust ventilation
systems to mitigate any odor associated with the Medical Marihuana Grow
Operation, and contain any noxious gases or fumes or odors on the property.
The licensee must comply with all City of Troy ordinances and state statutes.
10.Inspection of Premises:
A. The Chief of Police, Fire Chief, police officers, Fire Department personnel, code
enforcement officers, or other authorized inspectors from the City of Troy shall
have the right from time to time to inspect each Medical Marihuana Grow
Operation for the purposes of determining that the operation is in full compliance
Chapter 104  Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License Ordinance
104-8
with the provisions of this Ordinance, all other City of Troy ordinances, and State
Law.
B. It shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance for any Licensee to refuse or fail
to allow such inspection or to hinder such officer or inspector in any manner.
C. In an emergency, if there is not an imminent threat to persons or property, the
authorized City official will use the emergency contact information provided on
the application to notify the applicant that immediate access is needed. If the
applicant or his or her designee does not respond, or is not able to provide the
authorized City officials with access to the property within fifteen minutes, then
the authorized City official may take whatever reasonable means are necessary
to access the property, and the City will not be responsible for any resulting
damage to the applicants property.
11.Suspension or Revocation of License; Notice and Hearing:
A. When any of the provisions of this Ordinance are violated by the licensee, the
City Manager or his or her designee may immediately suspend the Medical
Marihuana Grow Operation License. If a license is suspended, then the licensee
may appeal this determination to the Troy City Council by filing a written request
with the Troy City Clerk within ten business days. Upon receipt of a written
request, the Troy City Clerk shall schedule a due process hearing at the earliest
regular meeting of the Troy City Council, and shall provide notice of the date and
time of the hearing to the licensee.
B. The notice of hearing shall indicate that the City of Troy has initiated suspension
and/or revocation proceedings, and shall state the reason for the suspension or
requested revocation. The notice shall state the location of the hearing and the
date and time that the licensee may appear before City Council to give testimony
and show cause why the Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License should not
be suspended or revoked.
C. At the due process hearing, City staff and/or other concerned individuals will
have the opportunity to present evidence and testimony supporting the
suspension or requested revocation. The licensee shall be allowed to present
evidence and testimony at the hearing as to why the license should not be
suspended or revoked. After the hearing, the City Council may revoke the
Medical Marihuana Grow Operation license, suspend the license, or reinstate the
license. If City Council suspends the Medical Marihuana Grow Operation
License, then Council shall clearly specify the length of the suspension, as well
as any conditions that must be satisfied or corrective action that must be taken
prior to restoration of the license.
D. If the licensee fails to satisfy Councils articulated conditions for restoration of a
suspended Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License within the time allocated
to the licensee, then Council can revoke the license. The licensee may seek
relief of the City Council decision through the Oakland County Circuit Court, but
must file any action within 21 days of the final decision.
Chapter 104  Medical Marihuana Grow Operation License Ordinance
104-9
E. Suspension or revocation of a license is not an exclusive remedy and nothing
contained in this Ordinance is intended to limit the Citys ability to prosecute the
violations of this or any other City of Troy ordinance or State Law that may have
been the cause of the suspension and/or revocation.
12.Penalty for Violation.
A person who violates any provision of this Ordinance, or the terms, conditions or
provisions of a license, is responsible for a misdemeanor, punishable by up to 90 days
in jail and/or fines up to $500. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
remedies available to the City in the event of a violation by any person of this Ordinance
or a condition of a license. Each violation, and each day upon which a violation exists
or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
13.Savings.
All proceedings pending, and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired or incurred, at the
time this Ordinance takes effect are hereby saved. Such proceedings may be
consummated under and according to the Ordinance in force at the time such proceedings
were commenced. This Ordinance shall not be construed to alter, affect, or abate any
pending prosecution, or prevent prosecution hereafter instituted under any ordinance
specifically or impliedly repealed or amended by this ordinance adopting this regulation, for
offenses committed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance; and new prosecutions
may be instituted and all prosecutions pending at the effective date of this Ordinance may
be continued, for offenses committed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, under
and in accordance with the provisions of any Ordinance in force at the time of the
commission of such offense.
14.Severability Clause.
Should any word, phrase, sentence, paragraph or section of this Ordinance be held invalid
or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of this ordinance shall remain in full force and
effect.
(Adopted: 04-23-2018; Enacted: 05-03-2018)
Chapter 105  Complete Prohibition of Recreational and Adult Use Marihuana Establishments
96-1
105.1 Intent and Purpose- The Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Initiated
Law 1 of 2018, MCL 333.27951 et. seq., and more specifically Section 6 (1) thereof,
MCL 333.27956 (1), authorizes municipalities to completely prohibit recreational or
adult use marihuana establishments within the City boundaries, even though otherwise
allowed under the law. This can be accomplished through the adoption of an
ordinance.
105.2 Definitions- Words used in this Ordinance shall have the definitions as provided for in
the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2018, MCL
333.27951 et. seq., and the corresponding State of Michigan Administrative Rules, as
may be amended.
105.3 Prohibition- As allowed under the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act,
Initiated Law 1 of 2018, MCL 333.27951 et. seq., all recreational or adult use
marihuana establishments are completely prohibited within the boundaries of the City of
Troy.
105.4 Penalty- A person who violates this ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
a fine of not more than $500 and/or up to 90 days in jail.
(Adopted 10/21/2019; Effective 10/31/2019)
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-1
1.0 WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED
1.01.00 Words and phrases.
The following words and phrases when used in this code shall, for the purpose of
this code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter.
Whenever any word or phrase used in this code is not defined herein but is
defined in Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, being 257.1 et
seq. of the Michigan Complied Laws, the definition therein shall be deemed to
apply to the words and phrases used in this code.
1.20.05 Distracted Driving means the following:
1. The physical manipulation of any 2-way wireless electronic communication
device used for dialing numbers; or scrolling; or typing or entering multiple
letters, numbers, symbols, or other text; or the sending, receiving, and
reading of any non-voice data in the device while the motor vehicle is in
motion on any highway or street or place open to the general public within the
City of Troy. As used in this subsection, a wireless 2-way communication
device does not include a global positioning or navigation system that is
affixed to the motor vehicle.
2. The physical manipulation or handling of any wireless entertainment or
electronic communication device for the purpose of speaking into, or listening
to voice data, while the motor vehicle is in motion on any highway or street or
place open to the general public within the City of Troy; or
3. Any action by the driver of a motor vehicle that diverts his or her attention
resulting in the failure to use due care and caution in the safe operation of a
motor vehicle while the vehicle is in motion on any highway or street or place
open to the general public within the City of Troy. Such action can include but
is not limited to: eating, reading, writing, performing personal hygiene/
grooming, physical interaction with pets, passengers, or unsecured cargo,
any of which is done in a manner that prohibits the driver from maintaining
direct physical control of the motor vehicle steering mechanism with at least
one hand that is free of all other objects and used entirely to form a controlled
grip on the steering mechanism.
(07-12-2010)
1.02.00 "Act" means Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, being 257.1
et seq. of the Michigan Complied Laws.
1.03.00 Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor,
liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by
whatever name called, containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume which
are fit for use for beverage purposes.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-2
1.04.00 "Alley" means a minor thoroughfare, opened to public use, for the purpose of
ingress and egress to service adjacent buildings.
1.05.00 "Ambulance" means a privately or publicly owned motor vehicle for highway use
which is specially designed or constructed and equipped, which is intended to be
used for, and is maintained or operated for, the transportation of persons who
are sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless, including dual
purpose police patrol cars and funeral coaches or hearses, and which is
equipped according to section 7 of Act No. 258 of the Public Acts of 1968, as
amended, being 257.1207 of the Michigan Complied Laws.
1.06.00 "Authorized emergency vehicle" means a vehicle of the fire department, a
police vehicle, an ambulance, a privately owned motor vehicle of a volunteer or
paid fireman, or a privately owned motor vehicle of a volunteer ambulance driver
or a licensed ambulance driver or attendant as is authorized by the department
of state police.
1.07.00 "Bicycle" means a device on which a person may ride, which is propelled by
human power, and which-has either 2 or 3 wheels in a tandem or tricycle
arrangement that are more than 14 inches in diameter.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1.08.00 "Bicycle lane" means a portion of a street or highway which is adjacent to the
roadway and which is established for the use of persons riding bicycles.
1.09.00 "Bicycle path" means a portion of a street or highway which is separated from
the roadway by an open, unpaved space or by a barrier and which is established
for the use of persons riding bicycles.
1.10.00 "Bus" means a motor vehicle which is designed to carry more than 10
passengers and which is used for the transportation of persons and also means
a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, which is designed and used for the
transportation of persons for compensation. The term does not include a school
bus or a bus that is equipped and used for living or camping purposes.
1.11.00 "Bus stand" or "bus stop" means a fixed area in the roadway, parallel and
adjacent to the curb, to be occupied exclusively by buses for layover in operating
schedules or by buses waiting for, loading, or unloading passengers.
1.12.00 "Business district" means the territory contiguous to a highway when 50% or
more of the frontage thereon, for a distance of 300 feet or more, is occupied by
buildings in use for business.
1.13.00 "Civil infraction" means an act or omission which is prohibited by law, which is
not a crime as defined in section 5 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as
amended, being 75.05 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and for which sanctions
may be ordered.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-3
1.14.00 "Civil infraction determination" means a determination that a person is
responsible for a civil infraction based on one of the following:
a) An admission of responsibility for the civil infraction, or
b) An admission of responsibility for the civil infraction, "with explanation", or
c) A preponderance of the evidence at an informal hearing or formal hearing
on the question under section 746 or 747 of the act, or
d) A default judgment for failing to appear as directed by a citation or other
notice at a scheduled appearance under section 745(3) b) or 745(4) of the
Act, at a scheduled informal hearing under section 746 of the Act, or at a
scheduled formal hearing under section 747 of the Act.
1.15.00 "Commercial vehicle" means every motor vehicle which is used for the
transportation of passengers for hire or which is constructed or used for the
transportation of goods, wares, or merchandise. The term also means a motor
vehicle which is designed and used for drawing other vehicles and which is not
constructed to carry any load thereon, either independently or as any part of the
weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
1.16.00 "Controlled substance" means a controlled substance as defined by Act No.
196 of the Public Acts of 1971, as amended, being 335.301 et seq. of the
Michigan Complied Laws.
1.17.00 "Conviction" means a final conviction, the payment of a fine, a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere if accepted by the court; or a finding of guilt or probate court
order of disposition for a child found to be within the provisions of chapter XII of
Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, (being sections 712A.1 to 712A.28 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws), on a traffic law violation charge, regardless of whether
the penalty is rebated or suspended.
1.18.00 "Crosswalk" means either of the following:
a) That part of a roadway at an intersection that is included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable highway, or
b) A portion of a highway, at an intersection or elsewhere, which is distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
1.19.00 "Curb loading zone" means a space which is adjacent to a curb and which is
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers or materials.
1.20.00 "Department" means the Department of State.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-4
1.21.00 "Driver" means every person who drives, or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
1.21.05 Electric personal assistive mobility device means a self-balancing, nontandem
two-wheel device designed to transport only one person at a time,
having an electrical propulsion system with an average power of 750 watts or
one horsepower at maximum speed on a paved level surface of not more than
15 miles per hour.
(05-24-2004)
1.22.00 "Explosives" means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture which is
commonly used, or intended to be used, for producing an explosion and which
contains an oxidizing and combustive unit or other ingredient in such proportions,
quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or
detonator of any part of the compound or mixture might cause such a sudden
generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures would be
capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects or of destroying
life or limb.
1.23.00 "Farm tractor" means every motor vehicle that is designed and used primarily as
a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines, and other implements of
husbandry.
1.24.00 "Flammable liquid" means any liquid that has a flash point of 70 degrees
Fahrenheit or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test
device.
1.25.00 Freight curb loading zone" means a space which is adjacent to a curb and
which is provided for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of freight.
1.26.00 "Governmental unit" means an incorporated city, an incorporated village, or a
township.
1.27.00 "Gross weight" means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of a
load.
1.28.00 "Handicapper" means a person who has a physical characteristic categorized as
a handicap which limits ambulation or which necessitates the use of a wheelchair
for mobility. The term also means a person who is blind.
1.29.00 "Implement of husbandry" means every vehicle which is designed for
agricultural purposes and which is used exclusively in agricultural operations.
The transportation in a trailer of seeds, fertilizers, or sprays, which will be used to
plant, fertilize, or spray, between a place of storage or supply and farms is an
agricultural operation.
1.30.00 "Intersection" means either of the following:
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-5
a) The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb
lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of 2
highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles or the
area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at any
other angle might come in conflict.
b) Where a highway includes 2 roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every
crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting
highway also includes 2 roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every
crossing of 2 roadways of the highways shall be regarded as a separate
intersection.
1.31.00 "Laned roadway" means a roadway that is divided into 2 or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
1.32.00 "Law of another state" means a law or ordinance enacted by another state or
by a local unit of government in another state.
1.33.00 "Limited access highway" means every highway, street, or roadway where
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of
access to or from the same, except at such points and in such manner as may
be determined by the public authority that has jurisdiction over such highway,
street, or roadway.
1.34.00 "Moped" means a 2 or 3-wheeled vehicle with operable pedals which is
equipped with a motor that does not exceed 50 cubic centimeters piston
displacement, which produces 1.5 brake horsepower or less, and which cannot
propel the vehicle at a speed of more than 25 miles per hour on a level surface.
1.35.00 "Motorcycle" means every motor vehicle which has a saddle or seat for the use
of the rider and which is designed to travel on not more than 3 wheels in contact
with the ground, but excludes a tractor.
1.36.00 "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but
which is not operated upon rails.
1.37.00 "Official time standard" means that hours named in this code mean hours of
standard time or daylight saving time, whichever is in current use in this
governmental unit.
1.38.00 "Operator" means every person who is in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle on a highway.
1.38.05 Owner when referring to a motor vehicle, means any of the following: (1) any
person, firm, association, or corporation renting a motor vehicle or having the
exclusive use thereof, under a lease or otherwise, for a period that is greater
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-6
than 30 days, or (2) except as otherwise provided in 257. 401a of the Michigan
Compiled Laws, a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or (3) a person
who has the immediate right of possession of a vehicle under an installments
sales contract.
1.39.00 "Parking" means standing a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a highway
when not loading or unloading, except when making necessary repairs.
1.40.00 "Passenger curb loading zone" means a place which is adjacent to a curb and
which is reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of passengers.
1.41.00 "Pedestrian" means a person afoot.
1.42.00 "Person" means every person, firm, co-partnership, association, or corporation
and its legal successors, but does not include the state, a political subdivision of
the state, or an employee of the state operating within the scope of his or her
duties.
1.43.00 "Police officer" means a sheriff or his or her deputies, a village marshal, an
officer of the police department of a city, a village, a township, and an officer of
the Michigan State Police.
1.44.00 "Private driveway" means a piece of privately owned and maintained property
which is used for vehicular traffic, but which is not opened for or normally used
by the public.
1.45.00 "Private road" means a privately owned and maintained road which allows
access to more than one residence or place of business, which is normally open
to the public, and on which persons other than the owners may travel.
1.46.00 "Prosecuting attorney" means the attorney general, the prosecuting attorney of
a county, or the attorney representing a local unit of government.
1.47.00 "Railroad" means a carrier of persons or property on cars, other than street cars,
which are operated on stationary rails.
1.48.00 "Railroad train" means a steam engine or electric or other motor, with or without
coupled cars, which is operated on rails, but does not include a street car.
1.49.00 "Residence district" means the territory contiguous to a highway not comprising
a business district when the frontage on such highway for a distance of 300 feet
or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
1.50.00 "Right-of-way" means the privilege of the immediate use of a highway.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-7
1.51.00 "Roadway means that portion of a highway which is improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes 2 or more separate
roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to a roadway separately and not to all
such roadways collectively.
1.52.00 "Safety zone means the area or space which is officially set apart within a
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected and so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.
1.53.00 "School bus" means every motor vehicle, except for a station wagon, with a
manufacturer's rated seating capacity of 8 or more children which is owned by a
public, private, or governmental agency and which is operated for the
transportation of children to or from school. The term also means a motor
vehicle, except for a station wagon, that is privately owned and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from school. The term does
not include a bus that is operated by a municipally owned transportation system
or by a common passenger carrier certificated by the public service commission.
1.54.00 "School crossing" means a crosswalk that is designated by the department of
transportation, a county road commission, or a local authority as any place to be
used by school children for crossing a street or highway.
1.55.00 "School-crossing guard" means a person who is 18 years of age or older and
who is authorized to supervise children who use a school crossing as provided in
section 613c of the Act.
1.56.00 "Semi-trailer" means every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a
pole-trailer, which is designed to carry persons or property and to be drawn by a
motor vehicle and which is so constructed that some part of its weight and that of
its load rests on, or is carried by, another vehicle.
1.57.00 "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street which is between the curb lines or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines and which is intended
for the use of pedestrians.
1.58.00 "Special mobile equipment" means every vehicle which is not designed or used
primarily for the transportation of persons or property and which is incidentally
operated or moved over the highways, including, but not limited to: farm tractors,
road construction or maintenance machinery, mobile office trailers, mobile tool
shed trailers, mobile trailer units used for housing stationary construction
equipment, ditch-digging apparatus, well-boring apparatus, and well-servicing
apparatus.
1.59.00 "Stand" or "standing" means the hailing of a vehicle, other than for the purpose
of and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-8
1.59.05 Station wagon means a motor vehicle designed to carry not more than 10
passengers and built on a passenger vehicle chassis. This includes, but is not
limited to, passenger vans, mini vans and sport utility vehicles.
1.60.00 "Stop" when required, means the complete cessation of movement.
1.61.00 "Stop" or "stopping", when prohibited, means the halting, even momentarily, of
a vehicle, whether occupied or not. The terms do not apply to the halting of a
vehicle which is necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or which is in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
1.62.00 "Street" or "highway" means the entire width between boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
1.63.00 "Taxicab" means a licensed public motor vehicle for hire which is designated
and constructed to seat not more than 10 persons and which is operated as a
common carrier on call or demand.
1.64.00 "Taxicab stand" means a fixed area in the roadway which is set aside for
taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers.
1.65.00 "Through highway" means every state trunk line highway or any other highway
at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required
by law to stop before entering or crossing the same.
1.66.00 "Tow-away zone" means a zone where parking, stopping, or standing is not
permitted, as indicated by proper signs, and where vehicles parked in violation of
the signs are towed away to keep the roadway clear for traffic movement.
1.66.05 Toy vehicle means a device designed to be used by children upon which a
child may ride that is propelled by human power or a motor and is capable of a
maximum speed of 5 miles per hour.
(05-24-2004)
1.67.00 "Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars, and
other conveyances, either singly or together, while using a highway for purposes
of travel.
1.68.00 "Traffic-control devices" means signs, signals, markings, and devices which
are not inconsistent with this ordinance and which are placed or erected by
authority of a public body or official who has jurisdiction for the purpose of
regulation, warning, or guiding traffic.
1.69.00 "Traffic-control order" means an order which officially establishes the location
of traffic-control devices and traffic-control signals on the highways of this state
by the authority that has jurisdiction over such highways and which is filed with
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-9
the county clerk of the county traversed by such highways. A certified copy of the
order shall be prima facie evidence in all courts of the issuance of such order.
1.70.00 "Traffic-control signal" means a device, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
1.71.00 "Traffic division" means the traffic division of the police department of a city, a
village, or a township, or, if a traffic division is not established, then the term shall
be deemed to refer to the police department of the city, village, or township.
1.72.00 "Trailer" means every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a poletrailer,
which is designed to carry property or persons and to be drawn by a
motor vehicle and which is constructed so that no part of its weight rests upon
the towing vehicle.
1.73.00 "Trailer coach" means every vehicle which is primarily designed and used as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel purposes and which
is drawn by another vehicle.
1.74.00 "U-turn" means a turn made on a roadway or in an intersection by a vehicle for
the purpose of reversing its direction of travel.
1.75.00 Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn on a highway, except devices which are moved
exclusively by human power or which are used exclusively on stationary rails or
tracts and except for a mobile home as defined in section 2 of Act No. 419 of the
Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being 125.1102 of the Michigan Compiled
Laws.
(Rev. 09-22-2003)
2.0 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION AND AUTHORITY
2.1. Police Department; Traffic Duties. It is the duty of the chief of police and the
officers of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this
governmental unit and all state vehicle laws which are applicable to street traffic
in this governmental unit, to make arrests for certain traffic violations, to issue
citations for civil infractions, to investigate accidents, to cooperate with the city
traffic engineer and other officials of this governmental unit in the administration
of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed by this code and
other traffic ordinances of this governmental unit.
2.2. Authority of Police Directing Traffic. Officers of the police department or such
officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. However, in
case of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians,
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-10
officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
2.3. Authority of Firemen Directing Traffic. Officers of the fire department, when at
the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at the scene
of the fire or in the immediate vicinity.
2.4. Authority of Police to Inspect Vehicles. A police officer is authorized, on
reasonable grounds shown, to stop any motor vehicle and inspect the vehicle;
and if any defects in equipment are found, the officer is authorized to cite the
driver in the manner provided in this code, in case of an accident, a police officer
may make an inspection of the vehicle involved in the accident.
2.5 Impounding of Vehicles; Authority; Procedure; Public Sale.
1) A police agency may immediately remove a vehicle from public property or
any other place open to travel by the public and impound the vehicle in any
of the following circumstances:
a) When a vehicle is in such a condition that the continued operation of the
vehicle upon the highway would constitute an immediate hazard to the
public.
b) When a vehicle is parked upon the highway in such a manner as to
create an immediate public hazard or an obstruction of traffic.
c) When a vehicle is left unattended on a bridge, viaduct ' causeway,
subway, tube, or tunnel where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic.
d) When a disabled vehicle on a street constitutes an obstruction to traffic
and the person in charge of the vehicle is, by reason of physical injury,
incapacitated and unable to provide for the vehicle's custody or removal.
e) When a vehicle is left unattended on a street and is parked in a manner
which constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic.
f) When a vehicle is found being driven on the streets or highways in an
unsafe condition which endangers persons or property.
g) When a vehicle is left continuously unattended on a street for more than
48 hours and may be presumed to be abandoned.
h) When the driver of the vehicle is taken into custody by the police
department and the vehicle would thereby be left unattended on the
street.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-11
i) When removal is 'necessary in the interest of public safety because of
fire, flood, storm, snow, or other emergency reason.
j) When a vehicle is found parked in a tow-away zone which is designated
by the traffic engineer and which is properly signposted.
2) A police agency which impounds a vehicle under subsection (1) of this
section shall do all of the following:
a) Check to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
b) Within 24 hours after impounding the vehicle, enter the vehicle as
impounded into the law enforcement information network.
c) Within 7 days, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays, after
impounding the vehicle,, send a notice that the vehicle has been
impounded to the owner and the secured party; if any, by certified mail.
Each notice shall contain all of the following information:
d) The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle.
i) The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody.
iii) The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
iv) The name and address of the police agency in whose custody the
vehicle is being held.
v) The location where the vehicle is being held.
vi) The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
vii) The date by which the vehicle must be redeemed.
viii) That a procedure exists to contest the impoundment of the vehicle.
ix) A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to contest the
impoundment of the vehicle within 15 days after the date of this
notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all
rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the
proceeds of the sale or to both the vehicle and the proceeds.
3) If the owner does not contest the impoundment of the vehicle, he or she
may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the
custodian of the vehicle.
4) If the owner contests the impoundment of the vehicle, the matter shall be
resolved after a hearing conducted in the district court, municipal court or
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-12
common pleas court of the City of Detroit. An owner who contests the
impoundment of the vehicle may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a
bond as determined by the court.
5) After the disposition of the hearing described in subsection (4) of this
section and, if a hearing is not requested, not less than 15 days not more
than 180 days after the date the notice described in subsection (2) c) of this
section is sent, the police agency shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public
sale unless the vehicle is redeemed.
6) A public sale shall be conducted in the following manner:
a) It shall be under the control of a police agency.
b) It shall be open to the public and consist of open auction bidding.
c) It shall be held not less than 5 days after public notice of the sale has
been published.
d) The public notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper
having a general circulation within the county in which the vehicle was
taken into custody. The public notice shall give a description of the
vehicle for sale and shall state the time, date, and location of the sale.
7) The money received from the public sale of the vehicle shall be applied in
the following order of priority:
a) Towing and storage charges.
b) Expenses incurred by the police agency.
c) Remainder to the secured party, if any. If there is not a secured party,
remainder to the owner. If the remainder of the money is not claimed
by the secured party or owner within 30 days after the sale, it shall
become the property of the unit of government that the police agency
represents.
8) If there are no bidders on the vehicle, the police agency may do 1 of the
following:
a) Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm to satisfy charges against the
vehicle.
b) Obtain title to the vehicle for the police agency or the unit of
government the police agency represents by doing both of the
following:
i) Paying the towing and storage charges.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-13
ii) Applying for title to the vehicle.
c) Hold another public sale pursuant to subsection (6) of this section.
9) Within 2 days, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays, after the
disposition of the vehicle the police agency shall do both of the following:
a) Notify the secretary of state of the disposition.
b) Cancel the entry into the law enforcement information network
described in subsection (2) b) of this section.
2.5a. Abandoned Vehicle" Defined; Taking Abandoned Vehicles into Custody;
Authority; Procedure; Public Sale.
1) As used in this section, "abandoned vehicle" means a vehicle which has
remained on public property or any other place open to the public, including
areas designated for parking, without the consent of the local police agency
for a period of 48 hours after a police agency has affixed a written notice to
the vehicle.
2) If a vehicle has remained on public property or any other place open to the
public, including areas designated for parking, for a period of time so that it
appears to the police agency to be abandoned, the police agency shall do
both of the following:
a) Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
b) Affix a written notice to the vehicle. The written notice shall contain all
of the following information:
i) The date and time the notice was affixed.
ii) The name and address of the police agency taking the action.
iii) The name and badge number of the police officer affixing the
notice.
iv) The date and time the vehicle may be taken into custody and
stored at the owner's expense if the vehicle is not removed.
v) The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle.
(Rev. 01-22-2001)
3) If the vehicle is not removed within 48 hours after the date the notice was
affixed, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned, the owner is responsible
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-14
for a civil infraction, and the police agency may take the vehicle into
custody.
4) A police agency which takes a vehicle into custody shall do all of the
following:
a) Recheck to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
b) Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle
as abandoned into the law enforcement information network.
c) Within 2 days, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays, after
taking the vehicle into custody, send a report of the abandoned
vehicle to the secretary of state on a form prescribed by the secretary
of state. The report shall contain all of the following information:
i) The year, make, and vehicle identification number.
ii) The body style.
iii) The registration plate number and year.
iv) The state which issued the registration plate.
v) The time and date the vehicle was taken into custody.
vi) The location of the abandonment.
vii) The location where the vehicle is being held.
viii) The name and address of the police agency which
obtained custody of the vehicle.
ix) The name and title of the reporting police officer.
d) Mail to the registered owner, by certified mail, a citation for the
alleged violation.
5) Upon receipt of the report described in subsection (4) of this
section, the secretary of state shall do all of the following:
a) Check the records of the secretary of state to determine the
registered owner and secured party, if any.
b) Record the vehicle as abandoned.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-15
c) Send a notice that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned to
the registered owner and secured party by first-class mail.
Each notice shall contain all of the following information:
i) The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the
vehicle.
ii) The location from which the vehicle was taken into
custody.
iii) The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody.
iv) The name and address of the police agency in whose
custody the vehicle is being held.
v) The location where the vehicle is being held.
vi) The procedure to redeem the vehicle.
vii) The date by which the vehicle must be redeemed.
viii) That the registered owner, by following the instructions on
the back of the citation, may contest the fact that the
vehicle was deemed abandoned by denying responsibility
for the civil infraction alleged in the citation.
ix) A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to deny
responsibility for a violation of subsection (3) of this
section, may result in the sale of the vehicle.
6) If the owner admits responsibility for a violation of subsection (3) of
this section, he or she may obtain the release of the vehicle by
paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle.
7) If the owner denies responsibility for a violation of subsection (3) of
owner may obtain release-of the vehicle by posting a bond as
determined by the court.
8) If the owner is found responsible for a violation of subsection (3) of
this section, the police agency shall offer the vehicle for sale at a
public sale unless the vehicle is redeemed.
9) A public sale shall be conducted in the following manner:
a) It shall be under the control of a police agency.
b) It shall be open to the public and consist of open auction
bidding.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-16
c) It shall be held not less than 5 days after public notice of the
sale has been published.
d) The public notice shall be published at least once in a
newspaper having a general circulation within the county in
which the vehicle was abandoned. The public notice shall give
a description of the vehicle for sale and shall state the time,
date, and location of the sale.
10) The money received from the public sale of the vehicle shall be
applied in the following order of priority:
a) Towing and storage charges.
b) Expenses incurred by the police agency.
c) Remainder to the secured party, if any, if there is not a secured
party, remainder to the owner. If the remainder of the money is
not claimed by the secured party or owner within 30 days after
the sale, it shall become the property of the unit of government
that the police agency represents.
11) If there are not bidders on the vehicle, the police agency may do 1
of the following:
a) Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm to satisfy charges
against the vehicle.
b) Obtain title to the vehicle for the police agency or the unit of
government the police agency represents by doing both of the
following:
i) Paying the towing and storage charges.
ii) Applying for title to the vehicle.
c) Hold another public sale pursuant to subsection (9) of this
section.
12) Within 2 days, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays,
after the disposition of the vehicle, the police agency shall do both
of the following:
a) Notify the secretary of state of the disposition.
b) Cancel the entry into the law enforcement information network
described in subsection (4) b) of this section.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-17
2.6. Notifying Local Police Agency Upon Removal of Vehicle From Private
Property; Police Agency Duties Upon Notification; Unclaimed Vehicle.
1) When a vehicle is removed from private property at the direction of a person
other than the registered owner of the vehicle or a police agency, the
custodian of the vehicle immediately shall notify the local police agency.
2) Upon receipt of the notification described in subsection (1) of this section,
the police agency immediately shall do both of the following:
a) Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
b) Enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network.
3) If the vehicle described in subsection (1) of this section is not claimed by the
owner within 7 days after the police agency has been notified by the
custodian that it has been taken into custody, the vehicle shall be deemed
abandoned and the owner is responsible for a civil infraction.
4) If a vehicle is deemed abandoned by a police agency under subsection (3)
of this section, the procedures prescribed in section 2.5a (4) to (12) of this
code shall then apply.
2.7. "Abandoned Scrap Vehicle" Defined; Taking Abandoned Scrap Vehicles in
Custody; Authority; Procedure; Scraping Vehicles.
1) As used in this section, "abandoned scrap vehicle" means a vehicle which
meets all of the following requirements:
a) Is on public property or any other place open to travel by the public.
b) Is 7 or more years old.
c) Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the extent that
the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as
required by section 683 of the Act would exceed the fair market value of
that vehicle.
d) Is not currently registered pursuant to the act.
e) Is not removed within 48 hours after a written notice as described in
section 2.5a (2) b) of this code is affixed to the vehicle.
2) A police agency may take an abandoned scrap vehicle into custody, in
which case the police agency shall do all of the following:
a) Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen.
b) Take 2 photographs of the vehicle.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-18
c) Detail the damage or missing equipment to substantiate the vehicle as
an abandoned scrap vehicle, on a form prescribed by the secretary of
state. The form shall contain all of the following information:
i) The year, make, and vehicle identification number.
ii) The date of abandonment.
iii) The location of abandonment.
iv) A detailed listing of the damage or missing equipment.
v) The police agency and address.
vi) The reporting officer's name and title.
d) Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle
as an abandoned scrap vehicle into the law enforcement information
network.
3) Within 24 hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays, after taking the
vehicle into custody, the police agency shall complete a release form and
release the vehicle to the towing service or a used vehicle parts dealer or vehicle
scrap metal processor, who shall then transmit that release form to the secretary
of state and apply for a certificate of scrapping. Upon receipt of the release form
and application, the secretary of state shall issue a certificate of scrapping. After
the certificate of scrapping has been issued, the towing service, used vehicle
parts dealer, or vehicle scrap metal processor may dispose of the abandoned
scrap vehicle.
4) The release form described in subsection (3) of this section shall be prescribed
by the secretary of state and shall include an affidavit, to be executed by the
applicable police agency when the abandoned scrap vehicle is released, which
states that the police agency has complied with all the requirements of
subsection (2) b) and c) of this section.
5) The certificate of scrapping form shall be prescribed by the secretary of state.
The secretary of state shall retain the records relating to an abandoned scrap
vehicle for not less than 2 years. The 2 photographs taken pursuant to
subsection (2) b) of this section shall be retained by the police agency for not
less than 2 years. After the certificate of scrapping has been issued, a certificate
of title for the vehicle shall not be issued again.
2.8. "Citation" Defined; Numbering; Form.
1) As used in the following sections, "citation" means a complaint or notice upon
which a police officer shall record an occurrence which involved 1 or more
vehicle law violations by the person cited. Each citation shall be numbered
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-19
consecutively, shall be in a form determined by the secretary of state, the
attorney general, the state court administrator, and the director of the department
of state police, and shall consist of the following parts:
a) The original copy which shall be a complaint or notice to appear issued by the
officer and which shall be filed with the court in which the appearance is to be
made.
b) The first copy which shall be retained by the local traffic enforcement agency.
c) The second copy which shall be delivered to the alleged violator if the
violation is a misdemeanor.
d) The third copy which shall be delivered to the alleged violator if the violation is
a civil infraction.
2) With the prior approval of the state officials listed in subsection (1) of this
section, the citation may be appropriately modified as to content or number of
copies to accommodate law enforcement and local court procedures and
practices. Use of a citation for other than moving violations is optional.
2.9. Issuance of Citation Books. The police chief shall issue citation books to each
police office of his or her department whose duties may or will include traffic duty or
traffic law enforcement. The police chief shall obtain a receipt from an officer to whom
a citation book has been issued.
2.10. Issuance of Citation for Misdemeanor.
1) When a person is arrested without a warrant for any violation of the act which is
punishable as a misdemeanor, or for a violation of a provision of this code which
substantially corresponds to any provision of the act, under conditions not
referred to in sections 5.4, 5.4a, 5.15, and 5.16 of this code, or sections 617,
619, and 727 (1), (2), and (3) of the act, the arresting officer shall prepare as
soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and 3 copies of a
written citation to appear in court which shall contain the name and address of
such person, the offense charged, and the time and place when and where
such person shall appear in court. The officer shall inform the offender of the
violation and shall give the third copy of the citation to the alleged offender. If
such arrested person so demands, rather than being given a citation, the
arrested person shall be taken before a magistrate or probate court which has
jurisdiction.
2) The time to appear in court which is specified in the citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the arrest, unless the person arrested demands an earlier
hearing.
3) The place to appear in court which is specified in the citation shall be before a
magistrate who has jurisdiction over the alleged offense charged in the citation.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-20
4) An appearance may be made in person, by representation, or by mail. When an
appearance is made by representation or mail, the magistrate may accept the
plea of guilty or not guilty for purposes of arraignment with the same effect as
though the person personally appeared before him or her. The magistrate, by
giving 5 days' notice of the date of appearance, may require an appearance in
person at the time and place designated in the citation.
2.10a. Civil Infraction; Commencing Action; Plaintiff; Jurisdiction; Time and Place
of Appearance; Minors.
1) A civil infraction action is a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to
be responsible for a civil infraction. A civil infraction action is commenced
upon the issuance and service of a citation as provided in section 2.10b of
this code. The plaintiff in a civil infraction action shall be the state if the
alleged civil infraction is a violation of this code or shall be a political
subdivision if the alleged civil infraction is a violation of a local ordinance
of the subdivision which substantially corresponds to a provision of this
code.
2) The following courts shall have jurisdiction over civil infraction actions:
a) The district court.
b) The recorder's court of the city of Detroit, traffic and ordinance division.
c) Any municipal court.
3) The time specified in the citation for appearance in court shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued pursuant to section 742 of the
act.
4) The place specified in the citation for appearance in court shall be the court
listed in subsection (2) of this section which has territorial jurisdiction of the
place where the civil infraction occurred. Venue in the district court shall be
governed by section 8312 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as
amended, being 6000.8312 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
5) If the person cited is a minor, that individual shall be permitted to appear in
court or to admit responsibility for a civil infraction without the necessity of
appointment of a guardian or next friend. The courts listed in subsection (2)
of this section shall have jurisdiction over the minor and may proceed in the
same manner as if that individual were an adult.
2.10b. Civil Infraction; Temporary Detention; Accident Citation, Citation Form and
Procedure.
1) A police officer who witnesses a person violating the act or a local
ordinance that substantially corresponds to the act which constitutes a civil
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-21
infraction may stop the person, detain the person temporarily for purposes
of making a record or vehicle check, and prepare and subscribe, as soon as
possible and as completely as possible, an original and 3 copies of a written
citation which shall be a notice to appear in court for I or more civil
infractions.
2) A police officer may issue a citation to a person who is a driver of a motor
vehicle which is involved in an accident if, based upon personal
investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe
that the person is responsible for a civil infraction in connection with the
accident.
3) A citation issued under subsection (1) or (2) of this section shall be in the
form prescribed in sections 727c and 743 of the act.
4) The officer shall inform the person of the alleged civil infraction or
infractions and shall deliver the third copy of the citation to the alleged
offender.
5) In a civil infraction action that involves the parking or standing of a motor vehicle, a
copy of the citation need not be served personally upon the defendant, but may be
served upon the registered owner by attaching the copy to the vehicle. A city may
also authorize personnel other than a police officer to issue and serve a citation for
violation of its ordinance involving the parking or standing of a motor vehicle. In a
civil infraction action involving the abandoning of a vehicle, a copy of the citation
need not be served personally upon the defendant but may be served upon the
registered owner by certified mail.
6) If a parking violation notice other than a citation is attached to a motor vehicle,
and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if
any, prescribed by ordinance for the violation are not paid at the parking violations
bureau, a citation may be filed with the court in compliance with section 2.10(4) of
this code and a copy of the citation may be served by first-class mail on the
registered owner of the vehicle at the owner's last known address. A parking
violation notice may be issued by a police officer or other personnel who are duly
authorized by the city, village, township, college, or university to issue such a
notice under its ordinance. The citation that is filed with the court pursuant to this
subsection need not comply in all particulars with sections 727c and 743 of the
act, but shall consist of a sworn complaint which contains the allegation stated in
the parking violation notice and shall inform the defendant how to respond to the
citation.
7) A citation that is issued under subsection (5) or (6) of this section for a parking or
standing violation shall be processed in the same manner as a citation issued
personally to a defendant pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) of this section.
8) As used in subsection (6) of this section:
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-22
a) "Parking violation notice" means a notice, other than a citation, that directs a
person to appear at a parking violations bureau in the city, village, or
township in which, or of the college or university for which, the notice is
issued and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed by ordinance for the
parking or standing of a motor vehicle in violation of the ordinance.
b) "Parking violations bureau" means a parking violations bureau that is
established pursuant to section 8395 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of
1961, as amended, being 600.8395 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, the
violation bureau that is established within the traffic and ordinance division of
the recorder's court of the city of Detroit, or a comparable parking violations
bureau that is established in a city or village which is served, by a municipal
court or which is established pursuant to law by the governing board of a
state university or college.
2.10c. Civil Infraction; Citation; Contents.
1) A citation that is issued pursuant to section 2.10b of this code shall contain
all of the following information:
a) The name of the state or political subdivision acting as plaintiff.
b) The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued.
c) Each civil infraction alleged.
d) The place where the person shall appear in court.
e) The telephone number of the court.
f) The time period during which the appearance shall be made.
g) Additional information required by this section.
2) The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the person, within
the time period specified for appearance, may do any of the following:
a) Admit responsibility for the civil infraction in person, by representation, or
by mail.
b) Admit responsibility for the civil infraction with explanation" in person, by
representation, or by mail.
c) Deny responsibility for the civil infraction by doing either of the following:
i) Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a district court
magistrate, a referee of the recorder's court of the city of Detroit,
traffic and ordinance division, or a judge without the opportunity of
being represented by an attorney.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-23
ii) Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge with the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
3) The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that if the person desires
to admit responsibility "with explanation" other than by mail or desires to
have an informal hearing or a formal hearing, the person shall apply to the
court in person, by mail, or by telephone within the time specified for
appearance and shall obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a
hearing.
4) The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the failure of a
person to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time
scheduled for a formal hearing or informal hearing shall result in the entry of
a default judgment against the person and in the immediate suspension of
the person's operator's or chauffeur's license.
Timely application to the court for a hearing or return of the citation with an
admission of responsibility and with full payment of applicable civil fines and
costs constitutes a timely appearance.
2.10d. Civil Infraction; Sworn Complaints. If an officer issues a citation under section
742 of the act for a civil infraction, or if a citation is issued under section 742 of
the act for parking or standing violation, the court may accept an admission with
explanation or an admission or denial of responsibility on the citation without the
necessity of a sworn complaint. If the person denies responsibility for the civil
infraction, there shall not be any further proceedings until a sworn complaint is
filed with the court. A warrant for arrest under section 321a of the act for failure
to appear in court pursuant to the civil infraction citation shall not be issued until
a sworn complaint relative to the civil infraction is filed with the court.
2.10e. Civil Infraction; Appearance; Responsibility; Denial; Hearing.
1) A person to whom a citation is issued under section 2.10b of this code
shall appear within the time specified in the citation and may respond to
the allegations in the citation as provided in this section.
2) If a person chooses to admit responsibility for the civil infraction, a person
may do so by appearing in person, by representation, or by mail. If an
appearance is made by representation or mail, the court may accept the
admission as through he or she personally appeared in court. Upon
acceptance of the admission, the court may order any of the sanctions
permitted under section 907 of the act.
3) If a person chooses to admit responsibility for the civil infraction "with
explanation", a person may do so in either of the following ways:
a) By appearing by mail.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-24
b) By contacting the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by
representation to obtain from the court a scheduled date and time to
appear. At such time, the person shall appear in person or by
representation.
4) If a person admits responsibility for a civil infraction "with explanation"
under subsection (3) of this section, the court shall accept the admission
as though the person has admitted responsibility under subsection (2) of
this section and may consider the person's explanation by way of
mitigating any sanction which the court may order under section 907 of
the act. If an appearance is made by representation or mail, the court may
accept the admission as though the person personally appeared in court,
but the court may request the person to provide a further explanation.
5) If a person chooses to deny responsibility for a civil infraction, a person
shall do so by contacting the court in person, by representation, by mail,
or by telephone and obtaining a scheduled date and time to appear for an
informal or formal hearing. The court shall schedule an informal hearing,
unless a person expressly requests a formal hearing. If a person
expressly requests a formal hearing, the court shall schedule a formal
hearing. If a hearing is scheduled by telephone, the court shall mail 'the
defendant a confirming notice of that hearing by regular mail to the
address appearing on the citation or to an address which may be
furnished by the defendant. An informal hearing shall be conducted
pursuant to section 2.10f of this code and a formal hearing shall be
conducted pursuant to section 2.10g of this code.
2.10f. Civil Infractions; Informal Hearings; Procedure; Witnesses, Appeal.
1) An informal hearing shall be conducted by a district court magistrate when
authorized by the judge or judges of the district court's district, by a
referee of the recorder's court of the city of Detroit, traffic and ordinance
division, or by a judge of a court listed in section 1.20a(2) of this code. A
referee or district court magistrate may administer oaths, examine
witnesses, and make findings of fact and conclusions of law at an informal
hearing. The judge, referee, or district court magistrate shall conduct the
informal hearing in an informal manner so as to do substantial justice
according to the rules of substantive law, but shall not be bound by the
statutory provisions or rules of practice, procedure, pleading, or evidence,
except for provisions relating to privileged communications. There shall
not be a jury at an informal hearing. A verbatim record of an informal
hearing is not required.
2) At an informal hearing, the person cited may not be represented by an
attorney nor may the plaintiff be represented by the prosecuting attorney
or the attorney for a political subdivision.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-25
3) Notice of a scheduled informal hearing shall be given to the citing police
agency. The agency may subpoena witnesses for the plaintiff. The
defendant may also subpoena witnesses. Witness fees need not be paid
to a witness in advance of an informal hearing.
4) If the judge, referee, or district court magistrate determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that the person cited is responsible for a
civil infraction, the judge, referee, or magistrate shall enter an order
against the person as provided in Section 907 of the Act. Otherwise, a
judgment shall be entered for the defendant, but the defendant shall not
be entitled to costs of the action.
5) The plaintiff and defendant shall be entitled to appeal an adverse
judgment entered at an informal hearing. An appeal from a municipal
judge shall be a trial de novo in the form of a scheduled formal hearing as
follows:
a) The appeal from a judge of the district court or recorder's court of the
city of Detroit, traffic and ordinance division, shall be heard by a
different judge of the district or of the traffic and ordinance division.
b) The appeal from a district court magistrate shall be heard by a
judged of the district.
c) The appeal from a referee shall be heard by a judge of the recorder's
court of the city of Detroit, traffic and ordinance division.
2.10g. Civil Infraction; Formal Hearings; Procedure; Fees; Council; Judgment.
1) A formal hearing shall be conducted only by a judge of a court which has
jurisdiction over civil infraction actions under section 2.10a of this code.
5) In a formal hearing, the person cited may be represented by an attorney,
but is not entitled to appointed counsel at public expense.
6) Notice of a formal hearing shall be given to the prosecuting attorney or
attorney for the political subdivision who represents the plaintiff. That
attorney shall appear in court for a formal hearing and that attorney shall
be responsible for the issuance of a subpoena to each witness for the
plaintiff. The defendant may also subpoena witnesses. Witness fees need
not be paid to a witness in advance of an informal hearing.
7) There shall not be a jury trial in a formal hearing.
8) If the judge determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the
person cited is responsible for a civil infraction, the judge shall enter an
order against the person as provided in section 907 of the act. Otherwise,
a judgment shall be entered for the defendant, but the defendant shall not
be entitled to costs of the action.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-26
2.10h. Civil Infraction; Failure To Appear. If the person to whom a citation is issued
for a civil infraction fails to appear, as directed by the citation or other notice, at a
scheduled appearance under section 2.10e(3) b) or (4) of this code, at a
scheduled informal hearing, or at a scheduled formal hearing, the court shall
enter a default judgment against that person, and the person's license shall be
suspended pursuant to section 321a of the act until that person appears in court
and all matters pertaining to the violation are resolved or until the default
judgment is set aside.
2.10i. Civil Infraction; Stopping A Nonresident; Procedure; "Guaranteed
Appearance Certificate" Defined.
1) When a person who is not a resident of this state is stopped for a civil
infraction pursuant to section 2.10b of this code, the police officer who
makes the stop shall take the person's driver's license as security for the
nonresident's appearance in court and satisfaction of any order which
may be issued under section 907 of the act and shall issue to that person
a citation as provided in sections 2.8 and 2.10b of this code. The officer
who takes the driver's license, within 48 hours after the taking, excluding
Sundays, legal holidays, and Saturdays when court is closed, shall deliver
the driver's license to the court named in the citation, together with a
report of the fact relating to the civil infraction. Failure to make a report
and deliver the license shall be considered contempt of court.
If the person does not have a license in his or her immediate possession,
in violation of section 301 or 311 of the act, the officer shall arrest that
person pursuant to section 727(4) of the act.
2) In place of the officer's taking of the license under subsection (1) of this
section or before appearance in court, the person stopped may guarantee
the officer or the court of his or her appearance by leaving with the officer
or court a guaranteed appearance certificate or a sum of money not to
exceed $100.00.
3) If a magistrate is available for an immediate appearance, upon demand of
the person stopped, the officer shall immediately take the nonresident
driver before the magistrate to answer to the civil infraction alleged. Upon
entry of an admission of responsibility for the civil infraction, with or
without explanation, or upon completion of an informal hearing, the
defendant's license shall be returned if judgment is entered for the
defendant, if any adverse judgment entered against the defendant is
satisfied, or if the defendant leaves with the court a guaranteed
appearance certificate or a sum of money not to exceed $100.00 as
security for payment of any fines or costs ordered. If the nonresident
defendant requests a formal hearing, the hearing shall be scheduled as
provided in section 2.10g of this code, but the defendant's license shall be
retained by the court until final resolution of the matter, unless the
defendant leaves with the court the guaranteed appearance certificate or
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-27
deposit as provided in subsection (2) of this section as security for
appearance at the scheduled formal hearing.
4) The officer who received a guaranteed appearance certificate of deposit
under subsection (2) of this section shall give a receipt to the person
stopped for the guaranteed appearance certificate or the money
deposited, together with the written citation required under subsection (1)
of this section.
5) The officer who takes a certificate of deposit shall, within 48 hours after
the taking, excluding Sundays, legal holidays, and Saturdays when court
is closed, deliver the certificate of deposit to the court named in the
citation, together with a report of the facts relating to the citation. Failure to
make a report and deliver the deposit shall be embezzlement of public
money.
9) If the person who posts a certificate of deposit fails to appear as required
in the citation, or fails to appear for a scheduled formal hearing, the court
that has jurisdiction and venue over the civil infraction shall enter a default
judgment against the person, and the guaranteed appearance certificate
of deposit shall be forfeited and applied to any civil fine or costs ordered
pursuant to section 907 of the act.
7) For purposes of this section, "guaranteed appearance certificate" means
a card or certificate which contains a printed statement that a surety
company which is authorized to do business in this state guarantees the
appearance of the person whose signature appears on the card or
certificate and that the company, if the person fails to appear in court at
the time of a scheduled informal or formal hearing or if the person fails to
pay any fine or costs imposed pursuant to section 707 of the act, will pay
any fine, costs, or bond forfeiture imposed on the person in a total amount
not to exceed $200.00.
2.12. Fees. An officer who makes an arrest pursuant to this code for a misdemeanor
without a warrant, except pursuant to section 727(l), (2), and (3) of the act, shall
not be entitled to any fees for making the arrest or for issuing a citation pursuant
to this section.
2.13. Misconduct of Officers and Magistrates. Any officer or magistrate who violates
any of the provisions of sections 2.8 to 2.17a of this code is guilty of misconduct
in office and is subject to removal from office.
2.14. Citations to Drivers in Accidents. A police officer may issue a citation to a
person who is a driver of a motor vehicle involved in an accident when, based
upon personal investigation; the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to
believe that the person has committed an offense under this code in connection
with the accident. The officer shall prepare an original and 3 copies of the
citation which shall set forth the name and address of such person, the offense
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-28
that may be charged against the person, and the time and place of the
appearance of such person in court. The citation shall inform the person of the
office, bureau, or department to which requests for a change or adjournment of
the court date shall be made.
2.15. Disposition of Citations.
1) At or before the completion of his or her tour of duty, a police officer to
whom a citation book has been issued and who has recorded the
occurrence of a vehicle law violation upon a citation shall deliver to his or
her police chief or to the person authorized by the police chief all copies of
the citation duly signed. The police chief or the person authorized by the
police chief shall deposit the original of the citation, together with the copy
designated for the department's motor vehicles record, with the court
which has jurisdiction over the offense not more than 2 days after the date
of the citation. Sundays and legal holidays excepted.
2) If a police officer arrests a person without a warrant for any vehicle law
violation, the arrest shall be noted on the citation.
3) If a citation is voided, the citation shall be endorsed with a full explanation
by the police officer who voids the citation and shall be duly accounted for
to his or her police chief or to the police chief's authorized designee.
4) Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent a person,, other than a police
officer, from applying for a criminal complaint for a vehicle law violation,
and such person need not show that the alleged offender has been issued
a citation in connection with such offense.
2.16. Accountability in the Processing of Citations. The various officers and
administrators of this governmental unit shall establish procedures, as provided
by instruction from the state treasurer, to insure accountability in the processing
of citations. The record that shows the issuance and subsequent disposition of a
citation shall be maintained for not less than the most recent 5-year period and
such records and notices shall be available for public inspection.
2.17. Audit of Citation Records. A complete audit of citation records shall be made at
least once annually by the appropriate fiscal officer of the governmental agency
to which the traffic enforcement agency is responsible. Citation records may be
audited by the state treasurer if deemed by him or her to be necessary.
2.17a. Falsification of Illegal Disposition of Citations; Penalties. Whoever knowingly
falsifies a citation, copies of a citation, or a record of the issuance of a citation;
disposes of a citation, copy, or record in a manner other than as required in this
code; attempts to falsify or dispose of a citation, copy, or record; or attempts to
incite or procure another to falsify or dispose of a citation, copy, or record shall
be fined not more than $500,000 or shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a
term not to exceed l year, or both.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-29
2.17b. Citation of Illegally Parked Vehicles. When a motor vehicle without a driver is
found parked or stopped in violation of any restriction imposed by ordinances of
this governmental unit or by state law, the officer who finds the vehicle shall take
its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the
vehicle which might identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a
traffic citation.
2.17c. Procedure upon Arrest for Certain Offenses.
1) A person who is arrested without a warrant on a charge of violating
section 5.14 of this code shall be taken, without unreasonable delay,
before the magistrate or probate court which has jurisdiction. He or she
may be released if, under existing circumstances, it does not appear that
his or her release pending the issuance of a warrant as provided in
section 2.10 of this code would constitute a public menace.
2) A person who is arrested without a warrant on a charge of violating
section 5.15 of this code shall be taken, without unreasonable delay,
before the magistrate of probate court which has jurisdiction.
3) A person who is arrested without a warrant on a charge of driving a motor
vehicle without a valid operator's or chauffeur's license in his or her
immediate possession, as provided in sections 5.62, 5.62a, 5.63, 5.64,
and 5.66 of this code, shall be taken, without unreasonable delay, before
the magistrate or probate court which has jurisdiction. If the arresting
officer satisfactorily determines the identity of the person and the
likelihood of subsequent apprehension in the event of failure to voluntarily
appear before a magistrate or probate court as directed, the officer may
release the person from custody after issuing him or her a citation as
provided in section 2.10 of this code.
2.17d. Sworn Complaints. When under the provisions of sections 2.8 to 2.17c of this
code an officer issues a citation, a magistrate may accept a plea of
guilty/responsible or not guilty/not responsible or responsible with explanation
upon the citation without the necessity of a sworn complaint, but the officer shall
sign the complaint before the magistrate makes his or her docket return thereon.
If the alleged offender pleads not guilty/not responsible, further proceedings shall
not be conducted until a sworn complaint is filed with the magistrate. A warrant
for arrest shall not be issued for an offense under this code until a sworn
complaint is filed with the magistrate.
2.18. Records of Traffic Violations; Warrants. The chief of police shall maintain, or
cause to be maintained, a record of all warrants which are issued on traffic
violation charges and which are delivered to the police department for service.
The chief of police shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, a record of the final
disposition of all such warrants.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-30
2.19. Traffic Accident Reports. The police department shall maintain a suitable
system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports, or cards referring to
them, shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for
the use and information of the traffic engineer.
2.20. Use of Accident Reports. The police department shall receive and shall
properly file all accident reports made to it under state law or under any
ordinance of this governmental unit. The reports required by this code shall not
be available for use in any court action, but shall be available to governmental
agencies for the purpose of furnishing statistical information as to the number
and cause of accidents.
2.21. Official Form for Accident Reports. The police department shall use the official
form prescribed by the director of the department of state police in reporting
accidents to him or her which are required to be-reported by the act or by
sections 5.3 and 5.6 of the code.
2.22. Traffic Accident Studies. If the accidents at any particular location become
numerous, the police department shall cooperate with the traffic engineer in
conducting studies of such accidents and shall determine remedial measures.
2.24 Traffic Engineer Designee. The powers and duties of the Traffic Engineer, as
set forth in this code, may be exercised by a person designated by the City
Engineer as Acting Traffic Engineer if the Traffic Engineer is absent or
unavailable.
(Rev. 06-16-2003)
2.25. Duties of Traffic Engineer. The general duties of the traffic engineer are as
follows:
a) To plan and determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of
traffic-control devices.
b) To conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial
measures.
c) To conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions.
d) To plan the operation of traffic on the streets of this government unit,
including parking areas.
e) To cooperate with other officials of this governmental unit in the
development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions.
f) To carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the ordinances of
this governmental unit.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-31
(Renumbered 06-17-2002)
2.26 Traffic Committee. The Traffic Engineer shall be assisted by the Traffic
Committee, as described in Chapter 35 of the Troy City Ordinances. The Traffic
Committee shall be vested with advisory powers with respect to the proposed
traffic regulations and traffic issues, and shall advise the City Manager and City
Council on amendments to this Chapter.
(Renumbered/Revised 06-17-2002)
2.27. Emergency Regulations. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make
and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies of special conditions.
Temporary regulations shall remain in effect for not more than 90 days.
2.28. Testing Traffic-Control Devices. The Traffic Engineer may test or experiment
with traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic in accordance with
procedures contained in the Michigan manual of uniform traffic-control devices.
2.29. Through Streets; Placing and Maintaining Stop Signs. If a through street is
duly established, it is the duty of the traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop
sign on each and every street which intersects such through street or which
intersects that portion of such through street which is described and designated
as a through street by any ordinance of this governmental unit, unless traffic at
any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; provided,
however, that at the intersection of 2 through streets or at the intersection of a
through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be
erected at the approaches of either street as may be determined by the traffic
engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study.
2.30. Intersections Where Stop Required. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized
to determine and designate intersections where particular hazards exist on other
than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at 1 or more
entrances to any such stop intersection. The traffic engineer shall erect a stop
sign at every place where a stop is required.
2.31. Yield Right-of-Way Signs. The traffic engineer may determine and designate
intersections where conditions warrant requiring vehicles to yield the right-of-way
to cross vehicles and to determine whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way at
1 or more entrances to any such intersection. A yield sign shall be erected at
every place where approaching vehicles are required to yield the right-of-way.
2.32. Parking Adjacent to Schools. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect
signs which indicate that parking on either or both sides of any street adjacent to
any school property is prohibited if such parking will, in his or her opinion,
interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
2.33. Parking Prohibited on Narrow Streets. The traffic engineer is hereby
authorized to erect signs which indicate that parking upon any street is prohibited
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-32
if the width of the roadway is not more than 20 feet or that parking on 1 side of a
street as indicated by such signs is prohibited if the width of the roadway is not
more than 30 feet.
2.34. Standing or Parking on 1-Way Streets. The traffic engineer is authorized to
erect signs on the left-hand side of any 1-way street to prohibit the standing or
parking of vehicles on the left-hand side of such street.
2.35. Standing or Parking on 1-Way Roadways. The traffic engineer is authorized to
determine when standing or parking is permitted on the left-hand side of any 1-
way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof.
2.36 No Stopping, Standing, or Parking Zones. The Traffic 'Engineer may
determine and designate zones where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited
due to hazardous conditions which may exist or where conditions exist which
would cause undue delay to traffic. Such zones shall be designated by posting
proper signs at such locations.
(Rev. 10-11-1993)
2.36a. Tow-Away Zones. The traffic engineer may establish tow-away zones as
follows:
a) At locations already designated as no stopping, standing, or parking zones.
b) On streets where the normal width of the roadway is reduced by a building or
buildings or by a construction project.
c) At or adjacent to streets and locations where safety and traffic movement is
affected by occurrence of a public event.
d) Such tow-away zones shall be designated by posting signs which read "towaway
zone". Such signs shall be posted independently or as an extra panel
attached below the posted signs which prohibit stopping, standing, or
parking at the location.
(Rev. 10-11-1993)
2.36b. Traffic-Control Devices on Private Property; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) With the consent, or at the request, of the owners or persons in charge of
private property that is open to the general public for travel, the traffic
engineer may determine controls of the movement of vehicles and
pedestrians and the parking of vehicles as needed for the safety and
convenience of the public and users of the property. The traffic engineer
shall place and maintain whatever traffic-control devices are necessary to
give notice of the controls determined to be necessary.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-33
2) A person who violates the directions of the traffic-control devices is
responsible for a civil infraction.
2.37. Curb Loading Zones. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine the
location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and
maintain appropriate signs which indicate the zones and which state the hours
during which the zones are restricted for loading purposes.
2.38 Permits for Curb Loading Zones. The traffic engineer shall not designate or
sign any curb loading zones upon special request of any person unless such
person makes application for a permit for such zone and for 2 signs to indicate
the ends of each zone. When approved by the traffic engineer, the clerk, upon
granting a permit and issuing such signs, shall collect from the applicant and
deposit with the treasurer a service fee for 2 year or a fraction thereof inn an
amount specified by resolution of the ordinance making body. The governmental
unit may, by regulation, impose conditions upon the use of the signs and provide
for reimbursement for the value of the signs if they are misused or upon
expiration of the permit. Every such permit shall expire at the end of 1 year.
2.39 Public Carrier Stands. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus
stops, bus stands, taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger commoncarrier
motor vehicles on such streets, in such places, and in such number as he
or she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience too the
public. Every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be
designated by appropriate signs, which the traffic engineer shall cause to be
erected.
2.40 Permit for Loading or Unloading at an Angle to the Curb. The traffic engineer
may authorize the clerk to issue special permits to permit the backing of a
vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or
materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. A permit may be
issued either too the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the
vehicle. A permit shall grant to such person the privileges which are stated in the
permit and which are authorized in this code.
2.42 Angle Parking Zones. The traffic engineer shall determine the location of angle
parking zones and shall erect and maintain appropriate sings which indicated the
location and which give notice thereof, except that such zones shall not be
established on state trunkline highways.
2.43. Duty to Erect Parking Signs. It is the duty of the traffic engineer to erect and
maintain appropriate signs which give notice of regulations that relate to the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles.
2.44 Speed Restrictions. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish,
increase, or decrease speed regulations provided for in this code and to erect
signs which give notice thereof, as follows:
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-34
a) Establish prima facie lawful speed limits on streets outside of business or
residential districts, which shall not be less than 15 miles per hour.
b) Increase the prima facie speed limits on through streets within business or
residential districts.
c) Establish the prima facie speed limit in public parks, alleys, and cemeteries.
2.45. Authority to Place Turning Markers. The traffic engineer is authorized to place
markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections which indicate the
course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The course to be
traveled, as indicated, may conform to, or be other than, that prescribed by law
or ordinance.
2.46. Turn Signs. The traffic engineer may determine the locations at which drives of
vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs at
such locations. Right, left, and U-turns may be prohibited between certain hours
of the day and permitted at other times. 'At such locations, the different times
shall be plainly shown on the signs or the signs may be removed when turns are
permitted.
2.47. Authority to Sign 1-Way Streets and Alleys. Where any 1-way street or alley is
duly established, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs which give
notice of the 1-way street or alley and such regulation shall not be effective
unless such signs are in place. Signs that indicate the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
2.48. Authority to Restrict Direction of Movement on Streets During Certain
Periods. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes of streets on which vehicular traffic shall
proceed in 1 direction during 1 period of the day and the opposite direction
during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate
markings, signs, barriers, or other devices to give notice thereof. The traffic
engineer may erect signs that temporarily designate lanes to be used by traffic
moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway.
2.49. Authority to Establish No Passing Zones. The traffic engineer is hereby
authorized to designate zones on streets or parts of streets where passing is
prohibited and shall place and maintain official signs or markings on the roadway
to indicate such zones.
2.50. Truck Routes; Road Limits. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to prohibit
the use of designated streets by trucks or other commercial vehicles and to
impose limitations as to the weight of vehicles on designated streets; however,
prohibitions and limitations shall not become effective until notice thereof is given
by means of official signs.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-35
2.51. Prohibiting Certain Traffic. The traffic engineer may, after an engineering and
traffic investigation, designate any heavily traveled street under his or her
jurisdiction as prohibited to a class or kind of traffic found to be incompatible with
the normal and safe movement of traffic. The traffic engineer shall erect
appropriate traffic-control devices which give notice of the determination.
2.53. Traffic-Control Orders.
1) The authority in this code to regulate traffic shall be exercised by the
traffic engineer by the issuance of traffic-control orders which shall specify
the rules and regulations adopted or established by him or her. such
traffic-control orders shall become effective upon being filed with the clerk
and upon erection of adequate signs or signals which give notice of the
existence of such regulation, if signs or signals are required by the
provisions of this code which pertain to such regulation.
2) Traffic-control orders may be issued by the traffic engineer on his or her
own authority, but when so issued shall be known as temporary trafficcontrol
orders and shall not be effective after the expiration of 90 days
from the date of filing and such temporary traffic-control orders shall not
be renewed or extended, except upon approval by the ordinance making
body.
3) Permanent traffic-control orders shall be issued by the traffic engineer,
approved by the ordinance making body, and filed with the clerk.
4) Temporary orders shall become permanent orders upon being approved
by the ordinance making body, and notice of such approval shall be filed
with the clerk.
5) All traffic-control orders and any action which modify or repeal such orders
shall be kept by the clerk in a separate book which shall be known as the
traffic-control order book.
6) A copy of a traffic-control order, certified by the clerk to be a true copy
compared by him or her with the original in his or her office, shall be
permitted into evidence in all courts and proceedings in the same manner
as the original would be permitted into evidence if produced, if it appears
that a traffic-control sign, signal, or device that conforms to the provisions
of this code was erected or in place when the alleged violation of this code
occurred, such showing shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of
a lawful traffic-control order which authorizes such traffic control sign,
signal, or device, and it is not necessary for the prosecution to
affirmatively show the existence of a valid traffic-control order in such
cases, unless and until such presumption is rebutted by competent
evidence.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-36
2.54. The duties set forth in sections 2.55 to 2.58 of this code shall apply to the person
who is elected or appointed to the office of clerk of this governmental unit.
2.55. Clerk to Issue Permit for Loading or Unloading at an Angle to the Curb. The
clerk, upon receipt of a written application, shall issue, subject to the approval of
the traffic engineer, permits to back a vehicle at right angles to the curb for the
purpose of loading or unloading of merchandise or material. Such permits shall
be subject to the terms and conditions stated thereon. Every such permit shall
expire at the end of each calendar year, but may be reissued.
2.56. Clerk to Issue Permit for Curb Loading Zones. The clerk, upon receipt of a
written application, shall issue, subject to the approval of the traffic engineer,
permits for curb loading zones. Such permits shall be subject to the terms and
conditions stated thereon.
2.57. Clerks to provide traffic citation forms. Traffic citation forms in serially
numbered sets which notify -alleged violators to appear and answer to charges
of violating traffic laws and ordinances shall be provided by the clerk in books
and in a form as provided in sections 727a, 727b, and 727c of the act and as
provided in sections 2.8 and 2.9 of this code.
2.58 Issuance and Record of Traffic Citation Books. The clerk shall be responsible
for the issuance of traffic citation books to the chief of police and shall maintain a
record of each book.
3.0 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
3.1. Required Obedience to Traffic Ordinances; Violation as Civil Infraction. It is
a violation of this code for any person to do any act which is forbidden, or to fail
to perform any act which is required, by this code Sec. 3.01. Parental
Responsibility; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize
or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions
of this code.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
3.2. Obedience to Police and the Fire Department Officials; Violation as
Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer or member of the fire department, at the
scene of or in the immediate vicinity of a fire, who is vested with authority
under the code to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-37
3.2a. Failure to Stop Upon Police Signal; Violation of a Misdemeanor.
1) If a driver of a motor vehicle is given a visual or audible signal by hand,
voice, emergency light, or siren by a police officer who is acting in the
lawful performance of his or her duty and who is directing the driver to
bring his or her motor vehicle to a stop and the driver willfully fails to obey
such direction by increasing his or her speed, extinguishing his or her
lights, or otherwise attempting to flee or elude the officer, the driver shall
be punished, upon conviction, as provided in section 9.3(2) of this code.
The officer who gives the signal shall be in uniform. A police vehicle that is
driven at night shall be adequately identified as an official police vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
3.3. Persons Propelling Push Carts or Riding Animals Subject to Traffic
Regulations; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) Persons who propel any push cart or who ride an animal upon a roadway
and persons who drive any animal-drawn vehicle are subject to the
provisions of this code which are applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except for the provisions of this code which by their very nature can have
no application.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
3.4. Use of Coasters, Roller Skates, and Similar Devices Restricted; Violation
as :
1) A person who is on roller skates or who is riding in, or by means of, any
coasters, toy vehicle, or similar device shall not go on any roadway,
except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. When crossing a street on
a crosswalk, such person shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
3.5. Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations. The provisions of this code
that are applicable to the drivers of vehicles on streets and highways shall apply
to the drivers of all vehicles owned by, or used in the service of, the United
States, this state, or any county, city, town, district, or other political subdivision
of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this code or in
the state statutes.
3.6. Authorized Emergency Vehicles. The driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, when in the pursuit of an actual
or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to, but not upon returning
from, a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in section 3.7 of this
code, subject to the conditions stated in sections 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9 of this code.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-38
3.7. Privileges of Authorized Emergency Vehicles. The driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle may do all of the following:
a) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this code.
b) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down
as necessary for safe operation.
c) Exceed the prima facie speed limits if the excessive speed does not
endanger life or property.
d) Disregard regulations that govern direction of movement or the turning in
specified directions.
e) Drive through a funeral or other authorized procession.
3.8. Signal Required. The privileges granted to an authorized emergency vehicle in
sections 3.6 and 3.7 of this code shall apply only when the driver of the vehicle in
motion sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle, as may be
reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least 1 lighted
lamp which displays a flashing, oscillating, or rotating red or blue light which is
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the
front of such vehicle. Only authorized emergency vehicles shall be equipped with
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating red or blue light which, when activated, shall be
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the
front of such vehicle, except when deemed advisable not to equip such
authorized emergency vehicle operating as a police vehicle with a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating light. A police vehicle shall retain the exemptions granted
in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle without sounding an audible
signal if the police vehicle is engaged in an emergency run where silence is
required.
3.9. Authorized Emergency Vehicle Driver Responsibility. The preceding
provisions of this code do not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
such provisions shall not protect the driver from the consequences of his or her
reckless disregard for the safety of others.
3.10. Workers on Surface of Highways. The provisions of this code that are the
same as the provisions o chapter 6 of the act do not apply to persons, teams,
motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work on the
surface of a street, but do apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to
or from such work. The provisions of Chapter 6 of the act that govern the size
and width of vehicles do not apply to vehicles owned by public highway
authorities when such vehicles are proceeding to or from work on public
highways.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-39
3.11. Code Provisions; Exclusive Applicability to Operation of Vehicles on
Streets, Except Where Otherwise Referred To. The provisions of this code
that relate to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of
vehicles on streets, except where a different place is specifically referred to in a
given section of this code.
3.12. Enforcing Violation on Private Road. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, a police officer may enter upon a private road to enforce violations of this
code.
4.0 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
4.1. Authority to Install Traffic-Control Devices. The traffic engineer shall place,
maintain, or remove traffic-control signs, signals, lane markings, and other
devices and shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control
device shall be in operation or in effect. This shall be done when and as required
under the traffic ordinances of this governmental unit to indicate and to carry out
the provisions of such ordinance of this governmental unit and under state law,
to regulate, warn, or guide traffic.
4.2. Manual and Specifications for Traffic-Control Devices. All traffic-control
signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the official Michigan manual of
uniform traffic-control devices. All signs and signals required by this code for a
particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location
throughout this governmental unit. All traffic-control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this code shall be official trafficcontrol
devices.
4.3. Limit to Authority. Notwithstanding the authority granted to the traffic engineer
under this code, traffic-control devices shall not be placed or maintained on any
trunkline highway which is under the jurisdiction of the state highway
commissioner, except by the commissioner's permission, or on any county road,
except by permission-of the county road commission which has jurisdiction
thereof.
4.4. Obedience to Official Traffic-Control Devices; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official trafficcontrol
device which is placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of
this governmental unit, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-40
4.4a. Avoiding Traffic-Control Device; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle shall not avoid obedience to an official trafficcontrol
device by driving on or through private property or on or through
public property which is not a street or highway.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
4.5. Provisions of Code Which Require Signs; Enforceability.
Provisions of this code which require signs shall not be enforced against an
alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign
was not in proper position and was not sufficiently legible so as to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person. when a particular section does not state that signs
are required, such section shall be effective even though signs are not erected or
in place.
4.6. Traffic-Control Signal Placement and Legend; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals, at least 1 signal shall
be located over the traveled portion of the roadway to give drivers a clear
indication of the right-of-way assignment from their normal positions
approaching the intersection. The vehicle signals shall exhibit different
colored lights successively 1 at a time or with arrows. The following colors
shall be used and the terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers
of vehicles as follows:
a) Green indication. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place
prohibits either turn. However, vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and
to pedestrians who are lawfully within the intersection or an
adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
b) Steady yellow indication. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall
stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection or at
a limit line, when marked, but if such stop cannot be safely made, a
vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
c) Steady red indication. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal
alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or at a limit line, when marked, or, if none, then
before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until a
green indication is shown, except that vehicular traffic facing a
steady red signal, after stopping before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection or at a limit line, when marked, or,
if none, then before entering the intersection, may make a right turn
from a 1-or 2-way street into a 2-way street or into a 1-way street
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-41
carrying traffic in the direction of the right turn or may make a left
turn from a 1-or 2-way street into a 1-way roadway carrying traffic in
the direction of the left turn unless prohibited by sign, signal,
marking, light, or other traffic-control device. The vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians who are lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
d) Arrow indications. Green arrow (steady): Vehicular traffic facing
a green arrow signal which is shown alone or in combination with
another indication may cautiously enter the intersection only to
make the movement indicated by the arrow or to make other
movement permitted by other indications shown at the same time.
Vehicle traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians who are
lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic which is
lawfully using the intersection. Red arrow (flashing): When a red
arrow is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection
or at a limit line, when marked, or, if none, then before entering the
intersection and may then make the movement indicated if
interference is not offered to pedestrians or vehicles which are
lawfully on the highway.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
4.7. Non-Intersection Signals; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) If a traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than
an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable, except
for those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any
stop that is required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement,
which indicates where the stop shall be made. In the absence of any sign
or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
4.8. Pedestrian Signals; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When special pedestrian-control signals are not utilized, the regular traffic-control
signals, as indicated in sections 4.6 and 4.7 of this code, shall apply to
pedestrians as follows:
a) Green indication. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-42
b) Steady yellow indication. Pedestrians facing such signal are advised that
there is insufficient time to cross the roadway and any pedestrian then
starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
c) U. Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the highway unless they
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
d) U. Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the highway unless they
can do so safely without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
4.9 Special Pedestrian Signals; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When special pedestrian-control signals are installed, they shall be placed
at the far end of each crosswalk and shall indicate a "walk" or "don't walk"
interval. These special signals shall apply to pedestrians only to the
exclusion of any regular traffic-control signal or signals which may be
present at the same location.
2) Walk interval. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
highway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by
the drivers of all vehicles.
3) Don't walk (steady burning or flashing) interval. A pedestrian shall not start
to cross the highway in the direction of such signals, but any pedestrian
who has partially completed his or her crossing on the walk interval of such
signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the don't walk
interval of the signal is showing.
4) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
4.10. Flashing Signals Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall be obeyed by
vehicular traffic as follows:
a) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line, when
marked, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
b) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may only proceed
through the intersection or past such signal if caution is exercised.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-43
4.11. Unauthorized Sign, Signal, Marking, Device, Decoration, or Banner;
Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) Except as authorized by the traffic engineer, a person shall not place,
maintain, or display, along any street or upon any structure in or over any
street, and sign; signal; marking; device; blinking, oscillating, or rotating
light or lights; decoration; or banner which is or purports to be a trafficcontrol
device or railroad sign or signal, which imitates or resembles, or
which can be mistaken for, a traffic-control device or railroad sign or
signal, which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view, or interferes with the effectiveness of, any traffic-control device
or any railroad sign or signal.
2) A person shall not place or maintain, and a public authority shall not
permit, on any highway, a traffic sign or signal that bears any commercial
advertising.
3) A person shall not place, maintain, or display, along any street, any
blinking, oscillating, or rotating light or lights which are sufficiently similar
to the distinguishing lights authorized by law for emergency vehicles in
color and design that they may be mistaken for the distinguishing lights
authorized by law for emergency vehicles or which create a hazard for the
safety of drivers using any street. Every such prohibited sign, signal,
marking, device, decoration, or banner is a public nuisance, and the
authority that has jurisdiction over the street is empowered to remove the
same or cause it to be removed without notice.
4) Decorations or banners that may be placed over the traveled portion of
any street or highway shall be placed not closer than 10 feet on either
side of traffic lights or signals and shall be placed so as not to obstruct a
clear view of such traffic lights or signals.
5) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
4.12. Interference with Traffic-Control Devices or Railroad Signs or Signals;
Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not, without lawful authority, attempt to alter, deface, injure,
knock down, or remove any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or
signal, any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part
thereof.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
4.13. Crosswalks. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate and
maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the
roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his or her opinion, there is
particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places
as he or she may deem necessary.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-44
4.14. Safety Zones. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish safety
zones of a kind and character and at such places as he or she may deem
necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
4.15. Traffic Lanes. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes on
the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
4.16. School Crossings; Designation; Creation. The traffic engineer may, after
traffic and engineering studies and in consultation with the superintendent of the
school district, designate appropriate crosswalks as school crossings and may
create additional school crossings where they are considered necessary on
streets or highways under his or her jurisdiction.
4.17. School-Crossing Guards; Duty Periods; Identifying Clothing; Signs.
1) When school-crossing guards are assigned, they shall be stationed at
school crossings during the times of day designated by the superintendent
of the school district and the chief of the law enforcement agency which
has jurisdiction.
2) When on duty, a school-crossing guard shall wear an outer vest of a color
and style that meets the standards of the Michigan manual of uniform
traffic-control devices. The school-crossing guard shall also hold a stop
sign which conforms to the Michigan manual of uniform traffic-control
devices for hand-held signs.
3) When the school-crossing guards are assigned at designated school
crossings, warning signs shall be erected in conformance with the
Michigan manual of uniform traffic-control devices.
4.18. School-Crossing Guards; Selection; Training; Supervision.
1) The local law enforcement agency has the responsibility for selection and
training of school-crossing guards in their jurisdiction.
2) A person shall receive not less than 4 hours of instruction before
performing the duties of a school-crossing guard. Two hours of additional
instruction shall be given annually to a school-crossing guard before the
beginning of each school year. The courses of instruction shall be
approved by the department of education and the department of state
police and shall be conducted by the local law enforcement agency which
has jurisdiction or its designee.
4.19. School-Crossing Guard; Failure to Obey Signal as Violation; Presumption;
Violation as Misdemeanor.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-45
1) The driver of a motor vehicle who fails to stop at a school crossing when a
school-crossing guard is in the crossing and is holding the stop sign in an
upright position which is visible to approaching vehicular traffic is guilty of
a violation of section 4.4 of this code.
2) In a proceeding for a violation of subsection (1) of this section, proof that
the particular vehicle described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was
in violation of subsection (1), together with proof that the defendant
named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was, at the time of the
violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, constitutes an evidentiary
presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the driver of the
vehicle at the time of the violation.
3) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
4.20. Bicycle Paths or Bicycle Lanes; Establishment; Traffic-Control Devices.
1) When the traffic engineer determines there is a need, after a traffic survey
and engineering study, he or she may establish a part of a street or
highway under his or her jurisdiction as a bicycle path or lane.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) The bicycle path or lane shall be identified by official traffic-control devices
that conform to the Michigan manual of uniform traffic-control devices.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
4.21. Bicycle Paths; Vehicles Prohibited; Snowmobiles Permitted Under Certain
Conditions; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not operate a vehicle on or across a bicycle path, except
to enter or leave adjacent property or as otherwise permitted in this
section.
2) A person shall not park a vehicle on a bicycle path.
3) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
4.22. Bicycle Lanes; Vehicles Prohibited; Parking Permitted Under Certain
Conditions; Violation as a Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not operate a vehicle on or across a bicycle lane, except
to enter or leave adjacent property.
2) A person shall not park a vehicle on a bicycle lane, except where parking
is permitted by official signs.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-46
3) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.0 RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF DRIVERS AND OTHERS.
5.1. Operation of Vehicles on Approach of authorized Emergency Vehicles;
Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least 1 lighted, flashing, rotating, or oscillating lamp
which exhibits a red or blue light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, if the
driver of the emergency vehicle gives an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, the driver of any other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way
and shall immediately drive to a position parallel, and as close as
possible, to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer. This section does not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the highway.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.1a. Stationary Authorized Emergency Vehicles, Visual Signals, Approach with
Due Care and Caution; Violation, Penalty and Fine.
1) Upon approaching and passing a stationary authorized emergency vehicle
that is giving a visual signal by means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating red,
blue, or white lights, the driver of an approaching vehicle shall exhibit due
care and caution, as required under the following:
a) On any public roadway with a least 2 adjacent lanes proceeding in
the same direction of the stationary authorized emergency vehicle,
the driver of the approaching vehicle shall proceed with caution and
yield the right-of-way by moving into a lane at least 1 moving lane or
2 vehicle widths apart from the stationary authorized emergency
vehicle, unless directed otherwise by a police officer. If movement to
an adjacent lane or 2 vehicle widths apart is not possible due to
weather, road conditions, or the immediate presence of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic in parallel moving lanes, the driver of the
approaching vehicle shall proceed as required in subdivision b).
b) On any public roadway that does not have at least 2 adjacent lanes
proceeding in the same direction as the stationary authorized
emergency vehicle, or if the movement by the driver of the vehicle
into an adjacent lane or 2 vehicle widths apart is not possible as
described in subdivision a), the approaching vehicle shall reduce and
maintain a safe speed for weather, road conditions and vehicular or
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-47
pedestrian traffic and proceed with due care and caution, or as
directed by a police officer.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days
or both.
(Revised 10-15-2001)
5.2. Involvement in Accident Resulting in Damage to Vehicles; Stopping;
Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) The driver of any vehicle who knows or who has reason to believe that he
or she has been involved in an accident that results only in damage to a
vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop
his or her vehicle at the scene of such accident and shall remain at the
scene until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of section 5.4a of this
code. Every such stop shall be made without unnecessarily obstructing
traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.3. Accidents; Fixtures on or Adjacent To Highway; Report; Violation as
Misdemeanor.
1) The driver of any vehicle that is involved in an accident which results only
in damage to fixtures that are legally on or adjacent to a highway shall
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge
of such property of such accident, his or her name and address, and the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall, upon
request, exhibit his or her operator's or chauffeur's license and, if such
owner cannot be found, shall forthwith report such accident to the nearest
or most convenient police officer.
2) The officer who receives such report or his or her commanding officer
shall forward each individual report to the director of state police on forms
prescribed by the director which shall be completed in full by the
investigating officer. A copy of the accident report required under this
section shall be retained by the local police department for not less than 3
years.
5.4. Involvement in Accident Resulting in Injury or Death; Stopping, Violation as
Misdemeanor.
1) The driver of any vehicle who knows or who has reason to believe that he
or she has been involved in an accident on either public or private
property, when such property is open to travel by the public, that results in
injury or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-48
scene of such accident and shall remain at the scene until he or she has
fulfilled the requirements of section 5.4a of this Code. Every such stop
shall be made without necessarily obstructing traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.4a. Giving Information and Obtaining Aid; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) The driver of a vehicle who knows or who has reason to believe that he or
she has been involved in an accident that results in injury or the death of a
person or damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person
shall give his or her name, address, and registration number of the vehicle
he or she is driving and the name and address of the owner and shall
exhibit his or her operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or
the driver or occupants of any vehicle collided with and shall render to any
person injured in such accident reasonable assistance in securing medical
aid or transportation.
5.5. Unattended Vehicles; Report; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) The driver of any vehicle that collides, on either public or private property,
with any vehicle which is attended or unattended shall immediately stop
and either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the
name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the
vehicle or, if such owner cannot be located, forthwith report the accident
to the nearest or most convenient police officer.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.6. Duty to Report Accidents Forthwith; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) The driver of a motor vehicle involved in an accident that injures or kills
any person, or that damages property to an apparent extent totaling
$400.00 or more, shall forthwith report such accident to the Police
Department if the accident occurs within the City of Troy. The officer who
receives such report, or his or her commanding officer, shall forthwith
forward each individual report to the director of state police on forms
prescribed by the director, which shall be completed in full, by the
investigating officer. A copy of the accident report required under this
section shall be retained by the local police department for not less than
three years.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Rev. 05-24-1993)
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-49
5.7. Report of Garage Keeper or Repairmen; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any
motor vehicle that shows evidence of having been involved in an accident
or having been struck by any bullet shall report the same to the police
department immediately after such motor vehicle is received and shall
give the engine number, registration number, and the name and address
of the owner and operator of such vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.8. Use of Accident Reports. The reports required by sections 5.3, 5.5, and 5.6 of
this code are not available for use in any court actions, but are available for the
purpose of furnishing statistical information as to the number and cause of
accidents.
5.9. Speed and Caution Restrictions; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Any person who drives a vehicle on a street shall drive the vehicle using
due care and caution an at a careful and prudent speed which is
reasonable an proper considering the traffic, surface and width o the
street, and any other condition then existing. person shall not drive any
vehicle on a street at speed greater than will permit him or her to bring the
vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Rev. 03-25-1996)
5.9a. Driving at Slow Speed; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when
reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to comply with law.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.10. Business and Residence; Districts and Parks; Designated Work Areas;
Decrease in Prima Facie Speed Limits; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Subject to the provisions of section 5.9 of this code, except in those
instances where a different speed is lawfully established and posted, it
shall be prima facie lawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive at a speed of
not more than 25 miles an hour on all streets in business and residence
districts and parks, unless such speed would be unsafe.
2) A person who operates a vehicle on the highway shall not exceed a speed
of 45 miles per hour when entering and passing through a designated
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-50
work area where a normal lane or part of the lane of traffic has been
closed due to highway construction, maintenance, or surveying activities.
The department of transportation, county road commission, or local
authority shall identify a designated work area with traffic-control devices
which comply with the Michigan manual of uniform traffic-control devices
on streets and highways under its jurisdiction. A person shall not exceed
the foregoing speed limitation or those established pursuant to sections
628 or 629 of the act.
3) Local authorities are authorized to decrease the prima facie speed limits
to not less than 15 miles an hour on each street or highway under their
jurisdiction which is adjacent to a city-owned park or playground. A
decrease in the prima facie speed limits shall be binding when adequate
signs are duly posted giving notice of the reduced speeds.
4) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.11. Violation of Speed Limitations; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations set forth in Section 5.10 of this code.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.11a. 1) No passenger vehicle drawing another vehicle or trailer shall exceed the
speed of 55 mph unless the vehicle or trailer has two wheels or less and
does not exceed the combined weight of 750 pounds for the vehicle or
trailer and load, or a trailer coach of not more than 26 feet in length with
brakes on each wheel and attached to the passenger vehicle with an
equalizing or stabilizing coupling unit '
2) No truck, tractor, or tractor with trailer nor any combination of such vehicles
with a gross weight, loaded or unloaded, in excess of 5000 pounds, shall
exceed a speed of 55 mph on highways or streets, which speed shall be
reduced to 35 mph during the period when reduced loadings are being
enforced in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
3) No school bus shall exceed the speed of 50 mph.
4) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.12. Violation of Signs; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) It shall be prima facie unlawful to exceed the speed stated on signs erected
in accordance with the traffic ordinances of this governmental unit.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-51
5.13. Manner of Charging Violation Of Speed Restriction. In every charge of
violating a speed restriction in the traffic ordinances of this governmental unit, the
complaint and traffic citation shall specify the speed at which the defendant is
alleged to have driven and the speed applicable within the district or at the
location.
5.14 Drag Races Prohibited; "Drag Racing" Defined; Violation Punishable as
Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not operate a vehicle on any highway or other place open to
the general public, including any area designated for the parking of motor
vehicles, in a speed or acceleration contest or for the purpose of making a
speed record, whether from a standing start or otherwise, over a measured
or unmeasured distance, and shall not participate in drag racing as defined
in subsection (2) of this section.
2) "Drag racing" means the operation of 2 or more vehicles from a point sideby-
side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out distance each
other over a common selected course or where timing is involved or where
timing devices are used in competitive accelerations of speeds by
participating vehicles. Persons who render assistance in any manner to
such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as participants.
The operation of 2 or more vehicles either at speeds in excess of prima
facie lawfully established speeds or rapidly accelerating from a common
starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawful speed is prima
facie evidence of drag racing and is unlawful and shall be punished, upon
conviction, as a misdemeanor.
(07-12-2010)
5.14a. Reckless Driving; Violation Punishable as Misdemeanor. A person who
drives a vehicle on a highway or a frozen public lake, stream, pond, or other
place open to the general public, including but not limited to any area designated
for the parking of motor vehicles, in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of
persons or property, is guilty of reckless driving. A person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the county jail
for not more than 93 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
(Renumbered: 07-12-2010)
5.14b. Careless Driving; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person who operates a vehicle on a highway or a frozen public lake,
stream, pond, or other place open to the general public, including any
area designated for the parking of vehicles, in a careless or negligent
manner likely to endanger any person or property, but without wantonness
or recklessness is responsible for a civil infraction
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-52
(Renumbered: 07-12-2010)
5.14c. Distracted Driving; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not engage in distracted driving within the City of Troy.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
3) Exceptions. This section does not apply to a person who is using a
electronic communication device to do one or more of the following:
a) Report a traffic accident, medical emergency or serious road hazard.
b) Report a situation in which the person believes his or her personal
safety is in jeopardy.
c) Report or avert the perpetration or potential perpetration of a criminal
act against the individual or another person.
d) Carry out official duties as a police officer, law enforcement official,
member of a paid or volunteer fire department, or operator of an
emergency vehicle.
(07-12-2010)
5.14d. Drag Races Prohibited; "Drag Racing" Defined; Violation Punishable as
Misdemeanor.
3) A person shall not operate a vehicle on any highway or other place open
to the general public, including any area designated for the parking of
motor vehicles, in a speed or acceleration contest or for the purpose of
making a speed record, whether from a standing start or otherwise, over a
measured or unmeasured distance, and shall not participate in drag
racing as defined in subsection (2) of this section.
2) "Drag racing" means the operation of 2 or more vehicles from a point sideby-
side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out distance
each other over a common selected course or where timing is involved or
where timing devices are used in competitive accelerations of speeds by
participating vehicles. Persons who render assistance in any manner to
such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as participants.
The operation of 2 or more vehicles either at speeds in excess of prima
facie lawfully established speeds or rapidly accelerating from a common
starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawful speed is
prima facie evidence of drag racing and is unlawful and shall be punished,
upon conviction, as a misdemeanor.
(Renumbered: 07-26-2010)
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-53
5.15 Operating While Intoxicated; Violation Punishable as Misdemeanor.
1) A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a
highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible
to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles,
within the City of Troy if the person is operating while intoxicated. As used
in this section, operating while intoxicated means either:
a) The person is under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled
substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled
substance, or;
b) The person has an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine,
or, beginning October 1, 2013, the person has an alcohol content of
0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of
breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
2) The owner of a vehicle or a person in charge or in control of a vehicle
shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated upon a
highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible
to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor
vehicles, within the City of Troy by a person if any of the following apply:
a) The person is under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled
substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled
substance
b) The person has an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine,
or, beginning October 1, 2013, the person has an alcohol content of
0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of
breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
c) The persons ability to operate the motor vehicle is visibly impaired
due to the consumption of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or
a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance.
3) A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a
highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible
to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles,
within the City of Troy when, due to the consumption of alcoholic liquor, a
controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled
substance, the persons ability to operate the vehicle is visibly impaired. If
a person is charged with violating subsection (1), a finding of guilty under
this subsection may be rendered.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-54
4) A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether licensed or not, shall
not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general
public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area
designated for the parking of vehicles, within the City of Troy if the person
has any bodily alcohol content. As used in this subsection, "any bodily
alcohol content" means either of the following:
a) An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more, but less than
0.08 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per
67 milliliters of urine, or, beginning October 1, 2013, the person has
an alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more, but less than
0.10 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per
67 milliliters of urine.
b) Any presence of alcohol within a persons body resulting from the
consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic
liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or
ceremony.
5) A person, whether licensed or not, is subject to the following
requirements:
a) He or she shall not operate a vehicle in violation of subsections (1),
(3) or (6) while another person who is less than 16 years of age is
occupying the vehicle.
6) A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a
highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible
to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles,
within the City of Troy if the person has in his or her body any amount of a
controlled substance listed in schedule 1 under section 7212 of the public
health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7212, or a rule promulgated under
that section, or of a controlled substance described in section 7214 a)(iv)
of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7214.
7) A person who is convicted of violating subsection (1) or (6) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:
a) Community service for not more than 360 hours.
b) Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.
c) A fine of not less than $100 or more than $500.
d) Immobilization as provided in MCL 257.904d.
e) As a condition of probation, the person shall not operate a motor
vehicle unless that vehicle is equipped with an ignition interlock device
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-55
approved, certified, and installed as required under MCL 257.625k and
MCL 257.625l.
8) A person who is convicted of violating subsection (2) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:
a) Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.
b) A fine of not less that $100 or more than $500.
9) A person who is convicted of violating subsection 3, is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:
a) Community service for not more than 360 hours.
b) Imprisonment of not more than 93 days.
c) A fine of not more than $300.
d) Immobilization as provided in MCL 257.904d
10) If a person is convicted of violating subsection (4), all of the following apply:
a) The person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of
the following:
i) Community service for not more than 360 hours.
ii) A fine of not more than $250.
b) If the violation occurs within seven years of one or more prior
convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or more of the
following:
i) Community service for not more than 480 hours.
ii) A fine of not more than $500.
iii) Imprisonment of not more than 93 days.
iv) Immobilization as provided in MCL 257.904d.
11) A person who is convicted of violation of subsection (5), is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200 or
more than $500 and to one or more of the following:
a) Community service for not less than 240 hours or more than 720
hours.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-56
b) Imprisonment for not less than 5 days or more than 93 days.
c) Immobilization as provided in MCL 257.904d.
12) In addition to imposing the sanctions prescribed under this section, the
court may order the person to pay the costs of the prosecution.
13) A person sentenced to perform community service under this section shall
not receive compensation and shall reimburse the state or appropriate local
unit of government for the cost of supervision incurred by the state or local
unit of government as a result of the persons activities in that service.
14) If a person is charged with a violation of subsection (1), (3), or (5) or (6),
the court shall not permit the defendant to enter a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere to a charge of violating subsection (4) in exchange for
dismissal of the original charge.
15) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (17), if a person is charged
with operating a vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance
in violation of subsection (1), the court shall require the jury to return a
special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court convicts the
person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the
court shall make a finding as to whether the person was under the
influence of a controlled substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor
and a controlled substance at the time of the violation.
16) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (17), if a person is charged
with operating a vehicle while his or her ability to operate the vehicle was
visibly impaired due to his or her consumption of a controlled substance or
a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance in violation of
subsection (3), the court shall require the jury to return a special verdict in
the form of a written finding or, if the court convicts the person without a
jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the court shall make a
finding as to whether, due to the consumption of a controlled substance or
a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance, the persons
ability to operate a motor vehicle was visibly impaired at the time of the
violation.
17) A special verdict described in subsections (15) and (16) is not required if a
jury is instructed to make a finding solely as to either of the following:
a) Whether the defendant was under the influence of a controlled
substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled
substance at the time of the violation.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-57
b) Whether the defendant was visibly impaired due to his or her
consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of
alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance at the time of the
violation.
18) If a jury or court finds under subsection (15), (16), or (17) that the
defendant operated a motor vehicle under the influence of or while
impaired due to the consumption of a controlled substance or a
combination of a controlled substance and an alcoholic liquor, the court
shall do both of the following:
a) Report the finding to the secretary of state.
b) On a form or forms prescribed by the state court administrator,
forward to the department of state police a record that specifies
the penalties imposed by the court, including any term of
imprisonment, and any sanction imposed under MCL 257.625n
or MCL 257.904d.
19) Except as otherwise provided by law, a record described in subsection (18)
b) is a public record and the department of state police shall retain the
information contained on that record for not less than seven years.
20) In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (4), the defendant bears the
burden of proving that the consumption of intoxicating liquor was a part of
a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by a preponderance
of the evidence.
5.15a Chemical Test Refusal Sanctions.
1) If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to MCL 257.625a(6) or
submits to a chemical test or a chemical test is performed pursuant to a
court order and the test reveals an unlawful alcohol content, the peace
officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall do all of the
following:
a) On behalf of the secretary of state, immediately confiscate the
persons license or permit to operate a motor vehicle and, if the
person is otherwise eligible for a license or permit, issue a
temporary license or permit to the person. The temporary
license or permit shall be on a form provided by the secretary of
state.
b) Except as provided in subsection (2), immediately do all of the
following:
i) Forward a copy of the written report of the persons
refusal to submit to a chemical test required under
MCL 257.625d to the secretary of state.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-58
ii) Notify the secretary of state by means of the law
enforcement information network that a temporary
license or permit was issued to the person.
ii) Destroy the persons drivers license or permit.
2) If a person submits to a chemical test offered pursuant to MCL
257.625a(6) that requires an analysis of blood or urine and a report of the
results of that chemical test is not immediately available, the peace officer
who requested the person to submit to the test shall comply with
subsection (1) a) pending receipt of the test report. If the report reveals an
unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person to
submit to the test shall immediately comply with subsection (1) b). If the
report does not reveal an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who
requested the person to submit to the test shall immediately notify the
person of the test results and immediately return the persons license or
permit by first-class mail to the address given at the time of arrest.
3) A temporary license or permit issued under this section is valid for one of
the following time periods:
a) If the case is not prosecuted, for 90 days after issuance or until
the persons license or permit is suspended pursuant to MCL
257.625f, whichever occurs earlier, the prosecuting attorney shall
notify the secretary of state if a case referred to the prosecuting
attorney is not prosecuted. The arresting law enforcement agency
shall notify the secretary of state if a case is not referred to the
prosecuting attorney for prosecution.
b) If the case is prosecuted, until the criminal charges against the
person are dismissed, the person is acquitted of those charges,
or the persons license or permit is suspended, restricted, or
revoked.
4) As used in this section, "unlawful alcohol content" means any of the
following, as applicable:
a) If the person tested is less than 21 years of age, 0.02 grams or
more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of
breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
b) If the person tested is not a person described in subsection a),,
0.08 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210
liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, or, beginning October
1, 2013, 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood,
per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-59
5.15b Arrest Without Warrant; Preliminary Breath Test Refusal, Violation as Civil
Infraction; Admissibility and Use of Chemical Test Analysis.
1) A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant under either of the
following circumstances:
a) The peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was,
at the time of an accident in the City of Troy, the operator of a vehicle
involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of
MCL 257.625 or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to
MCL 257.625.
b) The person is found in the driver's seat of a vehicle parked or
stopped on a highway or street within the City of Troy, if any part of
the vehicle intrudes into the roadway and the peace officer has
reasonable cause to believe the person was operating the vehicle in
violation of MCL 257.625 or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to MCL 257.625.
2) A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person was
operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the
public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area
designated for the parking of vehicles, within the City of Troy and that the
person by the consumption of alcoholic liquor may have affected his or
her ability to operate a vehicle, or reasonable cause to believe that a
person who is less than 21 years of age was operating a vehicle upon a
public highway or other place open to the public or generally accessible to
motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles,
within the City of Troy while the person had any bodily alcohol content as
that term is defined in MCL 257.625(3), may require the person to submit
to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The following provisions apply
with respect to a preliminary chemical breath analysis administered under
this subsection:
a) A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon
the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis.
b) The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis are admissible
in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in MCL 257.625c(1)
or in an administrative hearing for 1 or more of the following
purposes:
i) To assist the court or hearing officer in determining a challenge
to the validity of an arrest. This subparagraph does not limit the
introduction of other competent evidence offered to establish
the validity of an arrest.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-60
ii) As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content, if offered
by the defendant to rebut testimony elicited on crossexamination
of a defense witness that the defendant's breath
alcohol content was higher at the time of the charged offense
than when a chemical test was administered under subsection
(3).
iii) As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content, if offered
by the prosecution to rebut testimony elicited on crossexamination
of a prosecution witness that the defendant's
breath alcohol content was lower at the time of the charged
offense than when a chemical test was administered under
subsection (3).
c) A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath analysis
remains subject to the requirements of MCL 257.625c, MCL
257.625d, MCL 257.625e, and MCL 257.625f for purposes of
chemical tests described in those sections.
d) A person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis upon a lawful request by a peace officer is responsible for
a civil infraction.
3) The following provisions apply with respect to chemical tests and analysis
of a person's blood, urine, or breath, other than preliminary chemical
breath analysis:
a) The amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or
both in a driver's blood or urine or the amount of alcohol in a
person's breath at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis
of the person's blood, urine, or breath is admissible into evidence in
any civil or criminal proceeding and is presumed to be the same as
at the time the person operated the vehicle.
b) A person arrested for a crime described in MCL 257.625c (1) shall
be advised of all of the following:
i) If he or she takes a chemical test of his or her blood, urine, or
breath administered at the request of a peace officer, he or
she has the right to demand that a person of his or her own
choosing administer 1 of the chemical tests.
ii) The results of the test are admissible in a judicial proceeding
as provided under this act and will be considered with other
admissible evidence in determining the defendant's innocence
or guilt.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-61
iii) He or she is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of a
test sample obtained at his or her own request.
iv) If he or she refuses the request of a peace officer to take a
test described in subparagraph (i), a test shall not be given
without a court order, but the peace officer may seek to obtain
a court order.
v) Refusing a peace officer's request to take a test described in
subparagraph (i) will result in the suspension of his or her
operator's or chauffeur's license and vehicle group
designation or operating privilege and the addition of 6 points
to his or her driver record.
c) A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and
collected in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or an
individual operating under the delegation of a licensed physician
under section 16215 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL
333.16215, qualified to withdraw blood and acting in a medical
environment, may withdraw blood at a peace officer's request to
determine the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled
substance or both in the person's blood, as provided in this
subsection. Liability for a crime or civil damages predicated on the
act of withdrawing or analyzing blood and related procedures does
not attach to a licensed physician or individual operating under the
delegation of a licensed physician who withdraws or analyzes blood
or assists in the withdrawal or analysis in accordance with this act
unless the withdrawal or analysis is performed in a negligent
manner.
d) A chemical test described in this subsection shall be administered at
the request of a peace officer having reasonable grounds to believe
the person has committed a crime described in MCL 257.625c(1). A
person who takes a chemical test administered at a peace officer's
request as provided in this section shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to have a person of his or her own choosing administer 1
of the chemical tests described in this subsection within a reasonable
time after his or her detention. The test results are admissible and
shall be considered with other admissible evidence in determining the
defendant's innocence or guilt. If the person charged is administered a
chemical test by a person of his or her own choosing, the person
charged is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of the test
sample.
e) If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the accident
is transported to a medical facility and a sample of the driver's
blood is withdrawn at that time for medical treatment, the results of
a chemical analysis of that sample are admissible in any civil or
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-62
criminal proceeding to show the amount of alcohol or presence of a
controlled substance or both in the person's blood at the time
alleged, regardless of whether the person had been offered or had
refused a chemical test. The medical facility or person performing
the chemical analysis shall disclose the results of the analysis to a
prosecuting attorney who requests the results for use in a criminal
prosecution as provided in this subdivision. A medical facility or
person disclosing information in compliance with this subsection is
not civilly or criminally liable for making the disclosure.
f) If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the accident
is deceased, a sample of the decedent's blood shall be withdrawn
in a manner directed by the medical examiner to determine the
amount of alcohol or the presence of a controlled substance, or
both, in the decedent's blood. The medical examiner shall give the
results of the chemical analysis of the sample to the law
enforcement agency investigating the accident and that agency
shall forward the results to the department of state police.
g) The Department of State Police shall promulgate uniform rules in
compliance with the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969
PA 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328, for the administration of chemical
tests for the purposes of this section. An instrument used for a
preliminary chemical breath analysis may be used for a chemical
test described in this subsection if approved under rules
promulgated by the department of state police.
4) The provisions of subsection (3) relating to chemical testing do not limit
the introduction of any other admissible evidence bearing upon any of the
following questions:
a) Whether the person was impaired by, or under the influence of,
alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of
alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance.
b) Whether the person had an alcohol content of 0.08 grams or more
per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67
milliliters of urine or, beginning October 1, 2013, the person had an
alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood,
per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
c) If the person is less than 21 years of age, whether the person had
any bodily alcohol content within his or her body. As used in this
subdivision, any bodily alcohol content means either of the
following:
i) An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more but less than 0.08
grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-63
per 67 milliliters of urine or, beginning October 1, 2013, the
person had an alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more but less
than 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210
liters of breath, or 67 milliliters of urine.
ii) Any presence of alcohol within a persons body resulting from
the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than the
consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally
recognized religious service or ceremony.
5) If a chemical test described in subsection (3) is administered, the test
results shall be made available to the person charged or the person's
attorney upon written request to the prosecution, with a copy of the
request filed with the court. The prosecution shall furnish the results at
least 2 business days before the day of the trial. The prosecution shall
offer the test results as evidence in that trial. Failure to fully comply with
the request bars the admission of the results into evidence by the
prosecution.
a) A person's refusal to submit to a chemical test as provided in subsection
(3) is admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime described in MCL
257.625c(1) only to show that a test was offered to the defendant, but not
as evidence in determining the defendants innocence or guilt. The jury
shall be instructed accordingly.
(Rev. 09-08-2003 / Effective 09-30-2003)
5.16a Transportation or Possession of Alcoholic Liquor in Container Open or
Uncapped or Upon Which Seal Broken; Violation Punishable as a
Misdemeanor; Nonacceptance of Plea for Violation of Section 5.15(4),
Nonapplicability.
1) Except as provided in subsection (2), a person shall not transport or
possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon
which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of a vehicle
upon a highway, or within the passenger compartment of a moving vehicle
in any place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor
vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, in the
City of Troy.
2) A person may transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is
open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger
compartment of a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the
general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area
designated for the parking of vehicles in this state, if the vehicle does not
have a trunk or compartment separate from the passenger compartment,
the container is enclosed or encased, and the container is not readily
accessible to the occupants of the vehicle.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-64
3) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by a term of imprisonment of not more than 90 days and a fine of not
more than $100.00. A court shall not accept a plea of guilty or nolo
contenders for a violation of this section from a person charged solely with
a violation of section 5.15(4) of Chapter 106 of the Troy City Code.
4) This section does not apply to a passenger in a chartered vehicle
authorized to operate by the Michigan Department of Transportation.
(10-24-1994)
5.16b. Consumption of Alcoholic Liquor on a Highway, Public Place, or Area
Generally Accessible to Motor Vehicles, Including Area Designated for
Parking of Vehicles; Violation Punishable as a Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not consume alcoholic liquor upon a highway, street, alley,
or any public or private property which is open to the general public and
which is not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises, or within the passenger compartment of a moving vehicle upon
a highway or in any place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking
of vehicles in the City of Troy.
2) Person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
a term of imprisonment of not more than 90 days and a fine of not more
than $100.00, or both.
(Rev. 12-23-1991)
5.17. Driving on Right Side of Roadway; Exceptions; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) On all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven on the right
half of the roadway, except as follows:
a) When overtaking and passing another vehicle which is proceeding in
the same direction under the rules governing such movement.
b) When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
c) On a roadway that is divided into 3 marked lanes for traffic under the
rules applicable thereon.
d) On a roadway designated and signposted for 1-way traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-65
5.18. Passing Vehicles Proceeding in Opposite Directions; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right. On roadways that are not wider than 1 lane of traffic in each
direction, drivers passing each other in opposite directions shall give to
the other, as near as possible, at least 1/2 of the main-traveled portion of,
the roadway.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.19. Overtaking and Passing of Moving Vehicles Proceeding in Same Direction;
Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions,
and special rules set forth in this code:
a) The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left thereof
and, when safely clear of such overtaken vehicle, shall take up a
position as near the right-hand edge of the main-traveled portion of
the highway as is practicable.
b) Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the
speed of his or her vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.20. Overtaking and Passing on Right of Moving Vehicles; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
a) When the vehicle overtaken is making or is about to make a left
turn.
b) On a street or highway with unobstructed pavement which is not
occupied by parked vehicles and which is of sufficient width for 2 or
more lanes of moving vehicles in each direction, if vehicles on such
street or highway are moving in substantially continuous lanes of
traffic.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-66
c) On a 1-way street or on any roadway on which traffic is restricted to
1 direction of movement, which is free from obstructions, and which
is of sufficient width for 2 or more lanes of moving vehicles, if
vehicles on such street or roadway are moving in substantially
continuous lanes of traffic.
d) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on
the right only under conditions that permit such movement in
safety. Such movement shall not be made by driving off the
pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.21. Overtaking and Passing on Left; Restrictions; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A vehicle shall not be driven to the left side of the center of a 2-lane street
or in the center lane of a 3-lane street when overtaking and passing
another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side or
center lane is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completed
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from
the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.22. Driving to the Left Side of Roadway Prohibited Under Certain Conditions;
Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A vehicle shall not be driven to the left side of the roadway at any time in
the following situations:
a) When approaching the crest of a grade or on a curve in the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed so as to create a
hazard if another vehicle is approaching from the opposite
direction.
b) When the driver's view is obstructed when approaching within 100
feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.
2) The limitations set forth in subsection (1) a) and b) of this section do not
apply when a vehicle is driven on a 1-way roadway.
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.23. No Passing Zones; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any vehicle in a no
passing zone where official signs or markings on the roadway indicate the
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-67
beginning and end of such zone and when such signs or markings are in
place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.24. One-way Roadways; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) On a roadway or alley that is designated and signposted for 1-way traffic,
a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.25. Rotary Traffic Islands; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A vehicle that is passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.26. Driving on Roadways Laned For Traffic; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When a roadway is divided into 2 or more clearly marked lanes for traffic,
the following rules, in addition to all other rules consistent herewith, apply:
a) A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as practicable, entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has
first made sure that the movement can be made with safety. On a
roadway with 4 or more lanes which provides for 2-way movement of
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven within the extreme right-hand lane,
except when overtaking and passing, and shall not cross the center
line of the roadway unless making a left turn.
b) On a roadway which is divided into 3 lanes and which provides for 2-
way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in
the same direction, when, in preparation for a left turn, the center lane
is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or when the center lane is
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction the vehicle
is proceeding and the allocation is designated by official traffic-control
devices.
c) Official traffic-control devices may be erected to direct specified traffic
to use a designated lane or to designate those lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center of the
roadway. Drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of the devices.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-68
d) Official traffic-control devices may be installed which prohibit the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall
obey the direction of the devices.
e) This section shall not be construed to prohibit a vehicle traveling in the
appropriate direction from traveling in any lane of a freeway having 3
or more lanes for travel in the same direction. A city, village, township,
or county shall not enact an ordinance which regulates the same
subject matter as any provision of this subsection.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.27. Driving on Divided Highways; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When any highway has been divided into 2 roadways by leaving an
intersection space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing
section which is constructed to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall
be driven only on the right-hand roadway and a vehicle shall not park or
be driven over, across, or within any such physical barrier or dividing
section or space or at a crossover or intersection which is established by
public authority. Crossovers on limited access highways shall not be used,
except by such vehicles as provided in sections 3.6, 3.7, and 3.8 of this
code and except by road service vehicles while going to or returned from
servicing a disable vehicle and except as otherwise permitted by
authorized signs. As used in this section, "road service vehicle" means a
vehicle that is clearly marked and readily recognizable as a vehicle used
to assist disabled vehicles.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.28. Limited Access Roadways; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access
roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are established by public
authority.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.28a. Limited Access Highway; Pedestrians and Certain Vehicles Prohibited;
Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not operate a moped or motorcycle with less than a 125
cubic centimeter engine, a farm tractor, or other self-propelled farm
implement, nor shall any pedestrian, bicycle, or other non-motorized traffic
be permitted, on any limited access highway in this state.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-69
5.29. Following Too Closely; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent considering the speed of such vehicle and
the traffic on, and the condition of, the street.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.30. Following Fire Apparatus Prohibited; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of any vehicle, other than an authorized emergency vehicle on
official business, shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response
to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet and shall not drive or park such vehicle
within 500 feet where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.31. Required Positions and Method of Turning at Intersections; Violation as
Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle who intends to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
a) Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of
the roadway.
b) Left turns on 2-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line
thereof and by passing to the right of such center line thereof and
by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the
intersection and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be
made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of
the roadway being entered. When practicable, the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of
the intersection.
c) Left turns on other than 2-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to 1 direction on 1 or more of the roadways, the
driver a vehicle who intends to turn left at any such intersection
shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane which
is lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of
such vehicle and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall
be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in
the left-hand lane which is lawfully available to traffic moving in
such direction on the roadway being entered.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-70
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.32. Obedience to Turn Markers; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within
an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, a driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of such
indications.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.33. Obedience to No-Turn Signs; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When authorized signs are erected indicating that right, left, or U-turns are
not permitted, a driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of any
such sign.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.34. Limitations on Turning Around; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction on any street in a business district and shall not, on
any other street, so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.35. Signals for Stopping or Turning; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle or bicycle on a highway, before stopping or turning
from a direct line, shall first see that the movement can be made in safety
and shall give a signal as required in this section.
2) The signal required in this section shall be given either by means of the
hand and arm, in the manner herein specified, or by a mechanical or
electrical signal device which conveys a clear signal or warning to other
highway traffic, except as provided in subsection (3) of this section. when
a signal is given by means of hand and arm, the driver shall indicate his or
her intention to stop or turn by extending his or her hand and arm from
and beyond the left side of the vehicle and signal as follows:
a) Left turn-Hand and arm extended horizontally.
b) Right turn-Hand and arm extended upward.
c) Stop or decrease speed - Hand and arm extended downward.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-71
3) A commercial motor vehicle, other than one in transit from a manufacturer
to a dealer, in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and the required
signal shall be given by, a signal light or mechanical signal device when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left
outside limit of the body, cab, or load of the commercial motor vehicle is
more than 24 inches or when the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof is more than 14
feet. The latter measurement shall apply to a single vehicle or
combination of vehicles.
4) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.36. Stop Signs; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, the driver of a vehicle
that is approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign, shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if
there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if none,
shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After having
stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has
entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so
closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when the driver would be moving across or within the intersection.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.36a. Right-of-Way at Merging Highways; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When a vehicle approaches the intersection of a highway from an
intersecting highway or street which is intended to be, and is constructed
as, merging highway or street and which is plainly marked at such
intersection with appropriate merge signs, the vehicle shall yield the rightof-
way to any vehicle so close as to constitute an immediate hazard on
the highway about to be entered and the vehicle's speed shall be adjusted
to enable the vehicle to merge safely with the through traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.37. Emerging from Alley, Driveway, or Building; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle that is emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall stop such vehicle immediately before driving onto a sidewalk or onto
the sidewalk are extending across any alleyway and shall yield the rightof-
way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and
upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-72
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.38. Entering Intersection or Crosswalk; Obstructing Traffic Prohibited;
Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A driver shall not enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any trafficcontrol
signal indication to proceed.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.41. Right-of-Way at Intersection; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle that is approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle that has entered the intersection from a different
highway.
2) When 2 vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
3) The driver of any vehicle that is traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit
any right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
4) The right-of-way rules set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section
are modified at through highways and as otherwise stated in this code.
5) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.42. Yield Right-of-Way Signs; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle that is approaching a yield sign, in obedience to
such sign, shall slow down to a speed which is reasonable for the existing
conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time such driver would be moving across or
within the intersection. However, if required for safety to stop, the driver
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersection roadway.
2) The driver of any vehicle that is traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit
any right-of-way which he or she might otherwise have under this code.
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-73
5.43. Right-of-Way: Vehicle Turning Left at Intersection; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle within an intersection who intends to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or which is so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver having so yielded and
having given a signal when and as required by this code, may make such
left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection
from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle
making the left turn, however, at an intersection at which a traffic signal is
located, a driver who intends to make a left turn shall permit vehicles
bound straight through in the opposite direction which are awaiting a go
signal to pass through the intersection.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.44. Funeral Procession; Right-of-Way; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A motor vehicle that is part of a funeral procession going to a place of
burial has the right-of-way over all other vehicles, except for fire
apparatus, ambulances, police patrol vehicles, at a street or highway
intersection within this state if the vehicle in the funeral procession
displays a flag which is fluorescent orange in color. The lead vehicle and
the last vehicle in the funeral procession may carry an additional flag. A
flag shall not contain a name embossed or printed on it, but may contain
the word "funeral".
2) A person who passes through a funeral procession of motor vehicles,
designated pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, with a vehicle of any
kind is responsible for a civil infraction.
3) A funeral procession going to a place of burial may make a direct left turn
from one public roadway to another at locations where signing has been
placed to specifically prohibit this left turn for other motor vehicles.
5.45. Driving Through a Funeral or other Procession Prohibited; Exception;
Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A driver of a vehicle shall not drive through the vehicles, person, or
animals comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while such
funeral or other procession is in motion, except when otherwise directed
by a police officer.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-74
5.46. Drivers in a Procession; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Each driver in a funeral or other authorized procession shall drive as near
the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.47. Parades and Processions; Permit Required; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A procession or parade, other than a procession or parade of the forces of
the United States armed services, the military forces of this state, and the
forces of the police and fire departments, shall not occupy, march, or
proceed along any roadway, unless pursuant to a permit issued by the
chief of police and unless the procession or parade is in accordance with
other regulations as are set forth in this code.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.48. Driving on Sidewalk Prohibited; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) The driver of a vehicle shall not drive on or within any sidewalk area,
except at a driveway.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.49. Limitations on Backing; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless the movement
can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other
traffic.
2) A vehicle shall not be backed a distance of more than 60 feet.
3) A vehicle shall not be backed into an intersection; except that a vehicle
may be backed into an intersection when it is not otherwise possible to
turn about and when such movement can be made safely without
interfering with other traffic.
4) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.50. Driving Over Fire Hose Prohibited; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A vehicle shall not be driven over any unprotected fire hose of a fire
department without the consent of the fire department official in
command.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-75
5.52. Driving Through or Over a Safety Zone Occupied by People Prohibited;
Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle shall not at any time drive through or over a safety
zone when such safety zone contains any person therein.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.53. Avoidance of traffic-control devices prohibited; violation as civil infraction.
1) A driver of a vehicle shall not attempt to avoid obedience to any trafficcontrol
device by driving on or through any private property.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.54. Splashing Prohibited; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A driver of a motor vehicle shall not recklessly, willfully, wantonly, or
carelessly operate his or her vehicle in such manner as to splash snow,
rain, water, mud, dirt, or debris on any person who is on a sidewalk,
crosswalk, or safety zone.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.55. Deposit of Litter on Streets Prohibited; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not, without the consent of the public authority having
supervision of the street, deposit, place, dump, throw or leave, or cause or
permit dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of any destructive
or injurious material, any rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal,
paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, or debris on any street.
2) A person who throws or drops, or permits to be thrown or dropped, on a
street any of the material or matter listed in subsection 1 of this section shall
immediately remove it or cause it to be removed.
3) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit upon any
street any snow, mud, dirt, or other material which may be harmful to the
pavement thereof or may do injury to any person, animal or property.
4) Any person, firm or corporation who deposits upon any street the materials
listed in subsection 3 shall immediately remove it or cause it to be removed.
In the event such person, firm or corporation fails to remove such materials,
the city shall do so and the cost thereof shall be charged to the responsible
person, firm or corporation.
5) The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-76
5.55a. Throwing Objects At or Into Paths of Vehicles Prohibited; Violation As
Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not knowingly cause any litter or any object to fall or to be
thrown into the path of or to hit a vehicle traveling on a street.
2) The violation of this section is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00
or not more than 1 year in county jail, or both. A person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.55b. Definitions: Removal or deposit of Snow, Ice, or Slush Which Obstructs
Safety Vision Prohibited; Deposit of Snow, Ice, or Slush Prohibited;
Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) As used in this section, "safety vision: means an unobstructed line of sight
which enables a driver to travel on, enter, or exit a roadway in a safe
manner.
2) A person shall not remove, or cause to be removed, snow, ice, or slush onto
or across a roadway or the shoulder of the roadway in a manner which
obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle other than an offroad
vehicle.
3) A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, ice, or slush
onto or across a roadway or the shoulder of the roadway in a manner which
obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle.
4) A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, ice, or slush on
any roadway or highway.
5) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.56. Removal of Wrecked or Damaged Vehicles; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A person who removes a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall
remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped on the street from
the vehicle.
2) The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor.
3) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor which is
punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or both.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-77
5.57. Spilling Loads on Streets Prohibited; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A vehicle shall not be driven or moved on any street unless the vehicle is
constructed or loaded to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting,
leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom.
2) Actual spillage of material on the highway or proof of that spillage is not
necessary to prove a violation of this section.
3) No vehicle shall be operate or parked on the street or on public or private
property unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its
contents from escaping therefrom.
4) No vehicle shall be operated on the streets in such a manner that
substances fall off or are blown off, and all such vehicles, when
necessary, shall have an adequate covering to prevent the contents from
falling on the street.
5) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor which is
punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days, or both.
5.58. Requirements When Leaving Motor Vehicle Unattended; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) A person who has control or charge of a motor vehicle shall not allow
such vehicle to stand unattended on any street or any other place without
first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing and taking
possession of the ignition key, effectively setting the brakes thereon, and,
when standing on any grade, turning the front wheels of such vehicle to
the curb or side of the street. The provisions of this section that pertain to
the locking of the ignition and removing and taking possession of the
ignition key do no apply to motor vehicles that are manufactured with an
ignition system which does not have a key and which is incapable of being
locked.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.59. Interference with Driver's View or Control Prohibited; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) A person shall not drive a vehicle if it is loaded in a manner, or if the front
seat is occupied by such number of persons, so as to obstruct the view of
the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or so as to interfere with the
driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-78
5.60. Position of Passengers; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Passengers in a vehicle shall not ride in a position which interferes with
the driver's view ahead or to the sides or which interferes with his or her
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.60a. Riders Leaning Out of Vehicles. No person shall ride in, on, or operate any
motor vehicle unless such person's body is within that portion of the vehicle
designated for the carrying of passengers or merchandise, or as otherwise
permitted by this ordinance; provided, however, that this section does not apply
to any person whose employment makes it necessary to ride otherwise.
5.61. Operating, Stopping, Standing, Or Parking Truck or Commercial Vehicle
with Gross Weight Of More Than Signed Limits Prohibited; Violation as
Civil Infraction.
1) When signs are erected that give notice of weight limits, a person shall not
operate, stop, stand, or park any truck or commercial vehicle with a gross
weight of more than the amounts specified on the signs at any time on
any of the streets or parts of streets on which such signs have been
posted.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.62. Driver's License Required; Motorcycle Endorsement; Change of
Residence; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A person who is not licensed as an operator or chauffeur, as required by
the act, shall not operate a motor vehicle on the streets or highways of
this governmental unit.
2) A person who operates a motorcycle shall have a motorcycle
endorsement on his or her operator's or chauffeur's license.
3) An operator or chauffeur who changes his or her residence before the
expiration of his or her license shall immediately take the license to the
local examining board or to the secretary of state, where the new address
and the date of the changes shall be entered on the back of the license.
4) Before operating a moped on a highway, a person shall procure a special
restricted license to operate a moped, unless the person has a valid
operator's or chauffeur's license. A special restricted license to operate a
moped may be issued to a person who is 15 years of age or older, if the
person satisfies the office of the secretary of state that he or she is
competent to operate a moped with safety. The secretary of state shall
not require a road test before issuing a special restricted license to
operate a moped.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-79
5) Before operating a single vehicle weighing over 24,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight or a bus or school bus, a person shall procure a class 1
endorsement on his or her operator's or chauffeur's license. Before
operating a combination of vehicles weighing over 24,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight or a vehicle towing a vehicle weighing over 10,000 pounds
gross vehicle weight, a person shall procure a class 2 endorsement on his
or her operator's or chauffeur's license. The license shall be issued,
suspended, revoked, canceled, or renewed pursuant to the act.
6) A person who violates sub-sections 1, 2, 4 or 5 is guilty of a
misdemeanor. A violation of sub-section 3 is a civil infraction
(Rev. 08-05-2002)
5.62a. Operation of Motor Vehicle by Person Whose License Suspended,
Revoked, Denied, or Who Has Never Applied for License; Violations;
Penalties; Subsequent Offenses; Confiscation of Plates.
1) A person whose operators or chauffeurs license or registration certificate
has been suspended or revoked and who has been notified as provided in
MCL 257.212 of that suspension or revocation, whose application for
license has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, shall not
operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the
general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area
designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within the City of Troy.
2) A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the person
to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public
or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for
the parking of vehicles, within the City of Troy by a person whose license
or registration certificate is suspended or revoked, whose application for
license has been denied, or who has never applied for a license.
3) Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person who violates
subsection (1) or (2) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500,
or both. Unless the vehicle was stolen or used with the permission of a
person who did not knowingly permit an unlicensed driver to operate the
vehicle, the registration plates of the vehicle shall be canceled by the
secretary of state upon notification by a peace officer.
4) Before a person is arraigned before a district court magistrate or judge on
a charge of violating this section, the arresting officer shall obtain the
persons driving record from the secretary of state and shall furnish the
record to the court. The driving record of the person may be obtained from
the secretary of states computer information network.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-80
5) This section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle solely for
the purpose of protecting human life or property if the life or property is
endangered and summoning prompt aid is essential.
6) A person whose vehicle group designation is suspended or revoked and
who has been notified as provided in MCL 257.212 of that suspension or
revocation, or whose application for a vehicle group designation has been
denied, or who has never applied for a vehicle group designation and who
operates a commercial motor vehicle within the City of Troy while any of
those conditions exist is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable, except as
otherwise provided in this section, by imprisonment for not less than 3
days or more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100, or both.
7) For purposes of this section, a person who never applied for a license
includes a person who applied for a license, was denied, and never
applied again.
(Rev. 10-04-1999)
5.62b. Order of Impoundment.
1) When a person is convicted under section 5.62a(l) of operating a motor
vehicle while his or her license to operate a motor vehicle is suspended,
revoked, or denied, the motor vehicle, if it is owned in whole or in part-by
that person, may be ordered impounded for not less than 30 or more that
120 days from the date of judgment. The order of impoundment shall
include the implied consent of the owner of the vehicle to the storage for
insurance coverage purposes.
The owner of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section is liable
for expenses incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle whether
or not the vehicle is returned to him or her. The vehicle shall be returned
to the owner only if the owner pays the expenses for removal and storage.
If redemption is not made or the vehicle is not returned as provided in this
section within 30 days after the time set in the impoundment order for
return of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be considered an abandoned
vehicle and disposed of as provided in section 2.5a(9)-(12) of Chapter 106
of the Troy City Code.
2) Nothing in this section affects the rights of a conditional vendor, chattel
mortgagee or lessor of a motor vehicle registered in the name of another
person as owner who becomes subject to this section.
(Rev. 12-23-1991)
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-81
5.63. Possession and Display of License; Violation Punishable as Misdemeanor.
1) Every driver shall have his or her operator's or chauffeur's license in his or
her immediate possession at all times when driving a motor vehicle and
shall display the license on demand of any police officer.
2) The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor.
5.63a. License Restrictions; Violation Punishable as Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not drive a motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions
imposed on his or her license by the secretary of state.
2) The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor.
5.63b. A person shall have his or her graduated licensing status in his or her immediate
possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle, and shall display the
card upon demand of a police officer. A person who violates this subsection is
responsible for a civil infraction.
(Rev. 12-15-1997)
5.63c. A person issued a level 1 graduated licensing status may operate motor vehicle
only when accompanied either by a licensed parent or legal guardian or, with the
permission of the parent or legal guardian, a licensed driver 21 years of age or
older. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Rev. 12-15-1997)
5.63d. A person issued a level 2 graduated licensing status shall not operate a motor
vehicle within this state from 12 midnight to 5 a.m. unless accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian or a licensed driver over the age of 21 designated by the
parent or legal guardian, or except when going to or from employment. A person
who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Rev. 12-15-1997)
5.64. Unlawful Use of License; Violation Punishable as Misdemeanor.
1) It is unlawful for any person to display or cause or permit to be displayed
or to have in his or her possession any operator or chauffeur's license
knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been canceled, revoked,
suspended, or altered.
2) The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-82
5.65. License Lending to, or Permitting Use by, Person Not Entitled; Violation
Punishable as Misdemeanor.
1) It is unlawful for any person to lend his or her chauffeur's or operator's
license to, or knowingly permit use of the license by, one who is not
entitled thereto.
2) The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor.
5.66. Unlawful Display or Representation of License; Violation Punishable as
Misdemeanor.
1) It is unlawful for any person to display or to represent as one's own any
operator's or chauffeur's license which has not been issued to the person
so displaying the license.
2) The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor.
5.67. Instruction Permit; Violation Punishable as Misdemeanor.
1) It is unlawful for an operator who holds an instruction permit to operate a
motor vehicle unless accompanied by a licensed operator or chauffeur
who is actually occupying a seat beside the driver.
2) The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor.
5.68. Authorizing or Permitting Unlicensed Driver to Operate Vehicle Prohibited;
Violation Punishable as Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not knowingly authorize or permit a motor vehicle owned by
him or her or under his or her control to be driven by any person who is
unlicensed to drive such a vehicle.
2) The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor.
5.69. Registration Plates Required; Violation Constitutes a Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not operate or park on the streets of the City of Troy any
vehicle which is required to be registered pursuant to state law, unless the
vehicle bears valid registration plates issued for it. A person who violates
this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Rev. 09-22-2003)
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-83
5.69a Registration Plates; Attachment, Display; Violation Constitutes A Civil
Infraction.
1) A registration plate issued for a vehicle shall be attached to the rear of the
vehicle, except that a registration plate issued for a truck tractor or road
tractor shall be attached to the front of that vehicle. A person who violates
this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
2) A registration plate shall be securely fastened in a horizontal position to
the vehicle for which the plate is issued so as to prevent the plate from
swinging. The plate shall be attached at a height of not less than 12
inches from the ground, measured from the bottom of the plate, in a place
and position which is clearly visible. The plate shall be maintained free
from foreign materials that obscure or partially obscure the registration
information, and in a clearly legible condition. A person who violates this
section is responsible for a civil infraction.
3) A registration plate and the expiration tab on the registration plate shall
conform to the color, contrast and design designated by the Michigan
Secretary of State or, if from a state other than Michigan, the registration
plate and tab must conform to that states requirements for color, contrast
and design. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
4) A person shall not attach a name plate, insignia, or advertising device to a
motor vehicle registration plate that obscures or partially obscures the
registration information. A person who violates this section is responsible
for a civil infraction.
5) A person shall not operate a motor vehicle which has a name plate,
insignia, or advertising device attached to a motor vehicle registration
plate in a manner which obscures or partially obscures the registration
information. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Rev. 09-22-2003)
5.70. Registration Certificate; Possession; Display; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The certificate of registration shall at all times be carried in the vehicle to
which it refers or shall be carried by the person driving or in control of
such vehicle who shall display the same upon demand of a police officer.
A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Rev. 07-07-2008)
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-84
5.70a. Registration; Title; Change of Address; Notice; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) If a person, after making application for or obtaining the registration of a
vehicle or a certificate of title, moves from the address named in the
application and shown on a registration certificate or certificate of title, the
person, within 10 days after moving, shall notify the secretary of state in
writing, and shall include both the old and new address. A person who
violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Rev. 09-22-2003)
5.70b. Production of Evidence of Insurance; Certificate of Insurance; Violations
and Penalties; Exemptions.
1) The owner of a motor vehicle who operates or permits the operation of the
motor vehicle upon the highways of this state or the operator of the motor
vehicle shall produce, pursuant to subsection (2), upon the requests of a
police officer, evidence that the motor vehicle is insured under chapter 31
of Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, being sections
500.3101 to 500.3179 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. An owner or
operator of a motor vehicle who fails to produce evidence under this
subsection when requested to produce that evidence is responsible for a
civil infraction.
2) A certificate of insurance, if issued by an insurance company, which
certificate states that security which meets the requirements of sections
3101 and 3102 of Act No. 218 of the public Acts of 1956, as amended,
being sections 500.3101 and 500.3102 of the Michigan Compiled laws, is
in force shall be accepted as prima facie evidence that insurance is in
force for the motor vehicle described in the certificate of insurance until
the expiration date shown on the certificate. The certificate, in addition to
describing the motor vehicles for which insurance is in effect, shall state
the name of each person named on the policy, policy declaration, or a
declaration certificate whose operation of the vehicle would cause the
liability coverage of that insurance to become void.
3) If an owner of a motor vehicle is determined to be responsible for a
violation of subsection (1), the court in which the civil infraction
determination is entered may require the person to surrender his or her
operator's or chauffeur's license unless proof that the vehicle has
insurance meeting the requirements of section 3102 of Act No. 218 to the
Public Acts of 1956, as amended, being Section 500.3102 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws, is submitted to the court. If the court requires the license
to be surrendered, the court shall order the secretary of state to suspend
the person's license and shall forward the surrendered license and a
certificate of civil infraction to the secretary of state. Upon receipt of the
certificate of civil infraction and the surrendered license, the secretary of
state shall suspend the person's license beginning with the date on which
a person is determined to be responsible for the civil infraction, for a
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-85
period of 30 days or until proof of insurance which meets the requirements
of section 3102 of Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, is
submitted to the secretary of state, whichever occurs later. If the license is
not forwarded, an explanation of the reason why it is not forwarded shall
be attached. A person who submits proof of insurance to the secretary of
state under this subsection shall pay a service fee of $10.00 to the
secretary of state. The person shall not be required to be examined as set
forth in section 320c of Acts No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as
amended, being Section 257.320c.
4) An owner or operator of a motor vehicle who knowingly produces false
evidence under this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $500-
00, or both.
5) Points shall not be entered on a driver's record pursuant to section 320a
of Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, being Section
257.320a for a violation of this section.
6) This section does not apply to the owner or operator of a motor vehicle
that is registered in a state other than this state or a foreign country or
province.
(Rev. 03-17-1992)
5.70c. Mandatory Motor Vehicle Insurance; Penalties; Failure to Produce
Evidence; Rebuttable Presumption.
1) A nonresident owner or registrant of a motor vehicle or motorcycle not
registered in the State of Michigan shall not operate or permit the motor
vehicle or motorcycle to be operated in the State of Michigan for an
aggregate of more than 30 days in any calendar year unless he or she
continuously maintains security for the payment of benefits pursuant to
MCL 500.3004 through MCL 500.3037.
2) An owner or registrant of a motor vehicle or motorcycle with respect to
which security is required, who operates the motor vehicle or motorcycle
or permits it to be operated upon a public highway or place open to the
public in the City of Troy, without having in full force and effect security
complying with MCL 500.3101, MCL 500.3102 or MCL 500.3103 is guilty
of a misdemeanor. A person who operates a motor vehicle or motorcycle
upon a public highway in the City of Troy with the knowledge that the
owner or registrant does not have security in full force and effect is guilty
of a misdemeanor. A person convicted of a misdemeanor under this
section shall be fined not more than $500.00, imprisoned for not more
than 90 days, or both.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-86
3) The failure of a person to produce evidence that a motor vehicle or
motorcycle has in full force and effect security complying with this MCL
500.3101, MCL 500.3102 or MCL 500.3103 on the date of the issuance of
the citation, creates a rebuttable presumption in a prosecution under
subsection (2) that the motor vehicle or motorcycle did not have in full
force and effect security complying with MCL 500.3101, MCL 500.3102 or
MCL 500.3103 on the date of the issuance of the citation.
(Rev. 03-13-1995)
5.71. Driving or Moving Unsafe Vehicles Prohibited; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not drive or move, and an owner shall not cause or
knowingly permit, to be driven or moved on any street, any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger
any person, which does not contain those parts, or is not at all times
equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment, as required by this code, or which is equipped in any manner
in violation of this code.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.71a. Equipment, Exceptions. The provisions of this code or of the act with respect to
equipment on vehicles does not apply to implements of husbandry, road
machinery, road rollers, or farm tractors, except as made applicable by this code
or by the act.
5.72. Additional Parts and Accessories. Nothing contained in this code shall be
construed to prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle
not inconsistent with the provisions of this code or the laws of this state.
5.73. Lights Required; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Every vehicle on a street within this governmental unit shall be equipped
with lights which shall be lighted pursuant to the provisions of the act.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.73a. Dimming Lights; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within 500
feet, the driver shall use a distribution of light or composite beam which is
aimed so that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the
oncoming driver.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-87
5.74.1 Spot Lamps; Fog Lamps; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than 2 spot lamps, except
that a motorcycle shall not be equipped with more than 1 spot lamp. Every
lighted spot lamp shall be aimed and used upon approaching another
vehicle so that part of the beam is not directed into the eyes of the
approaching driver. Spot lamps shall not emit light that is other than white
or amber.
2) A motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than 2 fog lamps
mounted on the front at a height of not less than 12, but not more than 30
inches above the level surface on which the vehicle stands. The fog lamps
shall be aimed so that, when the vehicle is not loaded, none of the highintensity
portion of the light to the left of the center of the vehicle, at a
distance of 25 feet ahead, projects higher than a level of 4 inches below
the level of the center of the lamp from which it is emitted. Lighted fog
lamps that meet the requirements of this subsection may be used with
lower head lamp beams.
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.76. Running Board Courtesy Lamps; Cowl or Fender Lamps; Backing Lights;
Additional Lamps or Reflectors; Flashing, Rotating, or Oscillating Lights;
Warning Lamps, Violation as a Civil Infraction or Misdemeanor.
1) A motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than 2 side cowl or fender
lamps that emit an amber or white light without glare.
2) A motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than 1 running board
courtesy lamp on each side that emits a white or amber light without glare.
3) Backing lights that emit red, amber, or white light may be mounted on the
rear of a motor vehicle if the switch that controls the light is arranged so
that it may be turned on only when the vehicle is in reverse gear. When
unlighted, the backing lights shall be covered or otherwise arranged so as
not to reflect objectionable glare in the eyes of drivers of vehicles
approaching from the rear.
4) Lamps or reflectors on a vehicle, other than those expressly required or
permitted by the provisions of this chapter shall, if visible from the front,
display or reflect a white or amber light if visible from either side, display
or reflect an amber or red light; and if visible from the rear, display or
reflect a red light, except as otherwise provided by law.
5) The use or possession of flashing, oscillating, or rotating red, blue, or
amber lights is prohibited, except under the following circumstances:
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-88
a) Publicly owned police vehicles shall be equipped with flashing,
rotating, or oscillating red or blue lights for use in the performance of
police duties.
b) Publicly owned fire vehicles and ambulances that are available for
public use or for use by the United States, this state, or any unit
thereof, whether publicly or privately owned, shall be equipped with
flashing, rotating, or oscillating red lights and shall be used as
required by safety.
c) School buses shall be equipped with flashing red lights which shall be
actuated by the driver only when the school bus is stopped or is stopping on
a highway in accordance with section 682 of the act.
d) When authorized by the department of state police, private motor vehicles
owned by volunteer or paid firemen, volunteer ambulance drivers, or
licensed ambulance drivers or attendants may be equipped with flashing,
rotating, or oscillating red lights for use when responding to an emergency
call if, when in use, the flashing, rotating, or oscillating red lights are
mounted on the roof section of the vehicle, either as a permanent installation
or by means of suction cups or magnets, and are clearly visible in a 360
degree arc from a distance of 500 feet. A person who operates lights under
this subsection at any time other than when responding to an emergency call
is guilty of a misdemeanor.
e) Flashing, rotating, or oscillating amber lights that are placed in such position
as to be visible throughout an arc of 360 degrees shall be used by state,
county, or municipal vehicles which are engaged in the removal of ice, snow,
or other material from the highway and in other operations designed to
control ice and snow.
f) Vehicles that are used to perform public utility services, automobile service
cars and wreckers, vehicles engaged in authorized highway repair or
maintenance, vehicles of peace officers, vehicles operated by rural letter
carriers, vehicles utilized for snow removal, and farm tractors may be
equipped with flashing, rotating, or oscillating amber lights. However,
wreckers may be equipped with flashing, rotating, or oscillating red lights
which shall be activated only when a wrecker is engaged in removing or
assisting vehicles at the scene of a traffic accident or disablement. The
flashing, rotating, or oscillating amber lights shall not be activated, except in
those circumstances when the warning produced by the light is required for
public safety.
g) Any lights or reflectors on a vehicle, except when otherwise authorized by
this code or Michigan state law, shall, if visible from the front, display or
reflect a white or amber light; if visible from either side, display or reflect an
amber light; and if visible from the rear, display or reflect a red light.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-89
h) Police vehicles, ambulances, and fire vehicles may display a flashing,
rotating, or oscillating white light in conjunction with an authorized
emergency light as prescribed in this section.
i) A private motor vehicle of a physician who is responding to an emergency
call may be equipped with, and the physician may use, flashing, rotating, or
oscillating red lights which are mounted on the roof section of the vehicle,
either as a permanent installation or by means of magnets or suction cups,
and which are clearly visible in a 360 degree arc from a distance of 500 feet
when in use. The physician shall first obtain written authorization from the
county Sheriff.
j) A person who is engaged in the manufacture, sale, or repair of flashing,
rotating, or oscillating lights governed by this subsection may possess such
lights for purposes of his or her employment, but shall not activate them on
the highway unless authorized to do so under the provisions of subsection
(6) of this section.
6) A person shall not sell, loan, or otherwise furnish a flashing, rotating, or
oscillating blue or red light which is designed primarily for installation on an
authorized emergency vehicle to any person, except a duly constituted police
officer, sheriff, deputy sheriff, authorized physician, volunteer or paid fireman,
volunteer ambulance driver, or licensed ambulance driver or attendant of this
state or a county or municipality within the state, or a person who is engaged
in the business of operating an ambulance or wrecker service. This
subsection does not prohibit an authorized vehicle that is equipped with
flashing, rotating, or oscillating blue or red lights from being operated by a
person other than as described in this section, if the person receives
authorization to operate the emergency vehicle from a policeman, sheriff,
deputy sheriff, volunteer or paid fireman, volunteer ambulance driver,
licensed ambulance driver or attendant, authorized physician, or person who
operates an ambulance or wrecker service, except that the authorization shall
not permit the person to operate lights as described in subsection (5) a), b),
(d), (g), or (h) of this section or to exercise the privileges described in section
603 of the act. A person who operates an authorized emergency vehicle in
violation of the terms of such authorization is guilty of a misdemeanor.
7) This section shall not be construed to prohibit, restrict, or limit the use of
lights that are authorized or required under sections 697, 697a, and 698a of
the act.
8) Any vehicle may be equipped with lamps which may be used for the purpose
of warning the operators of other vehicles of the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring the exercise of unusual care in approaching,
overtaking, or passing and, when so equipped, may display such warning in
addition to any other warning signals required by law. The lamps used to
display such warning to the front shall be mounted at the same level and as
widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall display simultaneously
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-90
flashing white or amber lights or any shade of color between white and
amber. The lamps used to display such warning to the rear shall be mounted
at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and shall
show simultaneously flashing amber or red lights or any shade of color
between amber and red. These warning lights shall be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions at night.
10) A person who violates subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), or (8) of this section is
responsible for a civil infraction. Violations of subsections (5) or (6) of this
section are misdemeanors.
5.77. Slow-Moving Vehicle; Reflective Devices Required; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) When operated on the highway, a vehicle which has a maximum potential
speed of 25 miles an hour, an implement of husbandry, a farm tractor, or
special mobile equipment shall be identified with a reflective device as
follows:
a) An equilateral triangle in shape which is not less than 16 inches
wide at the base and not less than 14 inches in height and which
has a dark red border that is not less than 1 3/4 inches wide and is
made of highly reflective beaded material.
b) A center triangle which is not less than 12 1/4 inches on each side
and which is made of yellow-orange fluorescent material.
c) The device shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, broad base
down, not less than 3, nor more than 5 feet above the ground and
as near the center of the vehicle as possible. The use of this
reflective device is restricted to use on slow-moving vehicles
specified in this section. Use of such reflective device on any other
type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.78. Turn Signal Requirements; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not sell, offer for sale, or operate on any street any vehicle
manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1955, except for those
vehicles exempted from certificate of title requirements under the
provisions of the act, unless the vehicle is equipped with mechanical or
electrical turn signals which meet the requirements of the act. This section
does not apply to a motorcycle or a moped.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-91
5.78a. Stop Lamp Requirements; 'Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not sell, offer for sale, or operate on the highway any
vehicles manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1965, except for
those exempted from certificate of title requirements under the provisions
of the act, unless the vehicle is equipped with 2 rear stop lamps, except
on a motorcycle or a moped, which meet the requirements of the act. A
motorcycle or moped shall have 1 rear stop lamp.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.79. Brake requirements; violation as civil infraction.
1) The requirements for brake equipment are as follows:
a) A motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or moped, when operated
on a highway, shall be equipped with brakes which are adequate to
control the movement of, and to stop and hold, the vehicle, including
2 separate means of applying the brakes to not less than 2 wheels. If
these 2 separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any
way, they shall be constructed so that the failure of 1 part of the
operating mechanism still leaves the motor vehicle with brakes on
not less than 2 wheels.
b) A motorcycle or moped, when operated on a highway, shall be
equipped with not less than 2 brakes, 1 on the front wheel and 1 on
the rear wheel, which may be operated by hand or foot.
c) A trailer or semitrailer of a gross weight of 5,000 pounds or more,
when operated on a highway, shall be equipped with brakes which
are adequate to control the movement of, and to stop and hold, the
vehicle and which are designed to be applied by the driver of the
towing motor vehicle from its cab.
d) A new motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer which is hereafter sold in
this state and which is operated on the highways shall be equipped
with brakes that are adequate to control the movement of, and to
stop and hold, the vehicle, except for a motorcycle or moped, and
except that a semitrailer or trailer of less than 3,300 pounds gross
weight need not be equipped with brakes. This subdivision does not
apply to a trailer or semitrailer which is owned by a farmer and which
is used exclusively in connection with the farming operations of the
farmer and is not used for hire. A truck or truck tractor that has 3 or
more axles need not have brakes on the front wheels. A truck or
truck tractor that is equipped with not less than 2 steerable axles
shall require brakes on (1) one of the steerable axles.
e) In any combination of motor-driven vehicles, means shall be
provided for applying the rearmost trailer brakes, for a trailer
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-92
equipped with brakes, in approximate synchronism with the brakes
on the towing vehicle and for developing the required braking effort
on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate or means shall be
provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost trailer
equipped with brakes or both of the means specified in this
subdivision which are capable of being used alternatively may be
employed.
f) A motor vehicle and any combination of vehicles, except pole
trailers, motorcycles, and mopeds, shall be equipped with parking
brakes which are adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on
which it is operated, under all conditions of loading on a surface
free from snow, ice, or loose material. The parking brakes shall be
capable of being applied in conformance with the requirements of
section 5.79 of this code by the driver's muscular effort, by spring
action, or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by
the service brakes or another source of power if failure of the
service brake actuation system or another power assisting
mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes from being applied.
The parking brakes shall be designed so that when once applied
they remain applied with the required effectiveness despite
exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind. The
same brake drums, brake shoes, lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism
normally associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used
for both the service brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of
applying the parking brakes and the service brakes are connected
in any way, they shall be constructed so that failure of I part still
leave the vehicle with operative brakes.
g) The brake shoes operating within or on the drums of the vehicle
wheels of a motor vehicle may be used for both service and hand
operation.
2) A motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall be capable,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, of being stopped on a dry,
smooth, level road which is free from loose material within the distances
specified in this subsection or shall be capable of being decelerated at a
sustained rate corresponding to these distances upon initial application of
the service (foot) brake.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-93
Feet to stop from
20 miles per hour
Deceleration in
feet per second
Vehicles or combination of
vehicles having brakes on
all wheels
30 14.0
Vehicles or combination of
vehicles not having brakes
on all wheels
40
10.7
3) All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
adjusted to operate as-equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on the opposite side of the vehicle.
4) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.80. Horn Requirements; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Every motor vehicle, when operated on a street, shall be equipped with a
horn which is in good working order and which is capable of emitting
sound that is audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less
than 200 feet, but a horn or other warning device shall not emit an
unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor
vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to insure safe operation, give
audible warning with his or her horn, but shall not otherwise use such horn
when on a street.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.80a. Windshield Required; Exemptions; Goggles Required for Operator of
Motorcycle; Violation as Infraction.
1) A motor vehicle shall not be operated on the streets or highways of this
governmental unit unless the vehicle is equipped with a windshield of
sufficient dimensions to protect the driver and occupants from insects,
other airborne objects, and highway surface water and debris when the
motor vehicle is moving forward. A farm tractor, other implements of
husbandry, and historic vehicles, as defined in section 803a of the act, are
exempt from this section. If a motorcycle operated on the streets and
highways in excess of 35 miles an hour is not equipped with a windshield,
the operator shall wear goggles with transparent lenses or a transparent
face shield or eye glasses. The goggles, eye glasses, or face shield shall
be made of shatter-resistant material and shall be of sufficient size to
protect the operator's eyes against insects, other airborne material, and
highway surface water and debris.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-94
5.81. Windshield; Obstructions; Cleaning Devices; Wipers; Additional
Equipment; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not drive a motor vehicle with a sign, poster, or other
nontransparent material on the front windshield, sidewings, or side or rear
windows of the vehicle which obstructs the driver's clear view of the
highway or an intersecting highway. A person shall not drive a motor
vehicle with a dangling ornament or other suspended object which in any
way obstructs the vision of the driver of the vehicle, except as authorized
by law.
2) The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for
cleaning rain, show, or other moisture from the windshield. The device
shall be constructed so as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the
vehicle. A vehicle that is licensed as an historical vehicle is exempt from
this subsection if the vehicle was not originally equipped with such a
device.
3) Every windshield wiper on a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good
working order.
4) On and after October 1, 1955, a licensed commercial vehicle shall not be
operated on the highways at any time between December 15 and March
15, both dates inclusive, unless the vehicle is equipped with a hot air
windshield defroster, an electrically heated windshield, or other means
capable of keeping the windshield heated and maintained in operable
condition at all times.
5) A licensed motor vehicle that is manufactured after January 1, 1956, shall
not be operated on the highways unless it is equipped with a windshield
washer which is maintained in operable condition at all times and which is
capable of cleaning the windshield so that the driver has a clear view of
the highway or an intersecting highway.
6) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7) A person shall not drive a motor vehicle with either of the following:
a) A window application, reflective firm, or nonreflective film upon or in
the front windshield, the side windows immediately adjacent to the
driver or front passenger, or the sidewings adjacent to and forward
of the driver or front passenger, except that a tinted film may be
used along the top edge of the windshield and the side windows or
sidewings immediately adjacent to the driver or front passenger if
the material does not extend more than 4 inches from the top of the
windshield, or lower than the shade band, whichever is closer to
the top of the windshield.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-95
b) A rear window or side window to the rear of the driver composed of,
covered by, or treated with, a material that creates a total solar
reflectance of 35% or more in the visible light range, including a
silver or gold reflective film.
8) A person shall not drive a motor vehicle if driver visibility through the rear
window is obstructed, unless the vehicle is equipped with 2 rearview
mirrors, 1 on each side adjusted so that the operator has a clear view of
the highway behind the vehicle.
9) This section shall not apply to any of the following:
a) The use of draperies, louvers, or other special window treatments,
except those specifically designated in this section, on the rear
window, or a side window to the rear of the driver if the vehicle is
equipped with 2 outside rearview mirrors, 1 on each side, adjusted
so that the driver has a clear view of the highway behind the
vehicle.
b) This use of non-reflective, smoked or tinted glass, non-reflective
film, perforated window screen, or other decorative window
application on the rear window or a side window to the rear of the
driver.
c) The placement of a necessary certificate or sticker that does not
obstruct the driver's clear view of the roadway or an intersecting
roadway.
d) A vehicle registered in another state, territory, commonwealth of
the United States, or another country or province.
e) A special window treatment or application determined necessary by
a physician, for the protection of a person who is light or
photosensitive, if the owner or operator of a motor vehicle has in
possession a letter signed by a physician, indicating the need for
the special window treatment or application as a medical necessity.
However, the special window treatment or application shall not
interfere with or obstruct the driver's clear vision of the highway or
an intersecting highway.
10) Subsections (7) a) and b), (8), and (9) a), b), c), (d), and (e) of this section
shall take effect and become civil infractions on the effective date of Act
No. 220 of the Public Acts of 1980, being 257.709 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws.
5.82. Child Restraint Systems.
1) Except as provided in this section, or as otherwise provided by law, or
federal regulation, each driver transporting a child less than 4 years of age
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-96
in a motor vehicle shall properly secure each child a child restraint system
that meets the standards prescribed in 49 C.F.R. 571.213.
2) This section does not apply to any child being nursed.
3) This section does not apply if the motor vehicle being driven is a bus,
taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not required to be
equipped with safety belts under federal law or regulations.
4) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5) Points shall not be assessed for a violation of this section.
6) The secretary of state may exempt by rules promulgated pursuant to the
Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of
1969, (MCL 24.201 to 24.328), as amended, a class of children from the
requirements of this section, if the secretary of state determines that the
use of the child restraint system required under subsection (1) is impractical
because of physical unfitness, a medical problem, or body size. The
secretary of state may specify alternate means of protection for children
exempted under this subsection.
(Rev. 03-06-2000)
5.83. Safety Belts.
1) Each driver and front seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a
street or highway in this city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened
safety belt, except that a child less than 4 years of age shall be protected as
required in section 5.82. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child
4 years of age or more but less than 16 years of age in the front seat of the
motor vehicle shall secure the child in a property adjusted and fastened
safety belt.
2) Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child 4 years of age or more
but less than 16 years of age in a motor vehicle shall secure the child in a
property adjusted and fastened safety belt.
3) It shall not be a violation of this section when a passenger, other than a
front seat passenger, between the ages of 4 and 16, is unrestrained when
the number of passengers exceeds the number of available seat belts, as
long as all available seat belts are utilized in compliance with this section.
For those vehicles equipped only with a front seat, the driver may transport
a child between the ages of 4 and 16 in the front seat without a safety belt
when there are more passengers than safety belts available for use.
4) This section shall not apply to a driver or passenger of:
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-97
a) A motor vehicle manufactured before January 1, 1965.
b) A bus.
c) A motorcycle.
d) A moped.
e) A motor vehicle if the driver or passenger possesses a written
verification from a physician that the driver or-passenger is unable to
wear a safety belt for physical or medical reasons.
f) A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with safety belts
under federal law.
g) A commercial or United States postal service vehicle which makes
frequent stops for the purpose of pickup or delivery of goods or
services.
h) A motor vehicle operated by a rural carrier of the United States Postal
Service while serving his or her rural postal route.
5) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6) Costs shall not be ordered in excess of $100.60.
7) Points shall not be assessed for a violation of this section.
(Rev. 03-06-2000)
5.85. Tire Requirements; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not operate on a public highway of this state a vehicle or
special mobile equipment which has metal or plastic tract or a tire which is
equipped with metal that comes in contact with the surface of the road or
which has a partial contact of metal or plastic with the surface of the road,
except as provided in subsections 3), 4), and 5) of this section.
2) A person shall not operate on a highway a vehicle which has a tire that has
on its periphery a block, stud, flange, cleat, spike, or other protuberance of
a material other than rubber which project beyond the tread of the traction
surface of the tire, except as provided in subsections 2), 3), and 4) of this
section. A person may,, however, use farm machinery with a tire having a
protuberance which will not injure a highway. A person may also use a tire
chain of reasonable proportion on a vehicle when required for safety
because of snow, ice, or other condition that tends to cause a vehicle to
skid.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-98
3) A person may operate on a highway a vehicle which has a pneumatic tire in
which wire of .075 inches in diameter or less is embedded, if the tire is
constructed so that the percent of metal in contact with the highway is not
more than 5% of the total tire area in contact with the roadway, except that
during the first 1,000 miles of use or operation of the tire, the metal in
contact with the highway shall not be more than 20% of the tire area.
4) A person may operate on a highway a vehicle which has a pneumatic tire in
which are inserted ice grips or tire studs, if the person is a law enforcement
officer operating a vehicle owned by a law enforcement agency, a person
operating an ambulance, or a United States postal service rural carrier
driving a vehicle the rural carrier owns and maintains as a prerequisite to
employment in the postal service.
5) A person shall not operate a vehicle on a highway when a tire in use on that
vehicle is unsafe as provided in subsection (7) of this section.
6) A person who is in the business of selling tires shall not sell or offer for sale
for highway use a tire which is unsafe as provided in subsection 7) of this
section.
7) A tire is unsafe if it is in any of the following conditions:
a) Has a part of the belting material, tire cords, or plys exposed.
b) Has evidence of cord or tread separations.
c) Is worn to or below the minimum tread level in 2 or more adjacent
major grooves at 3 or more locations spaced around the
circumference of the tire. Minimum allowable tread levels are as
follows:
i) Motorcycles and moped - 1/32 inch front and rear.
ii) Passenger cars and vehicles weighing less than 10,000 pounds -
2/32 inch front and rear.
iii) Vehicles weighing 10,000 pounds or more - 4/32 inch front and
2/32 inch rear. Measurements shall not be made at locations of
tread wear indicators or tie bars. A motor vehicle that is licensed
as an historic vehicle under section 803a of the act is exempt
from the tread depth requirements of this subsection.
d) Has a marking "not for highway use," "for racing purposes only," "for
farm use only," or "unsafe for highway use."
e) Has been regrooved or recut below the original tread design depth,
except in the cause of special purpose designed tires which have
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-99
extra undertread rubber provided for this purpose and which are
identified as such tires.
8) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.87. Mirror Requirements; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not drive on a highway a motor vehicle which is
constructed or loaded so as to prevent the driver from obtaining a view of
the highway to the rear by looking backward from the driver's position,
unless the vehicle is equipped with a mirror located to reflect to the driver
a view of the highway to the rear of the vehicle. In addition, all motor
vehicles shall be equipped with an outside rearview mirror on the driver's
side which shall be positioned to give the driver a rear viewing angle from
the driver's side of the vehicle, except for a motor vehicle that is licensed
as an historic vehicle if the vehicle was not originally equipped with an
outside rearview mirror. Rearview mirrors may be positioned on the
helmet or visor worn by the operator of a motorcycle if the helmet is
securely attached to the head of the operator. Every commercial vehicle
of 1/2-ton capacity or more that operates on the public highways of this
state, shall be equipped with 2 mirrors, 1 on each side, adjusted so that
the operator has a clear view of the highway behind the commercial
vehicle. The outside mirrors shall not be considered to be a part of the
vehicle for the purpose of determining the maximum width under section
717 of the Act.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.87a. Bumper Height; Vehicle Modification; Exemption; "Passenger Vehicle"
Defined; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not operate a passenger vehicle on a public highway or
street of this state unless the vehicle is equipped with a bumper or other
energy absorption system with an analogous function.
2) A person shall not modify a passenger vehicle or operate upon a public
highway or street of this state a passenger vehicle, except for a 4-wheel
drive vehicle, which has been modified, if the resultant operational altitude
of a bumper of the vehicle is less than 14, or more than 22 inches, as
measures from the ground to a load-bearing member of the horizontal
bumper bar. The suspension system of a passenger vehicle shall not be
modified to defeat the safe operation of the system.
3) A vehicle shall not be modified to cause the vehicle body or chassis to
come in contact with the ground or to expose the fuel tank to damage
from collision or to cause the wheels to come in contact with the body
under normal operation, and no part of the original suspension system
shall be disconnected to defeat the safe operation of the suspension
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-100
system. However, nothing contained in this section shall prevent the
installation of heavy-duty equipment, including shock absorbers and
overload springs, and nothing contained in this section shall prevent a
person from operating a motor vehicle on a public highway with normal
wear of the suspension system if normal wear does not affect the control
of the vehicle.
4) This section does not apply to a commercial vehicle, other than a vehicle
carrying passengers for hire, a vehicle that has a design which intrinsically
precludes conformance with the act, or to a vehicle that has an unaltered
and undamaged stock bumper or energy absorption system with an
analogous function of the type supplied by the vehicle manufacturer.
5) Installation of a shock absorber or overload spring as heavy-duty
equipment is not prohibited by this section.
6) This section shall not be construed to establish standards higher than
those formulated by the United States department of transportation for
bumpers on a passenger motor vehicle sold within the United States.
7) For purposes of this section "passenger vehicle" means a vehicle
displaying registration plates issued pursuant to section 801(l) a) of the
act.
8) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.88. Requirements for Flap-Type Devices on Commercial Vehicles; Violation as
Civil Infraction.
1) A commercial vehicle, except for a truck tractor between terminals which
is traveling at a speed of not more than 25 miles per hour, and a
combination of a commercial vehicle and trailer or semitrailer, when used
on a highway, shall be constructed, equipped, or operated to prevent
water or other road surface substances from being thrown from the rear
wheels of the vehicle or combination at tangents of more than 22 1/2
degrees measured from the road surface. If a flat-type device is used, it
shall not have attached any type of lamp, breakable reflective material, or
reflecting buttons, and the device shall not extend beyond the 96-inch
maximum width of the vehicle or combination.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.89. Lamp or Flag On Projecting Load Required; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When the load on any vehicle extends to the rear 4 feet or more beyond
the bed or body of such vehicle, a red light or lantern that is plainly visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the sides and rear shall be
displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, during the hours between
1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise and at any other time
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-101
when there is not sufficient light to clearly discern persons and vehicles on
the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead. The red light or lantern
required under this section shall be in addition to the red rear light
required on every vehicle.
2) At times other than between 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before
sunrise, a red flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square shall be
displayed at the extreme rear end of such load and shall be hung so that
the entire area is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the
rear.
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.90. Mufflers Required; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A motor vehicle, including a motorcycle or a moped, shall at all times be
equipped with a muffler that is in good working order which prevents
excessive or unusual noise. A person shall not remove, destroy, or
damage the baffles contained in the muffler. A person shall not use a
muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device on a motorcycle or moped on any
street or highway.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.90a. Operation of Vehicle with Unnecessary Noise Prohibited; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) A person shall not operate a motor vehicle with unnecessary noise and
shall not start, move, or turn a motor vehicle or apply the brakes or the
power on a motor vehicle or in any manner operate the vehicle so as to
cause the tires to squeal or the tires or vehicle to make any noise not
usually connected with the operation of the motor vehicle, except in case
of an emergency.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.91. Excessive Fumes or Smoke; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be
equipped and adjusted to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or
smoke.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-102
5.92. Devices for Causing Flame or Smoke from Motor Vehicle Prohibited;
Violation as Civil Infraction; Replacing Muffler or Exhaust Which Causes
Vehicle to Exceed Established Noise Levels Prohibited; Modifying,
Repairing,, Replacing, or Removing Part of Exhaust Which Causes Vehicle
to Exceed Established Noise Levels Prohibited; Sale Of Second-Hand
Vehicle by Dealer to Comply With Act; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not install, sell, or distribute any device for the purpose of
causing flame or smoke to be emitted from a motor vehicle, except for
highway maintenance vehicles, and a person shall not use any such
device on a motor vehicle not so excepted.
2) A person, either acting for himself or herself or as the agent or employee
of another, shall not sell, install, or replace a muffler or exhaust part which
causes the motor vehicle to which the muffler or exhaust part is attached
to exceed the noise limits established by the act or this code.
3) A person shall not modify, repair, replace, or remove parts of an exhaust
system which causes the motor vehicle to which the system is attached to
produce noise in excess of the levels established by the act and shall not
operate a motor vehicle so altered on a street or highway.
4) A dealer shall not sell a used motor vehicle, as defined by section 78 of
the act, which is not in compliance with the act for use on a street or
highway.
5) A person who violates subsection (1) of this section is responsible for a
civil infraction. Violations of subsection (2), (3), or (4) are misdemeanors.
5.93. Display on Vehicle of Official Designation, Sign, or Insignia Prohibited;
Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) An owner shall not display on any part of his or her vehicle, or knowingly
permit the display of, any official designation, sign, or insignia of any
public or quasi-public corporation; municipal, state, or national
department; or government subdivision without authority of such agency.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.94. Television Set; Placement in Motor Vehicle; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A person shall not drive any motor vehicle equipped with any television
viewer screen, or other means of visually receiving a television broadcast
which is located in the motor vehicle at any point forward of the back of
the driver's seat or which is visible to the driver while operating a motor
vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-103
5.95. Size and Weight Restriction; Violation as Misdemeanor; Exception.
1) No person shall drive or move or cause or knowingly permit to be driven
or moved on any street any vehicle or vehicles of width, height, length or
weight in excess of the imitations governing size and weight restrictions
specified in the Michigan vehicle Code, Act 300, Public Acts of 1949 as
amended, except as permitted by special permit issued under the
provisions of the Troy City Code.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
5.96. Merchandising within Highway Right-of-Way Prohibited; Exception;
Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person, firm, or corporation shall not sell, offer for sale, display, or attempt to
display for sale any goods, wares, produce, fruit, vegetables, or merchandise
within the right-of-way of highway, except as provided in subsection 4) of section
8.14 of this code. This section shall not be construed to interfere with any
permanently established business presently located on or partially on private
property, to grant to the owner of any additional rights or authority that the owner
may not now possess, or to diminish the legal rights or authority that the duties of
the authority that has jurisdiction of the right-of-way.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Rev. 09-14-1981)
5.97. School Buses; Signs; Overtaking, Meeting, or Passing; Violation as
Misdemeanor; Discharge Of Passengers; Signal Lights; Mirror; Evidence of
Violation; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A school bus that transports pupils outside of incorporated cities or
villages and inside of incorporated cities or villages where stopping of
school busses is controlled by local ordinance shall be painted and shall
contain signs on the back and front of the school bus, as approved b y the
department of transportation and the superintendent of public instruction.
2) The drive of a vehicle that overtakes or meets a school bus which has
stopped and which is displaying 2 alternately flashing red lights located at
the same level shall bring the vehicle to a full stop not less than 10 feet
from the school bus and shall not proceed until the school bus resumes
motion or the visual signals are no longer actuated. The driver of the
school bus, before resuming motion, shall deactivate flashing lights, shall
permit stopped traffic to proceed, and shall, when resuming motion,
proceed in a manner that will allow contested traffic to disperse by
keeping the bus as near to the right side of the road as can be done with
safety.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-104
3) Passengers who cross as road upon being discharged from a school bus
shall cross in front of the stopped school bus.
4) At an intersection where traffic is controlled by an officer or a traffic stopand-
go signal, a vehicle need not be brought to a full stop before passing
a stopped school bus, but may proceed past the school bus at a speed
not greater than is reasonable and proper, but not more than 10 mile an
hour, and shall proceed with due caution for the safety of passengers
being received or discharged from the school bus.
5) If the stopping for school buses is controlled by local ordinance, the
ordinance shall be enforceable if signs giving notice of the local traffic
regulation are posted on or at the entrance to the area, or part of the area
affected as may be most appropriate or sufficiently legible as to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person.
6) The driver of a vehicle who fails to stop for a school bus as required by
subsections 2) to 5) of this section, who passes as school bus in violation
of subsections 2) to 5) of this section, or who fails to stop for a school bus
in violation of an ordinance which complies with subsections 2) to 5) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
7) A school bus driver shall not stop the bus for the purpose of receiving or
discharging passengers unless the bus is clearly visible in its stopped
position to approaching or overtaking drivers of vehicles for a distance of
not less than 500 feet.
8) The driver of a vehicle on a highway that has been divided into 2
roadways by leaving an interfering space, by a physical barrier, or by
clearly indicated dividing sections constructed so as to impede vehicular
traffic need not stop upon meeting a school bus which has stopped across
the dividing space, barrier, or section.
9) A school bus that transports pupils outside of incorporated cities or
villages and inside of incorporated cities or villages where stopping of
school buses is controlled by local ordinance, in addition to any other
equipment and distinctive marking required by law, shall be equipped with
signal lamps mounted as high and as widely spaced laterally as
practicable,. The lamps shall be capable of displaying to the front 2
alternately flashing red lights located at the same level and to the rear 2
alternately flashing red lights located at the same level. The lights shall
have sufficient intensity to be visible from a distance of not less than 500
feet in normal sunlight and shall be actuated by the driver of the school
bus when, but only when, the vehicle is stopped and for a distance of not
less than 200 feet in advance of a top for the purpose of receiving or
discharging school children. The lights shall not be actuated inside of
incorporated cities or villages unless stopping of school buses is
controlled by local ordinance.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-105
10) A school bus shall be equipped with the mirror, convex in shape, which is
not less than 7 1/2 inches in diameter and which is firmly mounted at hood
or fender top height in front of the bus. The mirror shall be located on
either the left of right side of the bus in a manner so that the seated driver
may observe the road from the front bumper forward t the point where
direct observation is possible.
11) In a proceeding for violation of subsection (2) of this section, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was in
violation of subsection (2) of this section, together with proof that the
defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was, at the time of
the violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in
evidence a presumption than the registered owner of the vehicle was the
driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation.
12) Except as otherwise provided in subsection 2) of this section, a person
who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. A violation of
subsection 2) of this section is a misdemeanor.
(Rev. 09-14-1981)
5.98. Opening Vehicle Doors so as to Impede Traffic Prohibited; Violations as
Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not open a door of a vehicle in a manner that interferes
with or impedes the flow of traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.98a. Blocking, obstructing, impeding, or otherwise interfering with traffic
prohibited; violation as civil infraction.
1) A person without authority shall not block, obstruct, impede, or otherwise
interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a public
street or highway by means of a barricade, object, device, or with his or
her person. This section does not apply to persons who maintain,
rearrange, or construct public utilities in, or adjacent to, a street or
highway.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.99 Towed vehicles; violation as civil infraction.
1) A passenger vehicle shall not be driven on any highway drawing or having
attached thereto more than 1 vehicle trailer.
2) The draw bar or other connection between any 2 vehicles, 1 of which is
towing or drawing the other on a highway, shall not be more than 15 feet
in length for 1 vehicle to the other. When such connection consists of a
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-106
chain, rope, or cable, a red flag or other signal or cloth not less than 12
inches both in length and width shall be displayed on such connection.
3) Every vehicle or trailer drawn by any motor-propelled vehicle shall be so
attached to such vehicle with such forms of coupling devices as will
prevent such vehicle or trailer from being deflected more than 6 inches
from the path of the towing vehicle's wheels. Such vehicle or trailer shall
also be connected to the towing vehicle by suitable safety chains or
devices, I on each side of the vehicle, and each such chain or device and
connection so used shall be of sufficient strength to haul the trailer when
loaded.
4) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
5.100. Solicitation of Towing. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation,
operating a truck or other vehicle used to push, tow or otherwise service other
vehicles to operate such vehicle for the purpose of soliciting business on any
freeway in the City of Troy or any ramp connecting such freeway to surface
streets, or to engage in such solicitation on such freeways or ramps in the City of
Troy.
5.101. Towing Vehicles on Freeways and Expressways. No disabled motor vehicle
shall be towed on any freeway between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or
between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. except that any vehicle disabled
on a freeway during such hours may be towed to the nearest ramp and then to
the surface streets.
6.0 OPERATION OF BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, MOPEDS, AND TOY
VEHICLES.
6.1. Operator of Motorcycle or Moped; Rights and Duties; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) Every person who operates a motorcycle or a moped on a roadway shall
be granted all the rights, and shall be subject to all the duties, applicable
to the driver of a vehicle under this code, except as to those provisions
which by their nature do not apply.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.2. Supplementary Provisions. The provisions of this chapter applicable to
motorcycles and mopeds shall be considered supplementary to other provisions
of this code governing the operation of such vehicles.
6.4. Riders to Obey Traffic Law. Every person who rides a. bicycle or an electric
personal assistive mobility device on a roadway shall be granted all of the rights,
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle under
state, local, and/or federal law or regulation.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-107
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
6.4a. Limited Access Highway; Pedestrians and Certain Vehicles Prohibited;
Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not operate a moped, farm tractor, motorcycle with less than a
125-cubic centimeter engine, or other self-propelled farm implement, nor shall
any pedestrian, bicycle, except as provided in this code, or other non-motorized
traffic be permitted, on any limited access highway in this state. Bicycles shall be
permitted on paths which are constructed separately from the roadway and
which are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.6. Obedience to Traffic-Control Devices.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) Any person who operates a bicycle or an electric personal assistive mobility
device shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs, and
other control devices applicable to vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police
officer.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.7. Obedience to Pedestrian Regulations when Dismounted from a Bicycle. When
authorized signs are erected which indicate that right, left, or U-turns are not permitted,
a person who operates a bicycle or an electric personal assistive mobility device shall
obey the direction of any such sign, except where the person dismounts to make such
turn, in which event the person shall then obey the regulations applicable to
pedestrians.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
6.8. Passengers on Motorcycles or Mopeds; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person who operates a motorcycle shall ride on and astride the permanent and
regular seat attached to the vehicle and shall not carry another person, or permit
another person to ride, on the motorcycle as a passenger, unless the motorcycle
is designed and equipped to carry more than 1 person. If the motorcycle is so
designed and equipped, the passenger may ride on the permanent and regular
seat if the motorcycle is designed for 2 persons or may ride on another seat
firmly attached to the vehicle which is to the rear or side of the operator.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-108
2) A person who operated a moped shall ride on and astride the permanent and
regular seat attached to the vehicle and shall not carry another person as a
passenger on the moped.
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.9. Bicycles and Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device; Number and Manner of
Carrying Persons.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) A person who propels a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto and shall not carry more persons at one time than
the number for which the bicycle is designed and equipped.
2) An electric personal assistive mobility device shall not be used to carry more
than one persona at a time.
(05-24-2004)
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Renumbered: 05-24-2004)
6.10. Riding on Roadways and Bicycle Paths.
1) A person who operates a bicycle, an electric personal assistive mobility device, a
motorcycle, or moped on a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of
the roadway as practicable and shall exercise due care when passing a standing
vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) A person who operates a moped, a motorcycle, or a bicycle shall not pass
between lines of traffic, but may pass in an unoccupied lane on the left of traffic
moving in his or her direction on a two-way street and on the left or right of traffic
on a one-way street.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
3) A person shall not operate an electric personal assistive mobility device on a
public roadway that has a posted speed limit of more than 25 miles per hour.
This limitation does not preclude an operator of such device from crossing a
public roadway that has a posted speed limit in excess of 25 miles per hour.
(05-24-2004)
4) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-109
(Renumbered: 05-24-04)
6.11. Riding 2 Abreast Prohibited; Exception.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) Every person who operates a bicycle, an electric personal assistive
mobility device, a motorcycle or moped on a roadway shall not ride more
than 2 abreast; except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of such vehicles.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.12. Bicycles and Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices; Use of Paths
Required When Provided.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) When a usable path for bicycles and electric personal assistive mobility
devices has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle and electric
personal assistive mobility device riders shall use such path and shall not
use the roadway.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.13. Clinging to Other Vehicles Prohibited.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) A person who rides on any bicycle, Electric personal assistive mobility
device, motorcycle, moped, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall
not attach the same of himself or herself to any vehicle on a roadway.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.14. Bicycles and Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices; Speed.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) A person shall not operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-110
2) A person shall not operate an electric personal assistive mobility device at
a speed greater than 15 miles per hour.
(05-24-2004)
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Renumbered: 05-24-2004)
6.15. Emerging From Alley, Driveway, or Building; Yielding Right-of-Way.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) The operator of a bicycle or electric personal assistive mobility device who
emerges from an alley, driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a
sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk area and,
upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.16. Carrying Articles; Height of Handlebars.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) A person who operates a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility
device, motorcycle, or moped shall not carry a package, bundle, or article
which prevents the driver from keeping both hands on the handlebars.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) A person shall not operate a motorcycle or moped equipped with
handlebars that are higher than 15 inches from the lowest point of the
underpressed saddle to the highest point of the handlegrip of the operator
on a street or highway.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.17. Bicycles; Parking on Sidewalk.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) A person shall not park a bicycle on a sidewalk where bicycle parking is
prohibited by official traffic-control devices. A person shall not park a
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-111
bicycle on a sidewalk in a manner that would unreasonably obstruct
pedestrian or other traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.17a. Bicycles; Parking on Roadway.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) Unless prohibited or restricted by traffic-control devices, a bicycle may be
parked as follows:
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
a) On the roadway at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway at
any location w here the parking of vehicles is allowed.
b) On the roadway abreast of another bicycle near the side of the
roadway at any location where the parking of vehicles is allowed.
2) In all other respects, a bicycle parked anywhere on a street shall conform
with the provisions of Chapter 106, Section 8 of the City of Troy
ordinances which regulates the parking of vehicles.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.18. Obedience to Signs Prohibiting Riding of Bicycles and Electric Personal
Assistive Mobility Devices; Toy Vehicles.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) When a sign is erected on a sidewalk that prohibits the riding of bicycles
or electric personal assistive mobility devices thereon by any person, a
person shall obey the sign.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) Toy vehicles may be used by children on sidewalks. It shall be the
responsibility of a parent or legal guardian of a child using a toy vehicle to
ensure the use of toy vehicles will not interfere with the use of the
sidewalks by pedestrians.
(05-24-04)
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-112
(Renumbered: 05-24-2004)
6.19. Riding on Sidewalks; Right-of-Way.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) A person who operates a bicycle or an electric personal assistive
mobility device on a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and
passing such pedestrian.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
6.20. Bicycles and Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices; Lights; Red
Reflector.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) Every bicycle and electric personal assistive mobility device, when in use
at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a
white light that is visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the
front. Every bicycle and electric personal assistive mobility device, when in
use at nighttime, shall also be equipped with a red reflector on the rear
that is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when
the bicycle is directly in front of the lawful upper beams of head lamps on
a motor vehicle. A lamp that emits a red light visible from a distance of
500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.22. Bicycles and Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices; Brake Required.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
1) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that enables the operator to
make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement, or which shall
enable the rider to come to a controlled stop.
(Rev. 05-24-2004)
2) An electric personal assistive mobility device shall enable the operator to
bring it to a controlled stop.
(05-24-2004)
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-113
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Renumbered: 05-24-04)
6.23. Motorcycles; Protective Helmet Required; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person who operates or rides on a motorcycle on a public thoroughfare
shall wear on his or her head a protective helmet of a type approved by
the department of state police.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.23a. Motorcycles; Protective Helmet Standards; Label. Protective helmets
required by section 6.23 of this code which are sold or offered for sale in this
governmental unit shall meet or exceed the state police standards and shall be
clearly labeled as meting those standards.
6.24. Dealers; Renting, Leasing, Or Furnishing Motorcycles or Mopeds To
Unlicensed Operators Prohibited; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A dealer shall not rent, lease, or furnish a motorcycle or moped to a
person for use on the streets and highways who is not licensed to operate
a motorcycle or moped by this state, if a resident, or by the state of which
he or she is a resident, if a nonresident.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.25. Subleasing Motorcycles or Mopeds to Unlicensed Operators Prohibited;
Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) It is unlawful for a person to whom a motorcycle or moped is rented,
leased, or furnished to rent, sublease, or otherwise authorize the use of
the motorcycle or moped on pubic streets and highways to any person
who is not licensed to operate a vehicle in this state.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
6.26. Dealers; Maintenance of Motorcycles or Mopeds in Safe Operating
Condition; Explaining Operation to Person to Whom Rented, Leased, or
Furnished; Refusing to Rent, Lease, or Furnish; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) The dealer shall maintain in safe operating condition motorcycles and
moped rented, leased, or furnished by him or her. The dealer of his or her
agents or employees shall explain the operation of the motorcycle or
moped being rented, leased, or furnished. If such dealer or his or her
agent or employee believes that this person to whom the motorcycle or
moped is to be rented, leased, or furnished is not competent to operate
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-114
such motorcycle or moped on public streets and highways, he or she shall
refuse to rent, lease, of furnish the same.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
6.27. Motorcycle Dealers; Motor Vehicle Liability Policies Required; Violation as
Misdemeanor.
1) Any dealer who rents, leases, or furnishes any motorcycle shall carry a
motor vehicle liability policy of the same type and coverage as that
outlined in section 520 of the act for each motorcycle so rented, leased, or
furnished or, in the alternative, shall demand and be shown proof that the
person renting, leasing, or being furnished a motorcycle carries a motor
vehicle liability policy of at least the type and coverage as specified in
section 520 of the act.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
7.0 PEDESTRIANS RIGHTS AND DUTIES
7.1. Pedestrians; Traffic-Control Signals; Privileges and Restrictions; Violation
as Civil Infraction.
1) Pedestrians are subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as
provided in chapter 4 of this code. At all other places, pedestrians shall be
accorded the privileges, and shall be subject to the restrictions, stated in
this chapter.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.2. Pedestrians Right-of-Way in Crosswalk; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When traffic-control signals are not in place or are not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is on the half of the roadway on which the
vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from
the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but a pedestrian shall
not suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the
path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to
yield.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.3. Passing Vehicle Stopped at Intersection to Permit Pedestrian to Cross
Prohibited; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) When any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway,
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-115
the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.3a. Limited Access Highway; Pedestrians Prohibited; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) Pedestrians are prohibited on limited access highways as provided in the
act.
3) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.5. Crossing Roadway at Right Angles to Curb Required; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) A pedestrian shall not, except in a marked crosswalk, cross a roadway at
any other place than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the
shortest route to the opposite curb.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.6. Pedestrians Yielding Right-of-Way; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Every pedestrian who crosses roadway at a point other than within a
marked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles on the roadway.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.7. Pedestrians; Yielding Right-of-Way Where Tunnel or Overhead Crossing
Provided; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Any pedestrian who crosses a roadway at a point where a pedestrian
tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles on the roadway, if signs prohibiting the crossing
of the roadway by pedestrians at such point are in place.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.8. Pedestrians; Yielding Right-of-Way to Emergency Vehicles; Violation as
Civil Infraction.
1) A pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to an authorized emergency
vehicle under the conditions prescribed in section 5.1 of this code
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-116
7.9. Pedestrians; Crossing Between Adjacent Intersections; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) Where traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross
the roadway except in a marked crosswalk.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.10. Pedestrians; Crossing Roadway in Business District; Violation as Civil
Infraction.
1) In any business district, a pedestrian shall not cross a roadway other than
in a crosswalk.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.12. Pedestrians: Walking on Roadway When Sidewalk Provided Prohibited;
Walking on Street or Highway When Sidewalks not Provided; Violation as
Civil Infraction.
1) Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for pedestrians to walk on the
roadway. Where sidewalks are not provided, pedestrians shall, when
practicable, walk on the left side of the street or highway facing traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.13. Pedestrians; Soliciting Ride, Employment, or Business in Roadway
Prohibited; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.14. Pedestrians; Soliciting the Watching or Guarding of Vehicle in Street or
Highway Prohibited; Violations as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked
or about to be parked on a street or highway.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7.15. Stopping for Blind Pedestrians; Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) Any driver of a vehicle who approaches within 10 feet of a person who is
wholly or partially blind, who is carrying a cane or walking stick which is
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-117
white or white tipped with red, or who is being led by a guide dog wearing
a harness and walking on either side, or slightly in front, of the blind
person shall immediately come to a full stop and shall take such
precautions before proceeding as may be necessary to avoid accident or
injury to the wholly or partially blind person.
2) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
7.16. Drivers; Exercising Due Care; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian on
any roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary,
and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any
confused or incapacitated person on a roadway.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.0 STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
8.1. Standing or Parking Close To Curb; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement, and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches
of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.2 Parking on 1-Way Streets; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Vehicles may park with the left-hand wheels adjacent to, and within 12
inches of, the left-hand curb of properly signed 1-way streets.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.3. Stopping, Standing, or Parking on Streets Signed for Angle Parking,
Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) On those streets that have been signed or marked for angle parking a
person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than at the angle to
the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-118
8.4. Violating Terms of Permit for Backing Vehicle to Load or Unload at a Curb
Prohibited; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) it is unlawful for any permittee or any other person to violate any of the
special terms or conditions of any special permit issued to permit the
backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.5. Parking in a Manner that Obstructs Traffic; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not park any vehicle on a street in a manner that leaves an
insufficient width of the roadway available for free movement of vehicular
traffic.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.6. Vehicles Starting from Parked Position; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A vehicle starting from a parked position shall yield to moving vehicles the
right-of-way and the operator of such vehicle shall give a timely and visible
warning signal before so starting.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.7. Vehicle Parked at Angle to Curb and About to Start; Yielding Right-of-Way;
Backing into Lane of Moving Traffic; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A vehicle which is parked at an angle to the curb and which is about to
start shall yield to moving vehicles the right-of-way, and the operator of
the vehicle shall not back such vehicle from the curb into the lane of
moving traffic unless such maneuver can be made in safety and without
conflict with moving vehicles.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.8. Lights on Parked Vehicles; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) If a vehicle is lawfully parked on a street and if there is sufficient natural or
artificial light to reveal any person within a distance of 500 feet on such
street, lights need not be displayed on such parked vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.9. Headlights on Parked Vehicles; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) Any lighted headlights on a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-119
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.10. Stopping, Standing, or Parking Vehicles; Violation as Civil Infraction.
1) A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following
places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to
comply with the law or the directions of a police office or traffic-control
device:
a) On a sidewalk.
b) In front of a public or private driveway.
c) Within an intersection.
d) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
e) On a crosswalk.
f) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk, or if none, then within 15 feet of the
intersection of property lines at an intersection of streets.
g) Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, yield sign, or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a street.
h) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
i) Within 50 feet of the railroad crossing.
j) Within 20 feet of the any fire station and, opposite the entrance
within 75 feet of the signposted.
k) Alongside or opposite any street excavation obstruction when such
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
l) On the street side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
m) On any bridge or other elevated structure on a street or within a
street tunnel.
n) Within 200 feet of an accident at which police officers are in
attendance.
o) In front of any theater.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-120
p) In any place or in any manner so as to block immediate egress
from any emergency exit or exits which are conspicuously marked
as building emergency exits.
q) In any place or in any manner so as to block or hamper the
immediate use of an immediate egress from any fire escape which
is conspicuously marked as a fire escape and which provides an
emergency means of egress from any building.
r) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing, or
parking.
s) In a parking space which is clearly identified by an official sign as
being reserved for use by handicappers and which is on public
property or private property that is available for public use, unless the
person is a handicapper as described in the act or unless the person
is parking the vehicle for the benefit of a handicapper. A certificate of
identification issued under section 675(5) of the act to a handicapper
shall be displayed on the lower left corner of the front windshield. A
special registration plate issued under section 803d of the act to a
handicapper shall be displayed on the vehicle.
t) Within 500 feet of a fire at which fire apparatus are in attendance
when the scene of the fire lies outside a city or village. However,
volunteer fire fighters responding to the fire may park within 500 feet
in a manner that does not interfere with fire apparatus at the scene.
Vehicles legally parked before the fire shall be exempt from this
subdivision.
u) In a clearly identified access aisle or access lane immediately
adjacent to a space designated for parking by persons with
disabilities.
v) On a street or other area open to the parking of vehicles that results
in the vehicle interfering with the use of a curb-cut or ramp by
persons with disabilities.
w) In violation of an official sign restricting the period of time for or
manner of parking.
x) In a place or in a manner that blocks access to a space clearly
designated as a fire lane.
(Rev. 10-21-2013)
8.10A AUTHORITY TO AUTHORIZE ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS BY PERSONS
OTHER THAN POLICE OFFICERS, AND IMPLEMENTATION,
ADMINISTRATION AND TRAINING OF THE PROGRAM
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-121
1) The City of Troy Police Department may implement and administer a program to
authorize and utilize persons other than police officers as volunteers to issues
citations for the following violations:
a) Parking on a sidewalk in violation of Section 8.10a
b) Parking in front of a public or private driveway in violation of Section 8.10b.
c) Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant in violation of Section 8.10d
d) Parking on a crosswalk in violation of Section 8.10e.
e) Parking within 20 feet of a crosswalk or, if there is not a crosswalk, within
15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of highways in
violation of Section 8.10f.
f) Parking at a place where an official sign prohibits stopping or parking in
violation of Section 8.10r. This subdivision does not authorize a volunteer
to issue a citation for any other violation set forth in Section 8.10 expect as
set out in this Section.
g) Parking in a space reserved for use by disabled persons in violation of
Section 8.10s.
h) Parking in an access aisle or access lane immediately adjacent to a space
designated for parking by persons with disabilities in violation of Section
8.10u.
i) Parking in violation of an official sign restricting the period of time or
manner of parking in violation of Section 8.10w. This subdivision does not
authorize a volunteer to issue a citation for any other violation set forth in
Section 8.10 except as set out in this Section.
j) Parking in a space or in a manner that blocks access to a fire lane in
violation of Section 8.10x.
2) Before authorizing and utilizing persons other than police officers to issue
citations, the Troy Police Department shall implement a program to train the
persons to properly issue citations as provided in this Section, of which not less
than 8 hours shall be in parking enforcement, conducted by the Troy Police
Department. A person who successfully completes a program of training
implemented under this Section may issue citations as provided in this Section
as authorized by the Troy Chief of Police or his/her designee.
(Rev. 10-21-2013)
8.11. Motor buses; stopping; violation as civil infraction.
1) Motor buses, for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers, may
stop at the places designated in section 8.10(2), (4), and (6) of this code
or on the street side of a vehicle that is illegally parked in a legally
designated bus loading zone.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.12. Moving parked vehicle; violation as civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-122
1) A person shall not move a vehicle that is not lawfully under his or her
control into any prohibited parking area or away from a curb such distance
as is unlawful.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.13. Parking in alley prohibited; exception; stopping or standing in alley
prohibited; exception; violation as civil infraction.
1) A person shall not park a vehicle in an alley, except when authorized by
official signs. A person shall not stop or stand a vehicle in any alley,
except while actually in the process of loading or unloading such vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.14. Parking for certain purposes prohibited; violation as civil infraction.
1) A person shall not park a vehicle on any street for the principal purpose of
doing any of the following:
a) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
b) Washing, polishing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except for
repairs necessitated by an emergency.
c) Displaying advertising.
d) Selling merchandise from such vehicle, except in a duly established
market place or when so authorized or licensed under the
ordinances of this governmental unit.
e) Storage for more than 48 continuous hours.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.15. Standing or parking on 1-way roadways prohibited; exception; violation as
civil infraction.
1) If a street includes 2 or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to
1 direction on such roadway, a person shall not stand or park a vehicle on
the left-hand side of such 1-way roadway, unless signs are erected to
permit such standing or parking.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.16. Stopping, standing, or parking in passenger curb loading zone prohibited
during certain hours; exception; violation as civil infraction.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-123
1) A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period
of time, except for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when
the provisions applicable to such passenger curb loading zone are
effective, and then only for a period of not more than 5 minutes.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.17. Stopping, standing, or parking in freight curb loading zone prohibited
during certain hours; exception; violation as civil infraction.
1) A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period
of time, except for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.18. Temporary stop at freight curb loading zone permitted; violation as civil
infraction.
1) The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight
curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
loading or unloading passengers, if such stopping does not interfere with
any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting
to enter or about to enter such zone.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.19. Stopping, standing, or parking of buses and taxicabs restricted; exception;
violation as civil infraction.
1) The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stop, stand, or park on any
street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or
taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision does not prevent the
operator of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with
other stopping, standing, or parking regulations at any place for the
purpose of, and while engaged in, the expeditious unloading or loading of
passengers.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.20. Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands; violation as civil infraction.
1) A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when such stop or stand
has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-124
of, and while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers, if such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab
waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.23. Evidentiary presumption relating to parking violators. In any proceeding for a
violation of this ordinance relating to the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof
that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle,
shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of such
vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, such violation occurred.
8.23a. Unlawful standing or parking of vehicle; warrant for arrest; proof
establishing probable cause; evidentiary presumption. Except as provided in
section 8.23b of this code involving leased vehicles, in any proceeding relating to
arrest and prosecution for the violation of a local ordinance or state statute
relating to the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of the ordinance or state
statute, together with proof, by verifying ownership of the vehicle with the
secretary of state, that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of
the parking, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall be accepted by the court
as establishing probable cause for the issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the
registered owner and creates in evidence a presumption that the registered
owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the
point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
8.23b. Unlawful Standing or Parking of Leased Vehicle; Evidentiary Presumption.
In a proceeding for a violation of Section 8.23a of this code involving a leased
motor vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle -described in the citation,
complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the
defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was the lessee of the
vehicle at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the
lessee of the vehicle, not the registered owner, was the person who parked or
place the vehicle at the point, and for the time during which, the violation
occurred.
8.24. Parking Signs Required; Exception. If by this code or any other ordinance of
this governmental unit any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited
on designated streets, such regulations shall not be effective unless appropriate
signs giving notice of the' time limit or prohibited parking are erected and in place
at the time of any alleged offense, except that such signs need not be erected to
make ordinances regulating the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles
effective when these ordinances do not differ from the provisions of the act.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-125
8.25. Parking on Public or Private Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to
park a motor vehicle:
1) Off the street or roadway or any privately owned property, without the
express or implied consent, authorization, or ratification of the owner,
holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of such property.
2) Off the street or roadway on any public property without the express or
implied consent, authorization, or ratification of the authorized public
authorities.
3) No person shall drive upon, park or stand any vehicle between the curb or
curb line and the lot line nearest the street, said area being commonly
known as lawn extension, whether or not any sidewalk or curb is actually
in place on such street.
4) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any commercial vehicle,
truck or trailer, to park the same for a period exceeding one hour upon
any residential street in the City of Troy, unless such vehicles are being
used for the purpose of delivering or picking up goods, wares,
merchandise or materials or is being used in connection with servicing any
residences located adjacent to the street upon which said vehicles are
parked and then only for such period as is necessary to complete the
service. Commercial vehicles shall be defined as every motor vehicle
used for transportation of passengers for hire, or constructed or used for
transportation of goods, construction materials, wares or merchandise.
Provided, however, that this shall not include camping trucks, trailers and
other such vehicles used for recreational purposes only.
5) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.26. Parking Vehicle Without License Plates.
1) No person shall park a vehicle upon any public street unless such vehicle
shall have current license plates securely attached to such vehicle and
shall be in immediate operating condition except for repairs necessitated
by any emergency.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
8.27. Parking; Expressway or Freeway; Disabled and/or Damaged Motor Vehicles.
1) No person shall stop, stand, and or park a motor vehicle on the travel
portion, shoulder, ramp, or other portion of right-of-way on any
expressway or freeway in the City of Troy except for an emergency
condition created by motor vehicle damage or mechanical difficulty. All
motor vehicles so damaged or not functioning shall be deemed a hazard
to vehicular traffic and shall be removed by the owner and or driver of said
vehicle forthwith; the City of Troy Police Department shall remove all the
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-126
disable and/or damaged vehicles not removed by the owner or operator,
and the cost of same shall be chargeable to the claimant who redeems
the vehicle from the party hired for said removal.
8.28. Purpose. This article is to be interpreted as the standard of care necessary to
protect both people and property within the City of Troy in case of fire or similar
emergency in any of those establishments herein defined through the use of
controlled fire lanes.
a) Authority. The Fire Chief or his designated representative shall be
responsible for recommending the establishment of fire lanes on private
property within the City of Troy. The following criteria shall be used in
determining the necessity of said fire lanes.
1) Fire lanes shall be established as deemed necessary at the following
locations. This list shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but only as a
guide as to type of the establishment where necessary.
a) Multi-family residential buildings and complexes
b) Public assembly buildings and complexes
c) Churches and schools
d) Hospitals, convalescent homes, nursing homes, etc.
e) Hotels, motels, etc.
f) Industrial buildings and complexes
g) Mercantile buildings and complexes
h) Office and professional buildings and complexes
2) The necessity of access into the above enumerated areas from public
thoroughfares.
3) The necessity of traffic lanes free from parked vehicles both to and
around the above enumerated establishments capable of handling city
fire vehicles.
Whenever the Fire Chief or his designated representative deems such
lanes necessary for the safety of occupants and property of the above
enumerated establishments or when, after petitioned by a private land
owner or his authorized representative to have said fire lanes established
on his or her property, the Department will present to the Traffic
Committee, recommendations to establish fire lanes thereon in
accordance with the above criteria.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-127
This article shall apply to all such existing facilities within the City of Troy.
For fire lanes at new construction sites or modification of existing
structures this article shall also apply and be administered by the Fire
Department through the site plan review process. It shall be the duty of
the Transportation Engineer or his designated representative to notify the
land owner of any such property whereon fire lanes are to be
established, by mailing notice of the meeting of the Traffic Committee to
the address of the owner as found in the records of the city assessor.
Said notice shall be mailed no less than 10 days in advance of the
meeting.
The Traffic Committee will review the recommendations of the Fire Chief
and hear objections, if any, from the owners of the private property to be
posted and regulated. The findings, conclusions and recommendations
of the Traffic Committee will be transmitted to the City Council for final
action.
The Fire Department shall keep an accurate up-to-date record of all fire
lanes established within the City of Troy. Duplicate copies will be on file
in the Police Department and the Traffic Engineering Department.
b) Posting, uniformity, responsibility. All fire lanes shall be conspicuously
posted with posted with uniform fire lane signs in keeping with the standard
established in the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices as
revised and as prescribed by the Fire Chief or his designated representative.
The erection and maintenance of said signs shall be the responsibility of the
property owner. Any owner, who, upon notification by the City Clerk that a fire
lane has been established on his property and within (30) thirty days thereof
fails to erect uniform fire lane signs shall be in violation of this article and subject
to punishment as provided by ordinance. Further, when said signs are not
erected within (30) thirty days of notification, the City council may direct said
signs to be erected and the cost thereof assessed against the property on the
next general assessment roll of the City.
When such fire lanes are adjacent to a parking lot such fire lanes shall be clearly
outlined with curbing, posts or other markings raised above the grade sufficiently
so they will not be obscured by snow or other materials. Fire lanes shall be not
less than 18 feet wide.
The occupant of every premise adjoining a fire lane, or the owner of such
premise if the premise is not occupied, shall not obstruct said fire lanes by
emergency vehicles, the fire lanes may be ordered cleared. The expense
incurred for clearing shall become a debt to the City from the owner of such
premise and shall be collected as any other debt to the City.
(Rev. 10-11-1993)
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-128
c) Exceptions. The Fire Chief or his designated representative may grant
permission for parking of certain vehicles, objects or trailers in designated fire
lanes for limited periods where such parking will not interfere with the usage of
the fire lane by emergency vehicles. Whenever such permission is granted, a
record of same shall be kept by the Department. In conjunction with such
permission, the Department shall furnish a permit to be posted conspicuously on
the vehicle, object or trailer stating that permission to so park has been granted
and the duration that it may remain so parked.
d) Guidelines for Building Department. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or his
designated representative to establish guidelines for use by the Building
Department in determining the need for fire-lanes on all new construction sites
and at modification of existing structures. These guidelines shall include those
criteria found in Section 2 of this article and shall further include minimum
dimensions for said fire lanes so as to provide adequate maneuverability for city
fire vehicles during the construction phases of the project. The Fire Department
shall make a final check of all plans for such building or alteration upon
submission of same by the Building Department. The Fire Department shall
either approve or reject such plans within (20) twenty days of such submission
and, if rejected, shall state the reasons for same.
e) Enforcement. When any administrative officer of the Troy Fire Department or
any member of the Troy Police Department shall observe any vehicle', trailer, or
other object parked in a fire lane as herein established and such vehicle, trailer,
or other object is not there under authority of Section 5 of this article, any of the
foregoing shall issue a violation notice and affix it to said vehicle, trailer, or other
object.
If any vehicle, trailer or other object is so located within a fire lane at the time the
Fire Department is responding to an alarm for any reason which necessitates
use of such fire lane, then any member or members of the Troy Police
Department or Troy Fire Department may move or cause same to be moved by
any means possible without liability for any damage being incurred by the City of
Troy or any officer, agent or employee thereof.
9.0 MISCELLANEOUS
9.2. Invalidity or unconstitutionality of code; severability. If any part or parts of
this code are for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision
shall not affect the validity or constitutionally of the remaining portions of this
code. The ordinance-making body hereby declares that is would have passed
this code and each part or parts thereof, irrespective of the fact that any I part or
parts be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
9.3. Penalties.
1) Any provision of this ordinance which describes an act or admission which
constitutes a civil infraction shall be processed as a civil infraction and any
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-129
person found to have committed a civil infraction may be ordered to pay a
civil fine of not more than $100.00 and costs.
2) Violation of any other provisions of this ordinance not constituting a civil
infraction, as herein provided, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
9.4. Savings Clause. All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing,
acquired or incurred at the time this ordinance takes effect are hereby saved and
such proceedings may be consummated under and according to the ordinance
enforced at the time such proceedings are or were commenced. This ordinance
shall not be construed to alter, affect or abate any pending prosecution or
prevent prosecution hereafter instituted under any ordinance specifically or
impliedly repealed by the ordinance adopting this traffic code for offenses
committed before the effective date of this ordinance and all prosecutions
pending at the effective date of this ordinance and all prosecutions instituted
after the effective date of this ordinance for offenses committed before the
effective date of this ordinance may-be continued or instituted under and in
accordance with the provisions of any ordinance enforced at the time of the
commission of such offense.
10.0 SNOWMOBILES
10.1. Word and phrases. The following words and phrases, when used in this
chapter, have the following meaning respectively ascribed to them in this
chapter. When any word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined in this
chapter, but is defined in this code or in Act No. 74 of the Public Acts of 1967, as
amended, being 257.1501 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws, the
definitions used therein shall be deemed to apply to the words and phrases used
in this chapter.
10.001. Dealer. "Dealer" means a person who is engaged in the sale, lease, or rental of
snowmobiles as a regular business.
10.002. Operate. "Operate" means to ride in or on, or to be in actual physical control of,
a snowmobile.
10.003. Owner. "Owner" means any of the following:
a) A person who holds the legal title to a snowmobile in his or her name.
b) A vendee or lessee of a snowmobile that is the subject of an agreement for
the conditional sale or lease thereof, with the right of purchase on
performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an
immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-130
c) A person renting a snowmobile, or having the exclusive use of snowmobile,
for more than 30 days.
10.004. Private property open to the public. "Private property open to the public"
means property which is privately owned, but while is open to public access.
10.005. Public property. "Public property" means property owned, leased, or otherwise
controlled by this governmental unit, including parks, parking lots, and
recreational areas.
10.006. Right of Way. "Right-of-way" means that portion of a street or highway less the
roadway and any shoulder.
10.007. Snowmobile. "Snowmobile" means a motor-driven vehicle which is designed for
travel primarily on snow or ice and which utilizes sled-type runners or skis, an
endless belt, or other similar means of contact with the surface on which it is
operated.
10.11. Registration Required; Exceptions. A snowmobile shall not be operated within
the corporate limits of this governmental unit unless and until it is registered by
the owner pursuant to Act No. 74 of the Public Acts of 1968, as amended, being
257.1501 et seq. of the Michigan Complied Laws, except that the following
snowmobiles may be operated without being registered:
a) A snowmobile operated exclusively on lands owned by, or under the control
of, the snowmobile owner.
b) A snowmobile used entirely in an approved safety education and training
program conducted by a certified snowmobile safety instructor.
c) A snowmobile that is exclusively operated in a special event of limited
duration which is conducted according to a prearranged schedule under a
permit from this governmental unit.
10.12. Certificate of Registration: Carrying; Display; Duplicate. A certificate of
registration shall be carried on the snowmobile when it is in operation, and shall
be displayed on demand of a police officer. If the certificate is lost, mutilated, or
is illegible, the owner shall immediately obtain a duplicate certificate of
registration by application to the secretary of state.
10.13. Identification Number. The identification number of the certificate of registration
shall be prominently displayed on both sides of the forward half of the
snowmobile. The number shall be painted on or attached in a permanent manner
in block characters of good proportion, not less than 3 inches in height, reading
from left to right, and shall contrast so as to be distinctly visible and legible. Other
numbers shall not be attached or displayed on the snowmobile.
10.14. Operation of Snowmobile Registered in Another State or Canada. A
snowmobile registered in another state, or in a Province of Canada, to a
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-131
nonresident of this state may be operated within this governmental unit under the
authority of that registration for a period of not more than 20 days.
10.21. Brakes. A snowmobile shall be equipped with brakes which are capable of 1 of
the following while the snowmobile travels on packed snow and carries an
operator who weighs 175 pounds or more:
a) Stopping the snowmobile in not more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles an hour.
b) Locking the snowmobile traction belt or belts.
10.22. Lights. A snowmobile shall be equipped with at least one headlight and one
taillight and all headlights and taillights shall be in working order. The lights shall
be lighted when the snowmobile is being operated between the hours from onehalf
hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise.
10.23. Muffler.
1) A snowmobile shall be equipped with a muffler in good working order and
from which noise emission at 50 feet at right angles from the vehicle path
under full throttle does not exceed 86 dba, decibels on the 'all scale, on a
sound meter that has characteristics defined by American standards
association Sl.4 of 1966 entitled "General Purpose Sound Meter."
2) A snowmobile manufactured after February 1, 1972, and sold or offered for
sale in this state shall not exceed 82 dba as measured under the 1970
society of automobile engineers code J-192.
3) A snowmobile manufactured after July 1, 1977, and sold or offered for sale
in this state shall not exceed 78 decibels of sound pressure at 50 feet as
measured under the 1974 society of automotive engineers code J-192a.
4) This section does not apply to a snowmobile that is being used in an
organized race on a course which is used solely for racing.
5) American standards association, renamed American national standards
institute, standard Sl.4 of 1966, revised 1971 and reaffirmed 1976, may be
purchased prepaid at $5.50 per copy with a $2.00 shipping fee from
American National Institute, 1430 Broadway, New York, New York 10018.
J-192a, the replacement for J-912, may be purchased from Society of
Automotive Engineers, 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale,
Pennsylvania 15096, at a cost of 40 cents per page, or from Michigan
State Police, 7150 Harris Drive, Lansing, Michigan 48913, at the same
cost.
6) The material in this section is incorporated by reference.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-132
10.31. Operation on Designated Public and Private Property. A snowmobile shall be
operated within the corporate limits of this governmental unit only on public
property and private property opened to the public which has been so designated
by the governing body of this governmental unit, or on property owned or under
the control of the owner of the snowmobile, or a -snowmobile may be operated
upon the private property of another when the operator has obtained the express
permission of the owner or agent of the owner of said private property; any use
by an operator of a snowmobile on the property of another without such
permission shall be prima-facie evidence of trespassing; no posting on private
property prohibiting such use shall be necessary for the enforcement of this
provision.
10.31a. Special Events. A snowmobile may be operated on a street or highway in a city
park for a special event of limited duration conducted according to a prearranged
schedule only under permit from the City of Troy or upon school property upon
express authorization of the Troy School Board in writing according to a
prearranged schedule.
10.32. Time of Operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the corporate
limits of the City of Troy, including all areas of rights-of-way and private property
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
10.33. Speeds. A person shall not operate a snowmobile on public property or private
property open to the public at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper
having due regard for existing conditions.
10.34. Operating Snowmobile Under Influence of Intoxicating Liquor or a
Controlled Substance. A person shall not operate a snowmobile on public
property or private property open to the public while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance.
10.35. Operation Between Midnight and 6 a.m. A person shall not operate a
snowmobile within 100 feet of a dwelling between 12 midnight and 6 a.m. at a
speed greater than the minimum required to maintain forward movement of the
snowmobile.
10.36. Operation on Cemetery or Burial Ground. A person shall not operate a
snowmobile on or across cemetery or burial ground.
10.37. Operation on Public Sidewalk. A person shall not operate a snowmobile on a
public sidewalk, except that snowmobile may be driven across a sidewalk at a
regular driveway.
10.37a. Operation on Lawn Extension. No person shall drive upon, park or stand any
snowmobile between the curb or curb line and the lot line nearest the street, said
area being commonly known as the lawn extension whether - or not any sidewalk
or curb is actually in place on the street.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-133
10.38. Operation on Limited Access Highway. A person shall not operate a
snowmobile on a limited access highway.
10.39. Operation on Roadway Prohibited; Exceptions.
1) A person shall not operate a snowmobile on any roadway within the
corporate limits of this governmental unit, with the following exceptions:
a) The chief of police is hereby authorized to permit the operation of a
snowmobile on a roadway when, because of snow or other extreme
roadway conditions, conventional motor vehicles cannot be used for
necessary transportation.
b) A Snowmobile may be operated on a roadway when necessary to
cross the roadway or to cross a bridge or culvert. The snowmobile
shall be brought to a complete stop before entering onto the roadway,
and the operator shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle approaching
on the roadway.
c) A snowmobile may be operated on a roadway only for a distance of
not more than 500 feet while traveling to an area approved for
snowmobile use or between 2 approved areas.
2) A person shall not operate a snowmobile in any of the following locations:
a) In a forest nursery or a planting area or, if vegetation might be
damaged, on public lands which are posted or which are reasonably
identifiable as an area of forest reproduction or as a natural
dedicated area in Michigan's lower peninsula.
b) On the frozen surface of public waters within 100 feet of a person,
including a skater, who is not in or on a snowmobile, or within 100
feet of a fishing shanty or shelter, except at the minimum speed
required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile, or in an
area that has been cleared of snow for skating 'purposes, unless the
area is necessary for access to the public water.
c) In an area in which public hunting is permitted during the season
open to the taking of deer with firearms from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
and from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., except during an emergency; for
law enforcement purposes; to go to and from a permanent residence
or a hunting camp otherwise inaccessible by a conventional wheeled
vehicle; for the conduct of necessary work functions involving land
and timber survey, communication and transmission line patrol, and
timber harvest operations; or on the person's own property, property
under the person's control, or property on which the person is an
invited guest.
d) On or across a cemetery or burial ground.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-134
e) Within 100 feet of a slide, ski, or skating area. A snowmobile may
enter such an area for the purpose of servicing the area or for
medical emergencies.
f) On a railroad or railroad right-of-way, except when the railroad, a
public utility, or a law enforcement employee is performing an official
duty.
3) A person shall not transport a bow or firearm on a snowmobile unless the
bow is unstrung or the firearm is securely encased or equipped with, and
made inoperative by, a manufactured, key-locked, trigger-housing
mechanism.
10.40. Operation by Person Under 12 Years of Age. A parent or legal guardian shall
not permit a child who is under the age of 12 years to operate a snowmobile
without the direct supervision of an adult, except on land owned by or under the
control of, the parent or legal guardian. An operator under the age of 12 years
shall not cross a street or highway.
10.41. Operation by Persons 12 to 16 Years of Age. A person who is 12 to 16 years
of age may operate a snowmobile if any 1 of the following requirements is met:
a) He or she is under the direct supervision of a person who is not less than 18
years of age.
b) He or she has in his or her immediate possession a snowmobile safety
certificate issued to him or her.
c) He or she is on land owned or under the control of his or her parent or legal
guardian.
10.51. Accident; Notice; Report.
1) The operator of a snowmobile who is involved in any accident which results
in any injury to, or the death of, any person or any property damage in an
estimated amount of not less than $100.00 shall immediately notify the
Police Department.
2) The Police Department shall complete a report of the accident on a form
prescribed by the Director of the Department of State Police and shall
forward the report to that Department. A copy of the accident report shall
be retained by the Police Department for not less than three years.
3) Any court action in this state where competent evidence demonstrates
that a vehicle which is permitted operated upon a highway pursuant to Act
300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, is in a collision with a
snowmobile, the driver of the snowmobile involved in the collision shall be
considered prima-facia negligent.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-135
10.60 Selling or Offering for Sale.
1) A person shall not sell or offer to sell in this state a snowmobile that is
manufactured after July 1, 1978, unless it meets the minimum safety
standards for snowmobile produce certification of the snowmobile safety
and certification committee November 23, 1976, volume 3, entitled "Safety
Standards for Snowmobiles for Product Certification." including detailed
standard supplement and test specifications and procedures, covering
machine sound levels, seats, controls, brake systems, fuel systems,
shields and guards, electrical systems and lighting, reflectors, handgrips,
and general hazard requirements.
2) Proof of compliance with the requirements of this section shall be in the
form of certification by a qualified independent testing company which is
not affiliated with the manufacturer and which is approved by the
department of natural resources.
3) Copies of the standards specified in subsection (1)of this section may be
purchased for $2.50 per copy from snowmobile Safety and Certification
committee Incorporated, Suite 850, South 1800 "M" Street, N.W.,
Washington, D.C. 20036 or from Michigan State Police, 7150 Harris Drive,
Lansing, Michigan 48913 at the same cost.
4) The material in this section is incorporated by reference.
10.61 Duties of Dealer; Liability Insurance.
1) A dealer who rents, leases, or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles to the
public shall maintain the snowmobiles so rented, leased, or furnished in
safe operating condition. The dealer, his or her agents, or his or her
employees shall explain the operation of the snowmobile being rented,
leased, or, furnished. If the dealer, agent, or employee believes that the
person to whom the snowmobile is to be rented, leased, or furnished is
not competent to operate the snowmobile with safety to himself or herself
and to others, he or she shall refuse to rent, lease, or furnish the
snowmobile.
2) A dealer who rents, leases, or otherwise furnishes a snowmobile shall
carry a policy of liability insurance subject to limits, exclusive of interests
and costs, with respect to the snowmobile, a follows:
a) $20,000.00 because of bodily injury to, or death of, 1 person in any 1
accident and subject to that limit for I person.
b) $40,000.00 because of bodily injury to, or death of, 2 or more persons
in any 1 accident.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-136
c) $10,000.00 because of injury to, or destruction of, property of others
in any 1 accident.
d) In the alternative, a dealer shall demand and be shown proof that the
person renting, leasing, or being furnished a snowmobile carries a
liability policy of at least the type and coverage specified in this
subsection.
10.71 Operation in Violation of chapter. The owner of a Snowmobile shall not permit
his or her snowmobile to be operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
10.72 Registered Number as Evidence of Operation by Owner. In a proceeding for
a violation of this chapter involving prohibited operation or conduct, the
registration number displayed on a snowmobile constitutes prima facie evidence
that the owner of the snowmobile was the person operating the snowmobile at
the time of this offense.
10.73 Stopping at Direction of Uniformed Police Officer; Violation; Identification
of Official Law Enforcement Vehicle. The operator of a snowmobile who is
given a visual or audible signal by hand, voice, emergency light, or siren by a
police officer, who is acting in the lawful performance of his or her duty, which
directs the operator to bring his or her snowmobile to a stop shall do so. An
operator shall not willfully fail to obey the direction by increasing his or her
speed, extinguishing his or her lights, or otherwise attempting to flee or elude the
officer. (2) The officer who gives the signal shall be in uniform. A vehicle or
snowmobile that is used at night for purposes of enforcing this chapter shall be
identified as an official law enforcement vehicle or snowmobile.
10.74 Violation as Misdemeanor.
1) A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
2) When the judge of a juvenile court determines that a person who is less
than 16 years of age has violated the act, the judge shall immediately report
the determination to the department of natural resources. The director of
the department of natural resources, upon receiving a notice of a
determination pursuant to this subsection, may suspend the certificate
without a hearing.
10.75 Arrest Without Warrant; Procedures. If a person is arrested without warrant for
a violation of this chapter, except a violation of section 10.35 of this code, the
arresting officer shall follow the procedures provided in section 2.10 or 2.11 of
this code, whichever is applicable.
11.0 MOTOR VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD RESTRICTIONS
11.1 Size, weight and load restrictions.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-137
1) Unless specifically declared to be a civil infraction, it is a misdemeanor for a
person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or permit to be driven or
moved on a highway a vehicle of a size and weight exceeding the
limitations stated in this ordinance or otherwise in violation of this ordinance.
2) The provisions of this ordinance governing size, weight, and load do not
apply to a fire apparatus; to an implement of husbandry; to a boat lift or
oversized hydraulic boat trailer that is owned and operated by a marina or
watercraft dealer and used exclusively in a commercial boat storage
operation which is incidentally moved upon a highway; or to a vehicle
operated under the terms of a special permit issued as provided in this
ordinance.
3) The Michigan Department of Transportation, under the Administrative
Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306 ( MCL 24.201 to MCL 24.328), may
promulgate rules permitting and regulating the operation of a vehicle or
vehicles of a size or weight that exceeds the size or weight limitations of this
ordinance. The City may enforce those rules under this ordinance, but can
take no actions in conflict with Federal, State, or local law.
4) A wrecker and a disabled vehicle, or a wrecker and a combination of a
disabled vehicle and one trailer that exceeds the size and weight limitations
in this ordinance may be operated upon the highways of the City under the
following conditions:
a) The wrecker is specifically designed for such towing operations; is
equipped with flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber or red lights as
permitted under MCL 257.698; and is capable of utilizing the lighting
and braking systems of the disabled vehicle or combination of disabled
vehicles if those systems are operational.
b) For a combination of disabled vehicles, the wrecker is issued a special
permit under section under MCL 257.725 by the Michigan Department
of Transportation or the Road Commission for Oakland County if each
trip beginning from the place of original disablement is 25 miles or
less. The special permit is valid for the entire 25 mile towing distance,
and the operator of that wrecker may remove the disabled vehicles
from the roadway at any lawful point of his or her choosing within that
distance.
c) c) For a single disabled vehicle, the wrecker is issued a special permit
under MCL 257.725 by the Michigan Department of Transportation or
the Road Commission for Oakland County for the transport of the
disabled vehicle. A wrecker operator is not subject to mileage
limitations under such a special permit.
d) The wrecker does not operate on any highway, road, street or
structure that is included on a list provided by the State Transportation
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-138
Department that prohibits wreckers unless the disabled vehicle or
combination of vehicles is actually located on one of those roads or
structures.
5) The owner or operator of a wrecker that does not comply with Section
106.11.1 (4) is responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a civil fine of
not less that $250.00 or more than $500.00. The civil fine imposed under
this subsection is in addition to any fine that may be imposed under Section
106. 11.13 or 106.11.15.
11.2 Maximum outside width of vehicles or loads; operation or movement of
boat lifts and trailers.
1) The total outside width of a vehicle or the load on a vehicle that is operated
on the highways, streets, and roadways in the City shall not exceed 96
inches, except as otherwise provided in this section.
2) A person may operate or move an implement of husbandry of any width on
a highway as required, designed, and intended for farming operations,
including the movement of implements of husbandry being driven or towed
and not hauled on a trailer, without obtaining a special permit by the
Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission for
Oakland County for an excessively wide vehicle or load under MCL
257.725. The operation or movement of the implement of husbandry shall
be in a manner so as to minimize the interruption of traffic flow. A person
shall not operate or move an implement of husbandry to the left of center of
the roadway from a half hour after sunset or a half hour before sunrise,
under the conditions specified in 5.22 of Chapter 106 of this Ordinance, or
at any other time where visibility is substantially diminished due to weather
conditions. A person operating or moving an implement of husbandry shall
follow all traffic regulations.
3) The total outside width of the load of a vehicle hauling concrete pipe;
agricultural products; or unprocessed logs, pulpwood, or wood bolts shall
not exceed 108 inches.
4) Except as provided in subsections (2) and (5), if a vehicle that is equipped
with pneumatic tires is operated on a highway, the maximum width from the
outside of one wheel and tire to the outside of the opposite wheel and tire
shall not exceed 102 inches, and the outside width of the body of the
vehicle or the load on the vehicle shall not exceed 96 inches. However, a
truck or trailer or a tractor and semi-trailer combination hauling pulpwood or
unprocessed logs may operate with a maximum width of up to108 inches, in
accordance with a special permit issued under MCL 257.725.
5) The total outside body width of a bus, a trailer coach, a trailer, a semitrailer,
a truck camper, or a motor home shall not exceed 102 inches.
However, an appurtenance of a trailer coach, a truck camper, or a motor
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-139
home that extends not more than 6 inches beyond the total outside body
width is not a violation of this Section.
6) A vehicle shall not extend beyond the center line of a state trunk highway
except when authorized by law. Except as provided in subsection (2) above,
if the width of the vehicle makes it impossible to stay away from the center
line, a permit shall be obtained under MCL 257.725.
7) The City may designate a highway under its jurisdiction as a highway on
which a person may operate a vehicle or vehicle combination that is not
more than 102 inches in width, including load, the operation of which would
otherwise be prohibited by this Section. The City may require that the owner
or lessee of the vehicle or of each vehicle in the vehicle combination secure
a permit before operating the vehicle or vehicle combination. This Section
does not permit the operation of a vehicle or vehicle combination described
in Section 106.11.11 if the operation would otherwise result in a violation of
that Section.
8) The Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of
Oakland County may issue a special permit under MCL 257.725 to a
person operating a vehicle or vehicle combination if all of the following are
met:
a) The vehicle or vehicle combination, including load, is not more than
106 inches in width.
b) The vehicle or vehicle combination is used solely to move new motor
vehicles or parts or components of new motor vehicles between
facilities that meet all of the following:
i) New motor vehicles or parts or components of new motor
vehicles are manufactured or assembled in the facilities.
ii) The facilities are located within 10 miles of each other.
iii) The facilities are located with the Troy city limits.
iv) The special permit and any renewals are each issued for a term
of one year or less.
9) A person who violates this Section is responsible for a civil infraction. The
operator or the owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this
Section.
11.3 Passenger-type vehicles; projected load.
1) A passenger type vehicle shall not be operated on a highway with a load
carried on the vehicle extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-140
side of the vehicle nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the right side of the vehicle.
2) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
11.4 Height, length; combinations; connecting assemblies, lighting devices;
weight; violations.
1) A vehicle, either unloaded or with load, shall not exceed a height of 13 feet
6 inches. The owner of a vehicle that collides with a lawfully established
bridge or viaduct is liable for all damage and injury resulting from a collision
caused by the height of the vehicle, whether the clearance of the bridge or
viaduct is posted or not.
2) Lengths described in this Section shall be known as the normal length
maximum. Except as provided in Section (3) below, the following vehicles
and combinations of vehicles shall not be operated on a highway in this City
in excess of these lengths:
a) Subject to subsection 8, below, any single vehicle -40 feet; a crib
vehicle on which logs are loaded lengthwise of the vehicle- 42.5 feet;
any single bus or motor home- 45 feet.
b) Articulated buses- 65 feet.
c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, a combination of a
truck and semi-trailer or trailer, or a truck tractor, semi-trailer, and
trailer, or truck tractor and semi-trailer or trailer, designated and used
exclusively to transport assembled motor vehicles or bodies,
recreational vehicles, or boats- 65 feet. Stinger-steered combinations-
75 feet. The load on the combinations of vehicles described in this
Section may extend an additional 3 feet beyond the front and 4 feet
beyond the rear of the combinations of vehicles. Retractable extensions
used to support and secure the load that do not extend beyond the
allowable overhang for the front and rear shall not be included in
determining length of a loaded vehicle or vehicle combination.
d) Truck tractor and semi-trailer combinations- no overall length, but the
semi-trailer shall not exceed 50 feet.
e) Truck and semi-trailer or trailer- 59 feet.
f) Except as provided in Section (g) below, a combination of a truck
tractor, semi-trailer, and trailer, or truck tractor and 2 semi-trailers- 59
feet.
g) A truck tractor, semi-trailer, and trailer, or a truck tractor and 2 semitrailers,
in which no semitrailer or trailer is more than 28  feet long- 65
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-141
feet. This Section only applies while the vehicle is being used for a
business purpose that is reasonably related to picking up or delivering a
load and only if each semi-trailer or trailer is equipped with a device or
system capable of mechanically dumping construction materials or
dumping construction materials by force of gravity.
h) More than one motor vehicle, wholly or partially assembled, in
combination, utilizing one tow bar or three saddle mounts with full
mount mechanisms and utilizing the motive power of one of the
vehicles in combination- 55 feet.
3) The normal length maximums, as set forth in Section (2) above, may be
exceeded for the following vehicles and combinations of vehicles, but they
shall comply with the following:
a) Truck tractor and semi-trailer combinations- no overall length limit, but
the semi-trailer shall not exceed 53 feet. All semi-trailers longer than
50 feet shall have a wheelbase of 37.5 to 40.5 feet, plus or minus 0.5
feet, measured from the kingpin coupling to the center of the rear axle
or the center or the rear axle assembly. A semi-trailer with a length
longer than 50 feet shall not operate with more than 3 axles on the
semi-trailer. Vehicles with a semi-trailer longer than 50 feet may be
prohibited from stopping in the City unless the stop occurs along
appropriately designated routes, or is necessary for emergency
purposes or to reach shippers, receivers, warehouses, and terminals
along designated routes.
b) Truck and semi-trailer or trailer combinations- 65 feet, except that a
person may operate a truck and semi-trailer or trailer designed and
used to transport saw logs, pulpwood, and tree length poles that does
not exceed an overall length of 70 feet or a crib vehicle and semitrailer
or trailer designated and used to transport saw logs that does
not exceed an overall length of 75 feet. A crib vehicle and semi-trailer
or trailer designed for and used to transport saw logs shall not exceed
a gross vehicle weight of 164,000 pounds. A person may operate a
truck tractor and semi-trailer designed for and used to transport saw
logs, pulpwood, and tree length wooden poles with a load overhang to
the rear of the semi-trailer which does not exceed 6 feet if the semitrailer
does not exceed 50 feet in length.
c) Notwithstanding Section 106.11.4 (4) (d), a truck tractor with a log
slasher unit and a log saw unit- no maximum length limit if the length
of each unit does not exceed 28  feet, or the overall length of the log
slasher unit and the log saw unit, as measured from the front of the
first towed unit to the rear of the second towed unit while the units are
coupled together, does not exceed 58 feet. The coupling devices of
the truck tractor and units set forth in this Section shall meet the
requirements established under the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963,
1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.25.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-142
d) Truck tractor and 2 semi-trailers, or truck tractor, semi-trailer, and
trailer combinations- no overall length limit, as long as the length of
each semi-trailer or trailer does not exceed 28  feet each, or the
overall length of the semi-trailer and trailer, or 2 semi-trailers, as
measured from the front of the first towed unit to the rear of the second
towed unit while the units are coupled together, does not exceed 58
feet.
e) More than one motor vehicle, wholly or partially assembled, in
combination, utilizing one tow bar or 3 saddle mounts with full mount
mechanisms and utilizing the motive power of one of the vehicles in
combination- maximum 75 feet.
4) The following combinations and movements are prohibited:
a) A truck shall not haul more than one trailer or semi-trailer, and a truck
tractor shall not haul more than 2 semi-trailers or 1 semi-trailer and 1
trailer in combination at any one time, except that a farm tractor may
haul 2 wagons or trailers, or garbage and refuse haulers may, during
daylight hours, haul up to 4 trailers for garbage and refuse collection
purposes, as long as the total length of any combination does not
exceed 55 feet and the vehicles are operated at a speed limit of 15
miles per hour or less.
b) A combination of vehicles or a vehicle shall not have more than 11
axles, except when operating under a valid permit issued by the
Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of
Oakland County under MCL 257.725 on highways under its
jurisdiction.
c) Any combination of vehicles not specifically authorized under this
Section is prohibited.
d) Except as provided in Section 106.11.4 (3) (c ) a combination of 2
semi-trailers pulled by a truck tractor, unless each semi-trailer uses a
fifth wheel connection assembly that conforms to the requirements of
the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, 1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to
MCL 480.25.
e) A vehicle or combination of vehicles shall not carry a load extending
more than 3 feet beyond the front of the lead vehicle.
f) A vehicle described in Section 106.11.4 (2) (e) and (3) (e) employing
triple saddle mounts, unless all wheels that are in contact with the
roadway have operating brakes.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-143
5) All combinations of vehicles under this Section shall employ connecting
assemblies and lighting devices that are in compliance with the Motor
Carrier Safety Act of 1963, 1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.25.
6) The total gross weight of a truck tractor, semi-trailer, and trailer combination
or a truck tractor and 2 semi-trailers combination that exceeds 59 feet in
length shall not exceed a ratio of 400 pounds per engine net horsepower
delivered to clutch or its equivalent, as specified in the handbook published
by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc. (SAE), 1977 edition.
7) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. The
owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section.
8) The provisions in Sections 106.11.4 (2) (a) and (3) (b) prescribing the length
of a crib vehicle on which logs are loaded lengthwise do not apply unless
section 127(d) of Title 23 of the United States Code, 23 USC 127, is
amended to allow crib vehicles carrying logs to be loaded as described in
this section.
9) As used in this Section:
a) Designated highway means a highway under the jurisdiction of the
City of Troy and approved by the State of Michigan as a highway.
b) Length means the total length of a vehicle, or combination of
vehicles, including any load the vehicle is carrying. Length does not
include devices described in 23 CFR 658.16 and 23 CFR part 658,
appendix D, 23 CFR 658.16 and 23 CFR part 658, appendix D, as on
file with the Michigan Secretary of State and as adopted by reference.
A safety or energy conservation device shall be excluded from a
determination of length only if it is not designed or used for the
carrying of cargo, freight, or equipment. Semi-trailers and trailers shall
be measured from the front vertical plane of the foremost transverse
load supporting the structure to the rear-most transverse load
supporting the structure. Vehicle components not excluded by law
shall be included in the measurement of the length, height, and width
of the vehicle.
c) Stinger-steered combinations means a truck tractor and semitrailer
combination in which the fifth wheel is located on a drop frame
located behind and below the rear-most axle of the power unit.
11.5 Towing vehicle with mobile home attached; operating restrictions; permits;
transport requirements; violations; definitions.
1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, a person shall not
operate on a highway of this City a towing vehicle to which a mobile home
is attached, if that mobile home is more than 45 feet in length or more than
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-144
60 feet in length when combined with the towing vehicle; or is more than 12
 feet in height; or has an actual body width of more than 102 inches at
base rail, unless that person possesses either of the following:
a) A permit issued by the Michigan Department of Transportation or the
Road Commission of Oakland County pursuant to MCL 257.725.
b) A special permit issued by the Michigan Department of Transportation
or the Road Commission of Oakland County pursuant to MCL
257.725.
2) Pursuant to MCL 257.725, the Michigan Department of Transportation or the
Road Commission of Oakland County may issue an annual permit to a
mobile home transport company; a mobile home manufacturer; or a mobile
home dealer to move a mobile home over a highway under the jurisdiction of
the City, in the ordinary course of that companys, manufacturers, or
dealers business, as long as the mobile home conforms to each of the
following:
a) The mobile home is not more than 12 feet wide.
b) The actual body length of the mobile home is not more than 80 feet
and the combined length of the mobile home and towing vehicle is not
more than 105 feet; or the total length of a combination of mobile
homes is not more than 80 feet and the total length of a combination
of mobile homes and towing is not more than 105 feet.
3) Pursuant to MCL 257.725, the Michigan Department of Transportation or the
Road Commission of Oakland County may issue a special permit for the
movement of a mobile home over a highway within its jurisdiction if the width
of that mobile home conforms to both of the following:
a) The mobile home is not more than 16 feet wide plus normal
appurtenances or eaves that extend not more than 6 inches from any
side of the mobile home.
b) The length of the mobile home complies with Section 106.11.5 (2) (b).
4) A person operating a towing vehicle under Section 106.11.5 (3) shall
transport a mobile home only on the lane farthest to the right of that person.
When the wind velocity exceeds 25 miles per hour, a person shall not move
a mobile home that is 14 or more feet in width.
5) Pursuant to MCL 257.725, the Michigan Department of Transportation or the
Road Commission of Oakland County shall not issue a permit for the
transportation of a mobile home on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday (from
noon the day before until the noon the day after a holiday), or during the
hours between sunset and sunrise.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-145
6) Persons operating a vehicle towing a mobile home shall comply with all of
the conditions of a permit issued by Michigan Department of Transportation
or the Road Commission of Oakland County pursuant to MCL 257.725. A
permit issued under MCL 257.725 includes all of the following:
a) The date, day, and time period during which a mobile home may be
moved on a highway, subject to the permit.
b) Notice that the permit is conditioned upon its holders compliance
with all of the permits terms and with the law.
c) Notice that the operator of a towing vehicle transporting the mobile
home shall operate the towing vehicle on a highway as follows:
i) At a safe speed and in a safe manner that will not impede motor
traffic.
ii) Only when the surface condition of the highway is not slippery.
iii) In accordance with seasonal load restrictions.
d) For a mobile home or park model trailer and towing vehicle, when
combined, are more than 80 feet in length or more than 12 feet wide,
all of the following:
i) Notice that the mobile home or park model trailer shall be
equipped with two flashing amber lights on the rear of the
mobile home or park model trailer and one flashing amber light
on the top of the towing vehicle.
ii) Notice that the mobile home or park model trailer shall be
equipped with stop lights and directional lights on the rear of the
mobile home or park model trailer.
iii) Notice that the signs with the words oversize load shall be
displayed on the front bumper of the towing vehicle and the
back of the mobile home or park model trailer, or in the case of
mobile homes or park model trailers that are 16 feet wide,
notice that signs with the words 16-ft wide load shall be
displayed on the front bumper of the towing vehicle and the
back of the mobile home or park model trailer.
iv) Notice that the signs identified in paragraph (iii) above shall be
of durable material, in good condition, with black lettering on
interstate yellow background, and that each letter shall be of
block lettering that is not less than 12 inches high at the front
and not less than 16 inches high at the rear of the unit.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-146
v) Notice that a vehicle escort is required on those roads where
the Michigan State Police and the Troy Police Department
considers escort vehicles necessary for highway safety.
7) Signs and other special identification for escort vehicles shall conform to
Michigan Transportation Departments requirements for all escort vehicles
for oversized loads.
8) For a mobile home or park model trailer being moved pursuant to this
Section or MCL 257.725, the distance between mobile home or park
model trailer axle centers shall not be less than 34 inches. The axle and
tires shall meet standards established by the Michigan Transportation
Department.
9) This section does not grant or give authority to the Michigan Department
of Transportation, the Road Commission of Oakland County or the Troy
Police Department that did not exist on May 1, 1982 in accordance with
23 USC 127.
10) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction and
may be assessed a civil fine of not more than $500.00. The operator or
the owner of the towing vehicle may be charged with a violation of this
section.
11) As used in this section:
a) Jurisdictional authority means the Michigan Transportation
Department, the Road Commission of Oakland County or the City of
Troy.
b) Mobile home means any of the following:
i) A pre-built housing module.
ii) That term, as defined in section 2 of the Mobile Home
Commission Act, Act No. 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, being
section 125.2302 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
iii) A section of a mobile home as that term is defined under this
Ordinance.
11.6 Mobile homes; additional requirements for transporting.
All mobile homes transported on the highways of the City that are more than 14
1/3 feet wide (plus normal appurtenances that expand no more than 6 inches,
and an eave that extends no more than 2 feet from the width of the mobile home),
are subject to the following requirements in addition to the requirements of
Section 106.11.4:
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-147
a) Two escort vehicles shall escort the towing vehicle and mobile home on all 2-
lane roads and on those roads where the Troy Police Department considers
two escort vehicles necessary for highway safety.
b) Each towing vehicle shall be equipped with a radio or other device that allows
for continuous communication between the towing vehicle and each escort
vehicle.
c) The person transporting the mobile home shall have in effect a liability
insurance policy covering personal injury and property damage and having a
policy limit of not less than $1,000,000.00.
d) The towing vehicle and mobile home shall not exceed a speed of 45 miles
per hour or 10 miles per hour below the posted speed limit, whichever is
lower.
11.7 Trucks hauling semitrailers, transportation of passengers for sightseeing
purposes; approval of city; speed limitation; safety equipment; inspection.
1) Notwithstanding Section 106.11.4, the Troy Police Department may give
approval for a truck to be used to haul up to 4 semi-trailers for the purpose
of transporting passengers for sightseeing purposes, as long as the truck
does not travel more than 3 miles beyond the City boundaries and does not
exceed a speed limit of 25 miles per hours.
2) A truck and a semi-trailer, as described in this Section, shall meet the
following requirements:
a) Be equipped with hazard warning lights, and slow-moving vehicle
emblems, as described in MCL 257.688.
b) Be equipped with safety belts, as described in MCL 257.710e, for each
individual seat.
c) Be compliant with any applicable federal safety standards.
3) Before operating a truck regulated by this Section, the operator of the truck
shall secure the proper group vehicle designation and any required
endorsement required on his or her operators or chauffeurs license.
4) A truck and semi-trailer used as described in this Section shall be inspected
annually by the Michigan Department of State Police.
11.8 Construction or loading of vehicle to prevent spillage on highway or
roadway; loading of vehicle which is not completely enclosed; operation of
vehicle equipped with front end loading device with protruding tine:
offenses and penalties.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-148
1) A person shall not drive or move a vehicle on a highway unless the vehicle is
so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting,
leaking, blowing off, or otherwise escaping from the vehicle. This
requirement does not apply to a vehicle transporting agricultural or
horticultural products, such as hay, straw, silage, or residue from a product
(but not including the product itself), or when materials such as water that is
used to preserve and handle agricultural or horticultural products while in
transportation, escape from the vehicle in an amount that does not interfere
with other traffic on the highway. The tailgate, faucets, and taps on a vehicle
shall be securely closed to prevent spillage during transportation, whether
the vehicle is loaded or empty, and the vehicle shall not have any holes or
cracks through which material can escape. Any highway maintenance
vehicle engaged in either ice or snow removal shall be exempt from this
Section.
2) Actual spillage of material on the highway or proof of that spillage is not
necessary to prove a violation of this Section.
3) Except as provided in this Section, a vehicle carrying a load, (other than logs
or tubular products), which is not completely enclosed shall meet either of
the following requirements:
a) The load shall be covered with firmly secured canvas or a similar type
of covering. A device used to comply with the requirement of this
Section shall not exceed a width of 108 inches nor by design or use
have the capability to carry cargo by itself.
b) The load shall be securely fastened to the body or the frame of the
vehicle with binders of an adequate number and of adequate breaking
strength to prevent the dropping off or shifting of the load.
4) A company or individual who loads or unloads a vehicle or causes it to be
loaded or unloaded, with the knowledge that it is to be driven on a public
highway, and the loading or unloading is done in a manner so as to cause a
violation of Subsection 106.11.8 (1) shall be prima facie liable for a violation
of this Section.
5) Section 106.11.8 (3) does not apply to a person operating a vehicle to
transport agricultural commodities or to a person operating a farm truck or
implement of husbandry that is transporting sand, gravel, and dirt which is
necessary in the normal operation of a farm. However, if such person
violates subsections 106.11.8 (1) or (4), the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor and is subject to the penalties prescribed in subsection
106.11.8 (9).
6) Section 106.11.8 (3) (a) does not apply to a motor vehicle transporting items
in a load that, because of their weight, will not fall off the moving vehicle and
that have their center of gravity located at least 6 inches below the top of the
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-149
enclosure. Similarly, Section 106.11.8 (3) does not apply to a motor vehicle
carrying metal that, because of its weight and density, is so loaded as to
prevent it from dropping or falling off the moving vehicle.
7) Section 106.11.8 (3) (a) does not apply to motor vehicles and other
equipment that is engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street
in a designated work area.
8) A person shall not drive or move on a highway a vehicle equipped with a
front end loading device with a tine protruding parallel to the highway
beyond the front bumper of the vehicle unless the tine is carrying a load
designed to be carried by the front end loading device. This Section does
not apply to a vehicle designed to be used or being used to transport
agricultural commodities; to a vehicle en route to a repair facility; or to a
vehicle engaged in construction activity. As used in this Section,
agricultural commodities means that term as defined in section 106.11.10.
9) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both.
10) As used in this section, logs means saw-logs, pulpwood, or tree length
poles.
11.9 Trailers towed by passenger vehicle, attachment.
1) Except as otherwise provided in Section 106.11.9 (5), a passenger vehicle
or a pickup truck shall not be driven upon a highway drawing or having
attached to the passenger vehicle or pickup truck more than one vehicle or
trailer.
2) The drawbar or other connection between 2 vehicles, one of which is towing
or drawing the other on a highway, shall not exceed 15 feet in length from
one vehicle to the other. If the connection consists of a chain, rope, or
cable, there shall be a red flag or other signal or cloth on the connection
that is at least 12 inches both in length and width.
3) A vehicle or trailer towed or drawn by a vehicle shall be attached to the
vehicle with coupling devices in a manner so that when the combination is
operated in a linear alignment on a level, smooth, paved surface, the
movement of the towed or drawn vehicle or trailer does not deviate more
than three inches to either side of the path of the towing vehicle that tows or
draws it. The vehicle or trailer shall also be connected to the towing vehicle
by suitable safety chains or devices, one on each side of the coupling and
at the extreme outer edge of the vehicle or trailer. Each chain or device and
connection used shall be of sufficient strength to haul the vehicle or trailer
when loaded. In the case of an implement of husbandry with a gross vehicle
weight rating or gross combination weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less,
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-150
the safety chains or devices required under this subsection shall conform to
the federal motor carrier safety regulations requirements, which are
currently provided in 49 C.F.R. 393.70(d)(5).
4) A pickup truck with a fifth wheel assembly shall not tow a semi-trailer unless
the fifth wheel assembly conforms to the standards prescribed in the Motor
Carrier Safety Act of 1963, 1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.22 and
Section 12.1 to section 12.20 of this ordinance.
5) Notwithstanding Section 106.11.9 (1), a pickup truck with a towing rating
equal to or greater than the weight being towed, that is equipped with a fifth
wheel assembly that conforms with the standards prescribed in the Motor
Carrier Safety Act of 1963,1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.22, which
is towing a semi-trailer that is designated for recreational living purposes,
may tow an additional trailer or semi-trailer under the following conditions:
a) The additional trailer or semi-trailer shall be attached as set forth in
Section 106.11.9 (3). The safety chains described in Section 106.11.9
(3) shall be securely attached at the extreme outer edge of the
attached trailer or semi-trailer with a locking mechanism. The towing
vehicle hitch shall be of substantial material and shall be attached in a
proper and skillful manner to the frame of the towing vehicle.
b) The total length of the pickup truck, plus the semi-trailer that is
designed for recreational living purposes, and the additional trailer or
semi-trailer, and the load of the vehicle, shall not exceed 65 feet while
on any highway in the City.
c) The gross weight of the additional trailer or semi-trailer towed or drawn
shall not exceed the empty weight of the pickup truck or the empty
weight of the semi-trailer.
6) For the purpose of this Section, a pickup truck towing a semi-trailer and an
additional trailer shall be considered a passenger vehicle and shall comply
with the speed limit requirements of MCL 257.627 (5).
7) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
11.10 Wheel and axle loads; seasonal weight restrictions, exceptions.
1) The maximum axle load shall not exceed the number of pounds, as
designated in the following provisions which prescribe the distance between
axles:
a) If the axle spacing is 9 feet or more between axles, the maximum axle
load shall not exceed 18,000 pounds for vehicles equipped with high
pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-151
b) If the axle spacing between two axles is less than 9 feet but more than
3  feet, the maximum axle load shall not exceed 13,000 pounds for
vehicles equipped with high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
c) If the axles are spaced less than 3  feet apart, the maximum axle
load shall not exceed 9,000 pounds per axle.
d) Sections 106.11.10 (a), (b) and (c) shall be known as the normal
loading maximum.
2) When normal loading is in effect, the Troy Police Department may
designate certain highways, or sections of those highways under its
jurisdiction, where bridges and road surfaces are adequate for heavier
loading, and may also revise a designation to allow the maximum tandem
axle assembly loading of up to 16,000 pounds for any axle of the assembly,
as long as there is no other axle within 9 feet of any axle of the assembly.
3) On a legal combination of vehicles, only one tandem axle assembly shall be
permitted on the designated highways at the gross permissible weight of
16,000 pounds per axle, but only if there is no other axle within 9 feet of any
axle of the assembly, and if no other tandem axle assembly in the
combination of vehicles exceeds a gross weight of 13,000 pounds per axle.
On a combination of truck tractor and semi-trailer having up to 5 axles, two
consecutive tandem axle assemblies shall be permitted on the designated
highways at a gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if there
is no other axle within 9 feet of any axle of the assembly.
4) Notwithstanding Section 106.11.10 (3), on a combination of truck tractor
and semi-trailer having up to 5 axles, two consecutive sets of tandem axles
may carry a gross permissible weight of up to 17,000 pounds on any of the
tandem axles if there is no other axle within 9 feet of any axle of the tandem
axle and if the first and last axle of the consecutive sets of tandem axles are
at least 36 feet apart and the gross vehicle weight does not exceed 80,000
pounds, to pick up and deliver agricultural commodities between the
national truck network or special designated highways and any other
highway. This Section is not subject to the maximum axle loads of
subsections 106.11.10 (1), (2) and (3). For purposes of this Section, a
tandem axle means two axles spaced more than 40 inches but not more
than 96 inches apart or two axles spaced more than 3  feet but less than
9 feet apart. This Section does not apply during that period when reduced
maximum loads are in effect, pursuant to Section 106.11.10 (8).
5) In order to be exempt from the loading maximums and gross vehicle weight
requirements, the person hauling agricultural commodities, who picks up or
delivers either from a farm or to a farm, shall notify the Road Commission
for Oakland County at least 48 hours before the pickup or delivery,
indicating the time and location of the pickup or delivery. Pursuant to MCL
257.722 (5) the Oakland County Road Commission shall issue a permit to
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-152
such a person and charge a fee that does not exceed the administrative
costs incurred. The permit shall contain the all of the following:
a) The designated route or routes of travel for the load.
b) The date and time period requested by the person who picks up or
delivers the agricultural commodities during which the load may be
delivered or picked up.
c) A maximum speed limit of travel, if necessary.
d) Any other specific conditions agreed to between the parties.
6) In order to be exempt from the loading maximums and gross vehicle weight
requirements, public utility vehicles that are owned or operated by public
utilities under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Public Service Commission, or
are subcontracted by public utilities under the jurisdiction of the Michigan
Public Service Commission, when performing electrical emergency public
utility work, must meet the following circumstances:
a) For emergency public utility work on restricted roads, as follows:
i) If required by the Road Commission for Oakland County, the
public utility shall notify the Road Commission for Oakland
County, as soon as practical, of the location of the emergency
public utility work and provide a statement that the vehicles that
were used to perform the emergency utility work may have
exceeded the loading maximums and gross vehicle weight
requirements of this Ordinance. The notification may be made
via facsimile or electronically.
ii) The public utility vehicle travels to and from the site of the
emergency public utility work while on a restricted road at a
speed not greater than 35 miles per hour.
b) For non-emergency public utility work on restricted roads, as follows:
i) If the Road Commission for Oakland County requires, the public
utility shall apply to the Road Commission for Oakland County
annually for a seasonal truck permit for roads under its authority
before seasonal weight restrictions are effective. Pursuant to
MCL 257.722(6), the Road Commission for Oakland County
shall issue a seasonal truck permit for each vehicle or vehicle
configuration the public utility anticipates will be utilized for nonemergency
public utility work. Pursuant to MCL 257.722 (6), the
Road Commission for Oakland County may charge a fee for a
permit that does not exceed the administrative costs incurred
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-153
for the permit. The seasonal truck permit shall contain all of the
following:
A. The seasonal period requested by the public utility, during
which the permit is valid.
B. A unique identification number for the vehicle and any vehicle
configuration to be covered on the seasonal truck permit that is
requested by the public utility.
C. A requirement that travel on restricted roads during weight
restriction periods will be minimized and only utilized when
necessary to perform work using the public utility vehicle or
vehicle configuration and that non-restricted roads shall be
used for travel when available and for routine travel.
ii) Pursuant to MCL 257.722 (6), if the Road Commission for Oakland
County requires notification, the Road Commission of Oakland County
shall provide a notification application for the public utility to use when
requesting access to operate on restricted roads and the public utility
shall provide notification to the Road Commission of Oakland County,
via facsimile or electronically, not later than 24 hours before the time of
the intended travel. Notwithstanding this Section or an agreement
under this Section, if the Road Commission for Oakland County
determines that the condition of a particular road under its jurisdiction
makes it unusable, the Road Commission for Oakland County may
deny access to all or any part of that road. The denial shall be made
and communicated via facsimile or electronically to the public utility
within 24 hours after receiving notification that the public utility intends
to perform non-emergency work that requires use of that road. Any
notification that is not disapproved within 24 hours after the notice is
received by the Road Commission of Oakland County is considered
approved. The notification application, as required under MCL 257.722
(6), may include all of the following information:
A. The address or location of the non-emergency work.
B. The date or dates of the non-emergency work.
C. The route to be taken to the non-emergency work.
D. The restricted road or roads intended to be traveled upon to the
non-emergency work site or sites.
7) The normal size of tires shall be the rated size, as published by the
manufacturers, and the maximum wheel load permissible for any wheel
shall not exceed 700 pounds per inch of width of tire.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-154
8) Except as provided in this Section and Section 106.11.10 (9), during the
months of March, April, and May in each year, the maximum axle load
allowable on concrete pavements or pavements with a concrete base is
reduced by 25% from the maximum axle load as specified in this ordinance,
and the maximum axle loads allowable on all other types of roads during
these months are reduced by 35% from the maximum axle loads as
specified. The maximum wheel load shall not exceed 525 pounds per inch
of tire width on concrete and concrete base or 450 pounds per inch of tire
width on all other roads during the time that the seasonal road restrictions
are in effect. This Section does not apply to vehicles transporting
agricultural commodities or public utility vehicles on a highway, road, or
street under the jurisdiction of Troy. For the highways, roads, or streets
under Troys jurisdiction to which the seasonal restrictions prescribed under
this Section apply, Troy shall post all of the following information on the
homepage of its website:
a) The dates when the seasonal restrictions are in effect.
b) The names of the highways and streets and portions of highways and
streets to which seasonal restrictions apply.
9) Pursuant to MCL 257.722 (9), the Michigan Department of Transportation
(for roads under its jurisdiction) and the Road Commission for Oakland
County (for roads under its jurisdiction) may grant exemptions from
seasonal weight restrictions for the transport of milk on specific routes,
when requested in writing. Approval or denial of a request for an exemption
shall be given by written notification to the applicant within 30 days of
submission of the application. If a request is denied, the written notice shall
state the reason for the denial and alternate routes for which the permit may
be issued. The applicant may appeal to the Michigan Department of
Transportation or the Road Commission for Oakland County. These
exemptions do not apply on county roads in counties that have negotiated
agreements with milk haulers or haulers of other commodities during
periods of seasonal load limits before April 13, 1993. This subsection does
not limit the ability of these counties to negotiate such agreements.
10) The Troy Police Department, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction,
may suspend the restrictions imposed by this Section when and where
conditions of the highways or the public health, safety, and welfare warrant
suspension, and impose the restricted loading requirements of this Section
on designated highways at any other time that the conditions of the highway
require.
11) For the purpose of enforcing this ordinance, the gross vehicle weight of a
single vehicle and load or a combination of vehicles and loads shall be
determined by weighing individual axles or groups of axles, and the total
weight on all the axles shall be the gross vehicle weight. In addition, the
gross axle weight shall be determined by weighing individual axles or by
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-155
weighing a group of axles and dividing the gross weight of the group of
axles by the number of axles in the group. The overall gross weight on a
group of two or more axles shall be determined by weighing individual axles
or several axles, and the total weight of all the axles in the group shall be
the overall gross weight of the group.
12) The loading maximum in this subsection applies to the highways under
Troys jurisdiction. The Troy Police Department may designate a highway,
or a section of a highway for the operation of vehicles having a gross
vehicle weight of up to 80,000 pounds, subject to the following load
maximums:
a) Twenty thousand pounds on any one axle, including all enforcement
tolerances.
b) A tandem axle weight of 34,000 pounds, including all enforcement
tolerances.
c) An overall gross weight of a group of two or more consecutive axles
equaling:
W= 500 / LN + 12N + 36 \
\ N-1 /
where W = overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive
axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L = distance in feet between the extreme
of a group of two or more consecutive axles, and N= number of axles in the
group under consideration; except that two consecutive sets of tandem
axles may carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds each if the first and last
axles of the consecutive sets of tandem axles are not less than 36 feet
apart. The gross vehicle weight shall not exceed 80,000 pounds, including
all enforcement tolerances. Except for a five axle truck tractor; semi-trailer
combinations having two consecutive sets of tandem axels, vehicles having
a gross weight in excess of 80,000 pounds or in excess of the vehicle gross
weight determined by application of the formula in this subsection are
subject to the maximum axle loads of Section 106.11.10 (1), (2), and (3). As
used in this Section, tandem axle weight means the total weight
transmitted to the road by two or more consecutive axles, the centers of
which may be included between parallel transverse vertical planes spaced
more than 40 inches but not more than 96 inches apart, extending across
the full width of the vehicle. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
vehicles transporting agricultural commodities shall have weight load
maximums as set forth in this Section.
13) As used in this section:
a) Agricultural commodities means those plants and animals useful to
human beings produced by agriculture and includes, but is not limited
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-156
to, forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, field crops, dairy and
dairy products, poultry and poultry products, cervidae, livestock,
including breeding and grazing, equine, fish, and other aquacultural
products, bees and bee products, berries, herbs, fruits, vegetables,
flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, mushrooms, fertilizer, livestock
bedding, farming equipment, and fuel for agricultural use. The term
does not include trees or lumber.
b) Emergency public utility work means work performed to restore
public utility service or to eliminate a danger to the public due to a
natural disaster, an act of God, or an emergency situation, whether or
not a public official has declared an emergency.
11.11 Restrictions on transportation of flammable liquids and gases; violations,
penalties; enforcement.
1) A truck pulling a trailer, a truck tractor pulling a semi-trailer and trailer
combination, or a truck tractor pulling two semi-trailers shall not transport
within the City a flammable liquid, in bulk, with a flash point at or below 70
degrees Fahrenheit.
2) A truck pulling a trailer, a truck tractor pulling a semi-trailer and trailer
combination, or a truck tractor pulling two semi-trailers shall not transport
within the City a flammable gas or a compressed flammable gas, in bulk, as
defined by 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 180.
3) A truck or a truck tractor pulling a semi-trailer shall not transport within the
City a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flash point at or below 70
degrees Fahrenheit, unless the truck or the semi-trailer has a water
capacity of less than 13,800 gallons. This Section does not apply to those
vehicles registered with the Motor Carrier Division of the Michigan
Department of State Police on or before January 1, 1986.
4) A truck or truck tractor pulling a semi-trailer shall not transport within the
City a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flash point at or below 70
degrees Fahrenheit in a quantity of more than 13, 400 gallons.
5) The owner or driver of a vehicle that transports, or a shipper who loads a
vehicle with a flammable liquid, flammable gas, or compressed flammable
gas in violation of this Section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of not more than $500.00, or imprisonment for not more than 90 days,
or both.
6) This section shall be enforced only by a police officer.
7) For the purposes of this section, in bulk means an amount of product or
material of 3,500 water gallons or more in a single containment system.
Commercial motor vehicles transporting hazardous materials shall comply
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-157
with the Motor Carrier Safety Act, Act Nol. 181 of the Public Acts of 1963,
being sections MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.21 and section 12 of this
ordinance.
11.12 Information to be painted or permanently attached on certain commercial
vehicles and towing or platform bed wrecker service vehicles; use of
removable devices; effects of compliance with federal identification
requirements; exemptions; penalties.
1) All commercial vehicles with a single or combination gross weight rating or
total gross weight of more than 5,000 pounds and all towing or platform bed
wrecker road service vehicles in operation upon the public highways of the
City shall have the name, city, and state or the registered logo or emblem of
the registered owner of the vehicle, (and lessee of the vehicle if the vehicle
is being operated under lease), painted or permanently attached on each
side of the vehicle in letters of not less than 3 inches in height, not lower
than the bottom edge of the door. This information shall be in sharp color
contrast to the background.
2) Except for towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles, the
identification requirement of Section 106.11.12 (1) may be met through the
use of removable devices which meet the requirements. These devices shall
be of durable construction and securely attached to each side of the motor
truck or truck tractor. The removable devices shall be attached so that the
identification is in a horizontal position.
3) A vehicle in compliance with the identification requirements of the federal
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, 49 C.F.R. 390-399, is considered to be in
compliance with this Section.
4) This Section does not apply to a truck eligible for and registered under a
farm or manufacturer license plate, that has a gross vehicle weight of less
than 10,000 pounds.
5) A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
11.13. Stopping vehicles for weighing; offense and penalties.
1) A police officer, having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load
is unlawful, may require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the
vehicle by either portable or stationary scales approved and sealed by the
Department of Agriculture as a legal weighing device; and may require that
the vehicle be driven to the nearest weigh station of the Michigan Department
of Transportation for the purpose of allowing a police officer to determine
whether the vehicle is loaded in conformity with this ordinance.
2) When a police officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that the
weight is unlawful, the officer may require the driver to stop the vehicle in a
suitable place and remain standing until that portion of the load is shifted or
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-158
removed as necessary to reduce the gross axle load weight of the vehicle to
the limit permitted under this ordinance. All material unloaded as provided
under this subsection shall be cared for by the owner or operator of the
vehicle at the risk of the owner or operator. A judge or magistrate imposing a
civil fine and costs under this Section that are not paid in full immediately or
for which a bond is not immediately posted (in double the amount of the civil
fine and costs) shall order the driver or owner to move the vehicle at the
drivers own risk to a place of safekeeping, and keep the vehicle until the fine
and costs are paid or sufficient bond is furnished or until the judge or
magistrate is satisfied that the fine and costs will be paid. The officer who
determined, after weighing a vehicle and load, that the weight is unlawful,
may require the driver to proceed to a judge or magistrate within the City. If
the judge or magistrate is satisfied that the probable civil fine and costs will
be paid by the owner or lessee, the judge or magistrate may allow the driver
to proceed, after the load is made legal. If the judge or magistrate is not
satisfied that the owner or lessee, after a notice and a right to be heard on
the merits is given, will pay the amount of the probable civil fine and costs,
the judge or magistrate may order the vehicle to be impounded until trial on
the merits is completed under conditions set forth in this Section for the
impounding of vehicles after the civil fine and costs have been imposed.
Removal of the vehicle, and forwarding, care or preservation of the load shall
be under the control of and at the risk of the owner or driver. Vehicles
impounded shall be subject to a lien, subject to a prior valid bona fide lien of
prior record, in the amount of the civil fine and costs and if the civil fine and
costs are not paid within 90 days after the seizure, the Court shall certify the
unpaid judgment to the Troy City Attorney, who may proceed to enforce the
lien by foreclosure sale in accordance with procedure authorized in the case
of chattel mortgage foreclosures.
3) Subject to Section 106.11.13 (4), an owner of a vehicle, or a lessee of the
vehicle, or other person, who causes or allows a vehicle to be loaded and
driven or moved on a highway, when the weight of that vehicle violates
Section 106.11.10, is responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a civil fine
in an amount equal to 3 cents per pound for each pound of excess load over
1,000 pounds when the excess is 2,000 pounds or less; 6 cents per pound of
excess load when the excess is over 2,000 pounds but not over 3,000 pound;
9 cents per pound for each pound in excess load when the excess if over
3,000 pounds but not over 4,000 pounds; 12 cents per pound for each pound
of excess load when the excess is over 4,000 but not over 5,000 pounds; 15
cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over
5,000 pounds but not over 10,000 pounds; and 20 cents per pound for each
pound of excess load when the excess if over 10,000 pounds.
4) If the Court determines that the motor vehicle or the combination of vehicles
was operated in violation of this Section, the court shall impose a fine as
follows:
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-159
a) If the Court determines that the motor vehicle or the combination of
vehicles was operated in such a manner that the gross weight of the
vehicle or the combination of vehicles would not be lawful by a proper
distribution of the load upon all the axles of the vehicle or the
combination of vehicles, the Court shall impose a fine for the violation
according to the schedule provided for in Section 106.11.13 (3).
b) If the Court determines that the motor vehicle or the combination of
vehicles would be lawful by a proper distribution of the load upon all of
the axles of the vehicle or the combination of the vehicles, but that one
or more axles of the vehicle exceeded the maximum allowable axle
weight by 4,000 pounds or less, the court shall impose a misload fine of
$200.00 per axle. Not more than three axles shall be used in calculating
the fine to be imposed under this Section. This Section does not apply
to vehicles subject to the maximum loading provisions of Section
106.11.10 (11) or to a vehicle found to be in violation of a special permit
issued under Section 106.11.15.
c) If the Court determines that the motor vehicle or the combination of
vehicles would be lawful by a proper distribution of the load upon all of
the axles of the vehicle or the combination of vehicles, but that one or
more axles of the vehicle exceeded the maximum allowable axle weight
by more than 4,000 pounds, the court shall impose a fine for the
violation according to the schedule provided in Section 106.11.12 (3).
5) A driver or owner of a commercial vehicle with other vehicles or trailers in
combination, a truck or truck tractor, a truck or truck tractor with other
vehicles in combination, or any special mobile equipment, who fails to stop at
or bypasses any scales or weighing station, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
6) Reserved.
7) A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop when requested or
ordered to do so, or who fails to submit to a weighing by a police officer
authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the
vehicle and load, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for
not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. A driver or
person who dumps his or her load when ordered to submit to a weigh, or who
otherwise attempts to commit or commits an act to avoid a vehicle weigh is in
violation of this Section.
11.14 Axle weight requirements; vehicles equipped with lift axles.
1) The axle weight requirements of this ordinance do not apply to a vehicle
equipped with lift axles during the period in which axles are raised to
negotiate an intersection, driveway, or other turn and until the lift axles are
fully engaged after the period of time or the distance necessary to negotiate
that intersection, driveway or other turn.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-160
2) This section does not exempt axle weight requirements due to a lift axle
system that is not working properly or due to driver error or non-compliance.
3) If a vehicle is to be weighed to determine whether the vehicle is being
operated in violation of this ordinance or a rule promulgated under the
Motor Carrier Safety Act, and the vehicle is equipped with lift axles that
have been raised to allow the vehicle to negotiate an intersection, driveway,
or other turn, the vehicle shall be weighed only after the lift axles have been
fully lowered and are under operational pressure as provided in Section
106.11.14 (1). This section does not exempt axle weight requirements due
to a lift axle system that is not working properly or due to driver error or noncompliance.
4) As used in this section, lift axle means an axle on a vehicle that can be
raised or lowered by mechanical means.
11.15 Special permits for non-conforming vehicles; applications; farm machinery,
telephone, telegraph, or electric poles, concrete pipes, mobile homes.
1) Pursuant to MCL 257.725, the Michigan Transportation Department or the
Road Commission of Oakland County, upon receipt of a written application
and upon good cause being shown, may issue a written special permit,
authorizing an applicant to operate upon or remove from a highway
maintained by the City, a vehicle or combination of vehicles that are any of
the following:
a) Of a size, weight, or load exceeding the maximum specified in this
ordinance.
b) Otherwise not in conformity with this ordinance.
2) The special permit application shall be on a form prescribed by the Michigan
Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Oakland County
and shall specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and load to be
operated or moved and the particular highways upon which the special
permit to operate is requested.
3) The Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of
Oakland County may issue a special permit and charge a fee, which shall
not exceed the administrative costs incurred. The special permit can
authorize the operation of the following upon a highway:
a) Traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse
corrugations upon the periphery of those movable tracks on farm
tractors.
b) Other farm machinery otherwise prohibited under this ordinance.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-161
4) A special permit shall specify the trip or trips and date or dates for which it is
valid, and the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road
Commission of Oakland County may restrict or prescribe conditions of
operation of a vehicle or vehicles, if necessary, to protect the safety of the
public or to insure against undue damage to the road foundations, surfaces,
structures, or installations, and may require a reasonable inspection fee and
other security as set out in MCL 257.725 to compensate for damages
caused by the movement. A special permit may be issued on an annual
basis.
5) A special permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle or
combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by
a police officer. A person shall not violate any of the terms or conditions of
the special permit.
6) A person who violates this Section is responsible for a civil infraction.
7) A person who is issued a special permit to move a mobile home under this
section is subject to Section 106.11.5.
11.16 Regulation of highways by City; penalty for violations.
1) For highways under the Citys jurisdiction, except state trunk line highways,
the City may do any of the following:
a) Prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles on designated
highways or streets.
b) Impose limitations as to the weight of trucks or other commercial vehicles
on designated highways or streets.
c) Provide that only certain highways or streets may be used by trucks or
other commercial vehicles.
2) Any prohibitions, limitations, or truck route designations established under
Section 106.11.16 (1) shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on the
highways or streets. The design and placement of the signs shall be
consistent with the requirements of MCL 257.608.
3) A person who violates a prohibition, limitation, or truck route designation
established pursuant to section 106.11.16 (1) is responsible for a civil
infraction.
11.17 Police officers authority to enforce ordinance on boundary streets and
highways.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-162
Pursuant to MCL 257.726a, a police officer of the City may exercise authority and
powers outside his or her own City or County when enforcing this ordinance on a
street or highway which is on the boundary of the City or County, the same as if
the police officer were in his or her own City and County.
11.18 Stopping motor vehicles for possible load, weight, or height violations;
temporary detention; arrests.
Any police officer having reason to believe that the load, weight, or height of a
vehicle or load is in violation of Section 106.11.4, 106.11.8, 106.11.11 or
106.11.13, and that violation is a misdemeanor, may require the driver of the
vehicle to stop, and the officer may investigate, weigh, or measure the vehicle or
load. If after personally investigating, weighing, or measuring the vehicle or load,
the officer determines that the load, weight, or height of a vehicle or load are in
violation of the requirements of Section 106.11.4, 106.11.8, 106.11.11, or
106.11.13, the officer may temporarily detain the driver of the vehicle for
purposes of making a record or vehicle check, and may make an arrest for the
violation, and may proceed as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
12.0 MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY
12.1 Title. This section of Chapter 106 shall be known as the Motor Carrier Safety
Ordinance.
12.2 Adoption of federal regulations; modifications of federal definitions;
application of ordinance; definitions.
1) The City of Troy adopts the following provisions of Title 49 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, on file with the office of the Michigan Secretary of
State and the Troy City Clerk, except where modified by this ordinance:
a) Hazardous materials regulations, being 49 CFR parts 100 through 180,
except for the transportation of agricultural products (for which an
exception from the application of 49 CFR subchapter C and 49 CFR
subchapters G and H, part 172, is provided under 49 CFR 173.5), is
specifically authorized if the transportation is in compliance with this
ordinance and state law.
b) Motor carrier safety regulations, being 49 CFR parts 40, 356, 365, 368,
371 through 373, 375, 376, 379, 382, 385, 387, 390 through 393, 395
through 399 including the appendices of each part except for the
following:
i) Except as provided in this subparagraph, where the term United
States Department of Transportation, Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration, Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administrator, Director, Bureau of Motor Carrier Safety,
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-163
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Administration, or Associate
Administrator for Hazardous Materials Safety appears, it refers to
the Michigan Department of State Police or the City of Troy. If the
term is being used for purposes of 49 CFR 397 as it relates to
routing and movement of hazardous materials, it refers to the
Michigan Department of Transportation or the City of Troy.
ii) Where inter-state appears, it shall mean intra-state or inter-state,
or both, as applicable, except as specifically provided in this
ordinance.
iii) Where Special Agent of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration, Administration Personnel, or Hazardous
Materials Enforcement Specialist appears, it either means a
police officer or an enforcement member of the Motor Carrier
Division of the City.
iv) Where MCS 63 appears, it means MC 9 and MC 9b.
v) Where MCS 64 appears, it means UD-70.
vi) Exempt intra-City zones and the regulations applicable to exempt
intra-City zones do not apply to this ordinance.
2) This ordinance does not apply to a bus operated by a public transit
agency operating under any of the following:
a) A county, city, township, or village as provided by law or other
authority incorporated under 1963 PA 55, MCL 124.351 to MCL
124.359. Each authority and governmental agency incorporated
under 1963 PA 55, MCL 124.351 to MCL 124.359, has the exclusive
jurisdiction to determine its own contemplated routes, hours of
service, estimated transit vehicle miles, costs of public transportation
services, and projected capital improvements or projects within its
service area.
b) An authority incorporated under the Metropolitan Transportation
Authorities Act of 1967, 1967 PA 204, MCL 124.401 to MCL 124.426,
or an authority that operates a transportation service pursuant to an
inter-local agreement under the Urban Cooperation Act of 1967,
1967(Ex Sess.) PA 7, MCL 124.501 to MCL 124.512.
c) A contract entered into pursuant to 1967 (Ex Sess.) PA 8, MCL
124.531 to MCL 124.536 or 1951 PA 35, MCL 124.1 to MCL 124.13.
d) An authority incorporated under the Public Transportation Authority
Act, 1986 PA 196, MCL 124.451 to MCL 124.479, or a nonprofit
corporation organized under the Nonprofit Corporation Act, 1982 PA
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-164
162, MCL 450.2101 to MCL 450.3192, that provides transportation
services.
e) An authority financing public improvements to transportation systems
under the Revenue Bond Act of 1933, 1933 PA 94, MCL 141.101 to
MCL 141.140.
3) As used in this ordinance:
Hazardous material vehicle inspection or repair facility means a
commercial enterprise that performs inspections, certification, testing, or
repairs to commercial motor vehicles transporting hazardous materials as
required by 49 CFR parts 100 to 180 and includes motor carriers that
perform the inspections, certification, testing, or repairs to vehicles owned
or leased by the motor carrier.
12.3 Operation of commercial motor vehicle; requirements; qualifications for
operation in intra-state transportation.
1. A person shall not drive a commercial motor vehicle unless he or she is
qualified to drive that vehicle. A motor carrier shall not require or permit a
person to drive a commercial motor vehicle unless that person is qualified to
drive that vehicle.
2. In the case of intra-state or intra-city transportation, a person is qualified to
drive a commercial motor vehicle if he or she meets all the requirements of 49
CFR part 391, except the following provisions:
a) Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision (b), the person is at
least 18 years old when transporting intra-state or intra-city property or
passengers.
b) The person is at least 21 years old when transporting hazardous materials
in a quantity that requires the vehicle to be marked or placarded under 49
CFR parts 100 to 180.
c) The person is eligible for and displays a grandfather rights card issued in
accordance with the Motor Carrier Safety Act, MCL 480.11, et. seq.
12.4 Trailers; equipment with surge brakes. Trailers with a gross vehicle weight or
gross vehicle weight rating of 15,000 pounds or less or trailer-vehicle
combinations with an actual gross vehicle weight or a gross vehicle weight
rating of 26,000 pounds or less may be equipped with surge brakes for intrastate
and intra-city operations as allowed by section 705(1)(c ) of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.705.
12.5 Application of ordinance to drivers for intra-state or intra-city motor carriers
regularly employed for period beginning on or before June 10, 1984;
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-165
application of certain requirements of ordinance to all drivers granted
grandfather rights; duration of grandfather rights; application of exemption.
The provisions of this ordinance and 40 CFR 391.21, adopted by reference,
relating to the applications for employment, 49 CFR 391.23, adopted by
reference, relating to investigations and inquiries, and 49 CFR 391.31 and CFR
391.33 adopted by reference, relating to road tests, do not apply to a driver who
has been a regularly employed driver of an intra-state or intra-city motor carrier of
property for a continuous period which began on or before June 10, 1984, as long
as he or she continues to be a regularly employed driver of that motor carrier or a
driver who has been a regularly employed driver of an intra-state or intra-city
motor carrier of passengers for a continuous period which began on or before
March 3, 1991, as long as he or she continued to be a regularly employed driver
of that motor carrier. Such a driver is qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle
if he or she fulfills the requirements of section 12. 2 (d) (2).
12.6 Application of ordinance to operation of farm vehicles, implements of
husbandry, public utility vehicles, government vehicles, combinations of
vehicles, school buses, motor buses, and commercial vehicles engaged in
seasonal construction-related activities; definitions.
1) In the case of intra-state or intra-city transportation, the provisions of 49 CFR
391.21, adopted by reference, relating to application for employment, 49
CFR 391.23, adopted by reference, relating to investigations and inquires,
49 CFR 391.31, adopted by reference, relating to road tests, 49 CFR part
395, adopted by reference, relating to hours of service, 49 CFR 391.41 to
391.45, adopted by reference, to the extent that they require a driver to be
medically qualified or examined and to have a medical examiners certificate
on his or her person and the provisions of this ordinance relating to files and
records do not apply to a farm vehicle driver as defined in 49 CFR 390.5,
adopted by reference.
2) For intra-state or intra-city transportation, the provisions of this ordinance do
not apply to a self-propelled implement of husbandry or an implement of
husbandry being drawn by a farm tractor or another implement of
husbandry.
3) The provision of this ordinance related to driver qualifications do not apply to
public utility, telephone, and cable television company service employees if
those employees are not otherwise being used as a regularly employed
driver and are not operating a vehicle that meets the definition of a
commercial motor vehicle in 49 CFR part 383.
4) The requirements of 49 CFR part 395 do not apply to any driver of a public
utility service vehicle when being used in cases of emergency. As used in
this subsection, emergency means any instance of loss of public utility
service due to an unforeseen circumstance, a natural disaster, or an act of
God. A declaration of emergency by a public official is not required to
constitute an emergency under this subsection.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-166
5) A commercial motor vehicle constructed and maintained so that the body
chassis or other parts of the vehicle afford the rear end protection required
by 49 CFR 393.86 is in compliance with that section.
6) This ordinance and the rules promulgated under the federal regulations
which are adopted by reference do not apply to a commercial motor vehicle
owned and operated by a unit of government or its employees, except as
otherwise provided by this ordinance, and except for all of the following parts
of 49 CFR:
a) Part 382.
b) Part 391.
c) Part 392.
d) Part 393.
7) A combination of vehicles with an actual combination gross vehicle weight or
a gross combination weight rating of 26,000 pounds or less, provided the
trailer or semitrailer has an actual gross vehicle or gross vehicle weight
rating of 15,000 pounds or less, may be equipped with surge brakes for
intra-state and intra-city operation as allowed by section 705 (1) (c) of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.705. Vehicles of any size
that are transporting hazardous materials in an amount that requires
placarding or vehicles that are designed to transport more than 8
passengers, including the driver, are prohibited from being equipped with
surge brakes for intra-state and intra-city operation.
8) This ordinance and the rules promulgated under the federal regulations
which are adopted by reference do not apply to a school bus as defined in
the Pupil Transportation Act, 1990 PA 187, MCL 257.1801 to MCL
257.1877, or a bus defined and certified under the Motor Bus Transportation
Act, 1982 PA 432, MCL 474.101 to MCL 474.141.
9) As used in Section 106.12 (3) and (4), public utility means a person or
corporation operating equipment or facilities for producing, generating,
transmitting, delivering, or furnishing gas or electricity for the production of
light, heat, or power for the public for compensation.
10) As used in this section:
a) Implement of husbandry means that term as defined in section 21 of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.21.
b) Farm tractor means that term as defined in section 16 of the Michigan Vehicle
Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.16.
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-167
12.7 Submission of transportation safety related documents by motor carriers
and hazardous materials vehicle inspection and repair facilities to motor
carrier officers; facsimile of motor carrier division identification card;
inspection of cargo or vehicle without warrant by motor carrier officer.
1) Motor carriers shall submit, upon demand, all their transportation safety
related documents, such as all records and information pertaining to any
accident, drivers records of duty status, bills of lading, shipping records, driver
time and payroll records, driver qualification records, vehicle maintenance
records, and equipment for inspection or copying during regular business
hours to any Troy motor carrier enforcement police officer.
2) Hazardous materials vehicle inspections and repair facilities shall submit,
upon demand, all their transportation safety related documents as required by
this ordinance, such as hazardous materials tank certification and repair
documents, and annual inspection certification documents to any Troy motor
carrier enforcement police officer.
3) A motor carrier or a hazardous material vehicle inspection or repair facility
operating within the City with main offices in another city, state or province
shall submit all transportation safety related documents as outlined in Section
106.12 (1) for inspection and copying within 10 working days after receiving
formal notification requesting the documents.
4) A Troy motor carrier enforcement police officer, may without a warrant, require
the cargo carrying portion of a vehicle to be opened for inspection of the
cargo, any object within that portion of the vehicle, or the interior of the vehicle
or any compartment within the interior of the vehicle. If a commercial motor
vehicle is inspected by breaking the load seal, then the police officer shall give
to the driver a signed receipt of inspection and the police officer shall be
responsible for applying a City of Troy seal.
12.8 Penalties for violations of ordinance or rules; warrantless stops and
investigations of motor vehicles; issuance of citations; enforcement of
federal or foreign out-of-service orders; penalties for violations of out-ofservice
orders.
1) Except as provided in Sections 106.12.10, 106.12.11 and 106.12.12, any
person, driver, or motor carrier, as defined by 49 CFR 390.5, who violates this
ordinance or a rule adopted by reference under this ordinance, or permits or
requires any person to violate this ordinance or a rule adopted by reference
under this ordinance, is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to
pay a fine of not more than $250.00 for each violation.
2) A Troy motor carrier enforcement police officer, with probable cause to believe
that a motor vehicle is being operated in violation of this ordinance or a rule
adopted by reference under this ordinance, may stop the motor vehicle and
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-168
inspect the motor vehicle. If a violation is found, the officer may issue a notice
to appear for that violation.
12.9 Adoption by Reference of Rules Promulgated by the Michigan Department
of State Police.
Any rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of State Police necessary to
the accomplishment of purposes of the Motor Carrier Safety Act, 1963 PA 181,
MCL 480.11,et. seq. are hereby adopted by reference, as amended.
12.10 Penalties; serious safety defect defined.
1) A driver, person, or motor carrier, as defined by 49 CFR 390.5, who operates
or who requires or permits the driver to operate a commercial motor vehicle
with a serious safety defect in violation of this ordinance or a rule adopted by
reference under this ordinance, is responsible for a civil infraction and shall
be assessed a fine of not more than $500 for each violation. A fine ordered to
be paid by the district court under this Section shall be paid to the Court and
the Court shall apply the fines to the City and the State for library purposes,
as provided by law.
2) As used in this Section, serious safety defect means a violation of this
ordinance or a rule adopted by reference under this ordinance relative to
brakes, tires, steering, coupling devices, headlights, taillights, brake lights,
and turn signals that results in the vehicle being placed out of service.
12.11 Offenses relating to operating or requiring or permitting operation of
commercial motor vehicle in violation of provisions of ordinance or rules
related to transportation of hazardous materials; penalties.
1) A person who operates or who requires or permits a person to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of this ordinance or a rule adopted by
reference under this ordinance related to the transportation of hazardous
materials, if the vehicle is transporting a package required to be marked or
labeled under 49 CFR parts 100 to 180, is responsible for a civil infraction
and may be ordered to pay a fine of not more than $500.00 for each violation.
2) A person or entity identified in Section 106.12.10 (1) who knowingly or willfully
violates this ordinance or a rule adopted by reference under this ordinance is,
upon conviction, guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not
more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, for each
violation.
3) A person or entity identified in Section 106.12.10 (1), who causes injury or
death during a violation of this ordinance, while a vehicle identified in
subsection (1) that is transporting a package required to be marked or
labeled under 49 CFR parts 100 to 180 is, upon conviction, guilty of a
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-169
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than 90 days or a fine
of not more than $500.00, or both, for each violation.
4) An officer, employee, owner, or agent of an individual, partnership,
corporation, or association, or their lessees or receiver appointed by a court
that is the owner or user of any hazardous materials vehicle inspection or
repair facility that violates a section of this ordinance, or a rule adopted by
reference under this ordinance, related to the transportation of hazardous
materials, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, for each
violation.
12.12 Issuance and contents of compliance and shut down orders; penalties for
failure to comply with shut down orders.
1) As used in this section:
a) Immediate destination means the next scheduled stop of a commercial
vehicle already in motion where the cargo on board can be safely
secured.
b) Motor carrier division means the motor carrier division of the Michigan
State Police and/or the City of Troy.
c) Person means an individual, driver, or employee or a firm, motor carrier,
lessee, lessor, association, partnership, or corporation, and their affiliated
or related successors, that undertakes to control, direct, conduct, or
otherwise perform transportation by commercial motor vehicle upon the
public highways of this city.
d) Shut down order means a court order issued to the Troy police
department motor carrier enforcement division upon proof shown of
unreasonable risk or an imminent hazard.
e) Unreasonable risk or an imminent hazard shall be defined as any
condition of commercial motor vehicle, employee, or commercial motor
operation which creates, causes, or compounds the substantial likelihood
that death, serious illness, or severe personal injury may occur if not
discontinued immediately.
f) Upon determination that the continued operation of commercial motor
vehicles by a person upon the highways of this City and State poses an
unreasonable risk or an imminent hazard to the public safety, the motor
carrier division of the Troy Police Department shall issue a compliance
order. The order may direct a person to make certain changes, repairs,
or alterations to the persons vehicles or operations, to comply with the
laws of the City and the State of Michigan. In making an order,
restrictions shall not be imposed on any employee or person beyond that
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-170
required to abate the hazard. Any vehicle or driver operating during the
specified time period of the order shall be in compliance with all
applicable laws and rules.
g) A compliance order shall include the name and address of the person and
the chief operating officer of the person, the reason or reasons for the
order, and the requirements or conditions that must be met for rescission
of the order. The order shall also include a statement that the person has
a set time limit to comply with the order. If the set time limit expires and
the person is not in compliance with the order, the motor carrier division
of the Troy Police Department may seek a shut down order from the 52-4
District Court. The Motor Carrier Division of the Troy Police Department
shall set the time limit for compliance, with the compliance order to be not
less than 30 days and not more than 180 days.
h) Upon petition to the 52-4 District Court by the motor carrier division of the
Troy Police Department, the court may issue a shut down order. The
order shall direct a vehicle or vehicles or employee or employees out of
service from further operations, or shall direct a person to cease all or
part of the persons commercial motor vehicle operation. In making such
an order, restrictions shall not be imposed on any employee or person
beyond that required to abate the hazard.
i) A shut down order shall include the name and address of the person and
the chief operating officer of the person, the reason or reasons for the
order, the requirements or conditions that must be met for rescission of
the order, and a statement of the right of appeal.
j) An order to any person to cease all or part of its operation shall not
prevent vehicles in transit at the time the order is served from proceeding
to their immediate destinations, unless that vehicle or person is
specifically ordered out of service. However, vehicles and drivers
proceeding to their immediate destination shall be subject to compliance
upon arrival.
k) A person who fails to comply with a shut down order is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each
violation, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. A
person or vehicle found operating on the highway of this City while under
a shut down order shall be immediately stopped, and impounded or
arrested. The owner or lessee of the vehicle shall be responsible for any
costs incurred during impoundment. The vehicle shall be released upon
the Courts determination that there is compliance with the order.
12.13. Venue of prosecutions under this ordinance. When this ordinance or a rule
adopted by reference under this ordinance has been violated, the offense may
be prosecuted in the 52-4 District Court if the motor vehicle, driver or operator
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-171
implicated was situated in or passed through the City when the offense was
committed.
12.14 Incidents involving transportation of hazardous materials; notification of
state police and fire department. Immediately following any of the following
occurrences involving the transportation of hazardous materials, the owner,
driver, or lessee, or representative of the owner, driver, or lessee, shall notify the
motor carrier division of the Department of State Police, the motor carrier
division of the Troy Police Department and the Troy Fire Department of the
known details regarding the incident.
12.15 Vehicle combination transporting combustible liquids; requirements;
information required to be on file; retention and transfer of information;
applicability of requirements in subsections (2) and (3); transport of
flammable liquids, gases, or compressed gases. by vehicle combinations,
equipment requirements; retention of records regarding devices;
compliance with other requirements by motor vehicles transporting
flammable liquids or gases.
1) A truck tractor pulling a semi-trailer and a trailer, or pulling 2 semi-trailers,
shall not transport a combustible liquid unless the vehicle combination
meets the following requirements:
a) Is equipped with a device that restricts the horizontal and vertical
rotation of the dolly assemblage of the vehicle combination in a
manner that maintains the longitudinal tracking of the dolly and semitrailer
in a truck, tractor, semi-trailer, and trailer combination, or the
dolly and the truck in a truck and trailer combination. This device shall
be welded to the vehicle in a workmanlike manner, and the efficiency
of a weld shall not be less than 85% of the mechanical properties of
the adjacent metal in the chassis.
b) Is equipped with stops in the spring hangers of each semi-trailer and
trailer in the vehicle combination in a manner that improves the
stability of the vehicle combination by reducing the free play of the leaf
spring suspension to a maximum of  of an inch when the spring
passes from tension to compression.
2) The owner of the semi-trailer or trailer to which the device described in
Section 106.12.15 (1) is attached shall keep on file in their principal place of
business the following information:
a) Specifications and plans of the device.
b) Name of the manufacturer of the device.
c) Date of installation of the device
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-172
d) An individual manufacturer identification number which is stamped or
permanently affixed to the device.
3) The information required in subsection (2) shall be kept by the vehicles
owner and shall be transferred to the new owner if the vehicle is sold, or
may be destroyed if the vehicle is retired from service or scrapped.
4) The requirements specified in Section 106.12.15 (2) and (3) apply to
devices affixed to vehicles on or after January 8, 1996.
5) Commercial motor vehicles used to transport flammable liquids, flammable
gases, or compressed flammable gases shall also comply with Section
106.11.11 of this ordinance.
12.16 Adoption or enforcement of inconsistent ordinance or resolutions;
disposition of fines for operation of vehicles with serious safety defects;
issuance of multiple citations within 24-hour period for violation of
provisions substantially corresponding to MCL 257.683 to MCL 257.725a;
dismissal of City citations upon production of proof of repair of equipment
violations; requirements for classification as motor carrier enforcement
officer.
1) This ordinance shall not be amended by the City of Troy to adopt or enforce
provisions which are inconsistent with the Motor Carrier Safety Act, being
MCL 480.11, et. seq. As used in this section, inconsistent means a
provision or rule that is more permissive or more restrictive than the Motor
Carrier Safety Act, or that would require more action, equipment, or permits
than required by the Motor Carrier Safety Act, or that prevents or obstructs
compliance with the Motor Carrier Safety Act.
2) The fine for operating a vehicle with a serious safety defect, which is
ordered to be paid under this ordinance or a resolution adopted by the City
of Troy that is consistent with Section 106.12.10, shall be paid as follows:
a) Seventy percent to the City of Troy.
b) Thirty percent for library purposes, as provided by law.
3) Section 106.12.15 (2) does not apply to a fine ordered to be paid for a case
in which the citation is dismissed, as set forth below.
4) The owner or operator of a commercial motor vehicle shall not be issued
more than one citation for each violation of the provisions of this ordinance
regulating the operation of a commercial motor vehicle and substantially
corresponding to 683 to 725a of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300,
MCL 257.683 to MCL 257.725a, within a 24-hour period. If the owner or
operator of a commercial motor vehicle is issued a citation by the City of
Troy for an equipment violation that does not result in the vehicle being
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-173
placed out of service, the court shall dismiss the citation if the owner or
operator of that commercial motor vehicle provides written proof of the court
within 14 days after the citation is issued showing that the defective
equipment indicated in the citation has been repaired.
5) In order to be classified as a motor carrier enforcement officer, a Troy police
officer must have training equal to the minimum training requirements,
including any annual training updates, established by the Michigan
Department of State Police for an officer of the motor carrier division of the
Michigan Department of State Police. A police officer who has received
training equal to these minimum training requirements before the effective
date of this ordinance is considered a motor carrier enforcement officer for
purposes of the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act and this ordinance.
12.17 Transfer of hazardous materials on highways, roads, streets, or alleys;
overfilling of containers during transfers; penalties.
1) Except as provided in Section 106.12.17 (2), a person, driver, owner,
carrier, lessee, or lessor shall not transfer or allow to be transferred a
hazardous material from a cargo tank, portable tank, or any other container
to any cargo tank, portable tank, fuel tank, or any other container on a
highway, road, street, or alley within the City.
2) Section 106.12.17 (1) does not apply to the following transfer situations:
a) Fueling machinery or equipment for construction, farm, and
maintenance use.
b) Fueling emergency vehicles.
c) Under emergency conditions, a transfer may be made provided it is
approved by the Troy Fire Chief, or his/her designee and the Bureau of
Fire Service created in section 1b of the Fire Prevention Code, 1941
PA 207, MCL 29.1b, or a hazardous materials investigator of the motor
carrier division of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to
their respective authority under the Fire Prevention Code, 1941 PA
207, MCL 29.1 to MCL 29.34.
3) A person shall not overfill a container, including a storage tank, during a
transfer of a hazardous material from or into a vehicle, so that hazardous
material is released from the package or container.
4) The penalty for violating this section is as prescribed in Section 106.12.11.
12.18. Transportation or allowance of transportation of vehicle carrying
hazardous materials on publicly maintained route.
1) A person, driver, owner, carrier, lessee, or lessor shall not transport or allow
to be transported a vehicle carrying hazardous materials in an amount
required to be placarded under title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-174
on a publicly maintained route as identified on the national hazardous
materials route registry as determined by the United States Department of
Transportation under title 49 CFR.
2) The penalty for violating this section shall be as prescribed in Section
106.12.11.
12.19 Enforcement of civil infractions; procedure for provision of security and
appearance by nonresidents stopped for civil infractions; disposition by
police officers at end of tour of duty of certificates or deposits of money
taken as security for appearance; entry of default judgment and forfeiture
of posted certificate or deposit.
1) A civil infraction action shall be enforced in the manner provided for
enforcement under this Chapter.
2) When a person who is not a resident of the State of Michigan is stopped for
a civil infraction in the City of Troy, the police officer making the stop may
take security for the nonresidents appearance in court. The person stopped
may recognize to the officer or to the court for his or her appearance by
leaving with the officer or court a guaranteed appearance certificate or a
sum of money not to exceed $100.00.
3) If a magistrate is available for an immediate appearance, upon demand of
the person stopped, the officer immediately shall take the nonresident driver
before the magistrate to answer to the civil infraction alleged. If the
nonresident defendant requests a hearing, the hearing shall be scheduled
and the defendant shall leave with the court the guaranteed appearance
certificate or deposit as security for appearance at the scheduled informal
or formal hearing.
4) The officer receiving a guaranteed appearance certificate or deposit of
money shall give a receipt to the person stopped for the guaranteed
appearance certificate or the money deposited together with the written
citation.
5) At or before the completion of his or her tour of duty, a police officer taking
a certificate or deposit of money shall deliver the certificate or deposit of
money and the citation either to the court named in the citation or to the
police chief or person authorized by the police chief to receive certificates or
deposits. The police chief or person authorized by the police chief shall
deposit the certificate or the money deposited and the citation with the
court. Failure to deliver the money deposited shall be embezzlement of
public money.
6) If the person who posts a certificate or deposit fails to appear as required in
the citation or fails to appear for a scheduled informal or formal hearing, the
district court shall enter a default judgment against the person, and the
Chapter 106  Traffic
106-175
guaranteed appearance certificate or money deposit shall be forfeited and
applied to any civil fine or costs ordered.
7) For purposes of this Section, guaranteed appearance certificate means a
card or certificate containing a printed statement that a surety company
authorized to do business in Michigan guarantees the appearance of the
person whose signature appears on the card or certificate and that the
company, if the person fails to appear in court at the time of a scheduled
informal or formal hearing or to pay any fine or costs imposed, will pay any
fine, costs, or bond forfeiture imposed on the person in a total amount not
to exceed $200.00.
12.20 Prevention of throwing of water or other road surface substances from rear
wheels of vehicles or combinations; use of flaps. A truck, truck tractor, trailer,
semi- trailer, or any combination of these, when used on a highway, shall be
constructed, equipped, or operated to prevent water or other road surface
substances from being thrown from the rear wheels of the vehicle or
combination at tangents exceeding 22  degrees measured from the road
surface. If a flap type device is used, it shall not have attached any type of lamp,
breakable reflective material, or reflecting buttons nor may the device extend
beyond the maximum width of the vehicle or combination.
(05-10-2010)