COMPILATION OF GENERAL ORDINANCES 
____________ 
CHARTER TOWNSHIP 
OF
UNION
COUNTY OF ISABELLA
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Township Board 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
This is a compilation of the general ordinances of the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, which includes currently operative ordinances, compiled with all amendments through and including Ordinance No. 1995-4, adopted July 12, 1995. 
The chronological listing of ordinances, including title and location within the compilation, reflects ordinances in force at the time of this compilation, and subsequently adopted, amended or repealed ordinances, thus providing a valuable record of the municipality's ordinance history. Ordinances which are printed in their entirety are classified by subject matter and assigned to one of eleven basic categories. Each of these categories is indicated by a tab. Every ordinance is introduced with a part number, a title concerning the content, the ordinance number, and the adoption date. 
Section headings in boldface type have been provided by the editors, if not supplied in the original copy, to facilitate usage. Sections that are subsequently amended are followed by a history note enclosed in parentheses indicating the ordinance number and adoption date of the amendment. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Cross reference notations are included to provide quick referral to other ordinances and/or sections dealing with similar subjects. 
Running heads at the tops of the pages contain an abbreviated title, the ordinance number and section numbers to provide a guide for locating specific information quickly. The section number appearing in the running head on the left-hand page cites the section material beginning the page; the number on the right-hand page cites the section material concluding the page. 
The exact wording of the ordinances has been preserved. Since ordinances are legal documents, editorial changes in a compilation are minor, limited primarily to correction of obvious typographical errors and resolving, upon specific instructions from the township, any duplications and inconsistencies brought to their attention during the preparation of the proof copy of the compilation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of expression of numbers in text has been imposed. Any textual additions by the editor appear in brackets. 
Numbering system 
Each ordinance is assigned a part number. The part number is used to identify the ordinance primarily for indexing and cross reference purposes. Each succeeding article and/or section deriving from that ordinance will have the same number on the left-hand side of the decimal point. For example, section number 12.004 refers to section 4 of the ordinance assigned to part 12. Part numbers allow for expansion within each of the categories and within the compilation as a whole. 
Index 
The alphabetical index permits easy location of ordinances by subject. Main entries are in all uppercase letters. Under the entry for each ordinance, the catchlines of all sections appear in lowercase, indented and alphabetized. Cross references and additional entries are provided where necessary to direct the user to a particular topic. In preparing the index the proper balance has been achieved between creating an index comprehensive enough to be useful and yet not so detailed that it requires extensive revision each time an ordinance is enacted, repealed, or amended. 
Looseleaf supplements 
Since an ordinance compilation, unlike a bound book, is constantly in a state of evolution, a special feature of this compilation is the looseleaf system of binding. With this system, the compilation can easily be kept up-to-date by submitting copies of new ordinances or amendments as they are enacted. These will then be incorporated by the editor into the compilation, and the appropriate pages will be revised or created for distribution to the holders of copies, with specific instructions for the manner of removing obsolete pages and inserting the current ones. Through regular supplementation, the compilation will continue to remain current and useful. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; editors' notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; table of ordinances; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
©Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 1996.  
1.000 - FISCAL YEAR Ord. No. 1979-1 Adopted: April 10, 1979 
An Ordinance to establish the fiscal year of the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan and the annual settlement day for such Township pursuant to Michigan Public Act 596 of 1978. 
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN HEREBY ORDAINS:
 
1.001 - [Dates.] 
Sec. I. Commencing in 1979, the fiscal year of the Township shall extend from April 1st of each year until March 31st of the following year. Any preexisting Township budget lawfully adopted by the Township Board shall be proportionately extended to coincide with the foregoing new fiscal year periods.  
1.002 - [Annual settlement day meeting.] 
Sec. II. The annual settlement day meeting of the Township Board shall hereafter be held on the 15th day of the last month of the fiscal year of the Township unless said day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday whereupon said meeting shall be held on the following Monday which is not a legal holiday.  
1.003 - [Annual electors meeting.] 
Sec. III. The annual meeting of the electors of the Township, where the same has not been abolished, shall be held on the last Saturday in the last month of the aforesaid fiscal year at such time and place as is determined by the Township Board.  
1.004 - [Effective date.] 
Sec. IV. This Ordinance shall take immediate effect. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
2.000 - ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER Ord. No. 1986-3 Adopted: March 5, 1986 
An Ordinance to establish the office of Ordinance Enforcement Officer; to prescribe the duties of said office; to authorize the Township Board to appoint any person or persons to said office; and to amend any Ordinances of Union Township which conflict with the provisions hereof. 
 
2.001 - Title. 
Sec. 1. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as "The Union Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer Ordinance."  
2.002 - Ordinance Enforcement Officer. 
Sec. 2. There is hereby established the office of Ordinance Enforcement Officer within the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan.  
2.003 - Appointment. 
Sec. 3. The Township Board of Union is hereby authorized by resolution, at any regular meeting of said Board, to appoint any person or persons to the office of Ordinance Enforcement Officer for such term or terms as may be designated in said resolution. Said Board may further, by resolution, remove any person from said office, in the discretion of said Board.  
2.004 - Duties. 
Sec. 4. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to enforce all Ordinances of the Township of Union, whether heretofore or hereafter enacted, and whether such Ordinances specifically designate a different official to enforce the same or do not designate any particular enforcing officer. Where a particular officer is so designated in any such Ordinance, the authority of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer to enforce the same shall be in addition and supplementary to the authority granted to such other specific officer. The authority of such Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall also be in addition and supplementary to the authority vested in the Township Supervisor by state statute. The Ordinance enforcing authority of the Township Supervisor and the other officers specifically designated in any Township shall continue in full force and effect and shall in no way be diminished or impaired by the terms of the within Ordinance.  
2.005 - Definitions. 
Sec. 5. The ordinance enforcement duties herein authorized shall include, among others, the following: Investigation of ordinance violations; serving notice of violations; serving appearance tickets as authorized under Chapter IV of Public Act 175 of 1927, as amended; appearance in court or other judicial proceedings to assist in the prosecution of ordinance violators, and such other ordinance-enforcing duties as may be delegated by the Township Supervisor or assigned by the Township Attorney.  
2.006 - Saving clause. 
Sec. 6. The provisions of the within Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable and the invalidation of any one or more of the same by any judicial determination or statutory or constitutional provision shall not invalidate the remainder of said provisions or Ordinance.  
2.007 - Effective date. 
Sec. 7. This Ordinance shall take immediate effect. All ordinances of the Township heretofore or hereafter adopted shall hereafter be supplemented by the terms of the within Ordinance.  
3.000 - MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATION BUREAU Ord. No. 1999-02 Adopted: June 14, 1999 
An Ordinance adopted pursuant to Public Act 12 of 1994 to establish a municipal ordinance violations bureau for the purpose of accepting admissions of responsibility for ordinance violations designated as municipal civil infractions for which municipal ordinance violation notices have been issued and served by authorized officials; to collect and retain civil fines/costs for such violations as prescribed herein, and to repeal all conflicting ordinance or parts of ordinances. 
The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, hereby ordains:
 
3.001 - [Short title.] 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Union Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau Ordinance.  
3.002 - Establishment, location and personnel of Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau. 
Sec. II. 
A.	Establishment. The Charter Township of Union Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau (hereafter "Bureau") is hereby established pursuant to Public Act 12 of 1994 (MCL 600.8396), as it may be amended from time to time, for the purpose of accepting admissions of responsibility for ordinance violations designated as municipal civil infractions, and to collect and retain civil fines/costs for such violations as prescribed herein. 
B.	Location. The bureau shall be located at the township hall or other such location in the township as may be designated by the township board. 
C.	Personnel. All personnel of the bureau shall be township employees. The township board may by resolution designate a bureau clerk with the duties prescribed herein and as otherwise may be delegated by the township board.  
3.003 - Bureau authority. 
Sec. III. This bureau shall only have authority to accept admissions of responsibility (without explanation) for municipal civil infractions for which a municipal ordinance violations notice (as compared to a citation) has been issued and served, and to collect and retain the scheduled civil fines/costs for such violations specified pursuant to this ordinance or other applicable ordinance. The bureau shall not accept payment of fines/costs from any person who denies having committed the alleged violation or who admits responsibility only with explanation. The bureau shall not determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged ordinance violation.  
3.004 - Ordinance violation notice requirements. 
Sec. IV. 
A.	Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized township officials as provided by law. A municipal ordinance violation notice shall include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
1.	The violation;
2.	The time within which the person must contact the bureau for purposes of admitting or denying responsibility for the violation; 
3.	The amount of the scheduled fines/costs for the violation;
4.	The methods by which the violation may be admitted or denied;
5.	The consequences of failing to pay the required fines/costs or contact the bureau within the required time; 
6.	The address and telephone number of the bureau, and
7.	The days and hours that the bureau is open.
B.	Denial of responsibility. Where a person fails to admit responsibility (without explanation) for a violation within the jurisdiction of the bureau and pay the required civil fines/costs within the designated time period, the bureau clerk or other designated township employee(s) shall advise the complainant to issue and file a municipal civil infraction citation for such violation with the court having jurisdiction of the matter. The citation filed with the court shall consist of a sworn complaint containing, at a minimum, the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. A copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation shall thereafter be processed in the manner required by the law.  
3.005 - Schedule of civil fines/costs. 
Sec. V. Unless a different schedule of civil fines is provided for by an applicable ordinance, the civil fines payable to the bureau upon admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices shall be determined pursuant to the following schedule: 
First violation within a three-year period* .....$50.00 
Second violation within a three-year period* .....$125.00 
Third violation within a three-year period* .....$250.00 
Fourth or subsequent violation within a three-year period .....$400.00 
(*Determined on the basis of the date of the violation(s)). 
In addition to the above-prescribed civil fines, costs in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be assessed by the bureau if the fine and costs are paid within ten (10) days of the date of service of the municipal ordinance violation notice. Otherwise, costs of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be assessed by the bureau.  
3.006 - Record and accounting. 
Sec. VI. The bureau clerk or other designated township official/employee shall retain a copy of all municipal ordinance violation notices and shall account to the township board once a month or at such other intervals as the township board may require concerning the number of admissions and denials of responsibility for ordinance violations within the jurisdiction of the bureau and the amount of fines/costs collected with respect to such violations. The civil fines/costs collected shall be delivered to the township treasurer at such intervals as the treasurer shall require, and shall be deposited in the general fund of the township.  
3.007 - Availability of other enforcement options. 
Sec. VII. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require the township to initiate its municipal civil infraction ordinance enforcement activity through the issuance of an ordinance violation notice. As to each ordinance violation designated as a municipal civil infraction, the township may, at its sole discretion, proceed directly with the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation or take such other enforcement action as is authorized by law.  
3.008 - Severability. 
Sec. VIII. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
3.009 - Repeal. 
Sec. IX. This Ordinance shall not repeal the penalty section of the following Union Township ordinances: Part 61, Ordinance 1993-3, "Nuisance Party Ordinance"; Part 62, Ordinance 1993-5, "Minor Purchase of Alcohol." All other Ordinances, resolutions, or orders or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are to the extent of such conflict, repealed.  
3.010 - Effective date. 
Sec. X. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately after publication.  
4.000 - PENSION PLAN Ord. No. 1991-18 Adopted: January 8, 1992 
An Ordinance to create and establish an annuity or pension plan for the elected officers and eligible employees of Union Township and to authorize the Township Supervisor and the Township Clerk to contract, in the name of the township, for such plan; to define those classes of officers and employees who shall be covered by such annuity or pension plan; to set forth the respective per centum shares which Union Township and the officers and employees shall contribute to the premium or charges arising under such annuity or pension contract and to further provide for the deduction of contributions from officers' and employees' compensation; to establish the time at which existing and future employees shall become eligible for such plan and to further establish the normal retirement date for all employees; to set forth a date wherein each person covered under the annuity or pension plan shall have a vested right or interest in such plan; to ratify and confirm the validity of any annuity or pension plan in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance; and to repeal all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
 
4.001 - Title. 
Sec. 1. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Union Charter Township Pension Plan Ordinance."  
4.002 - Establishment. 
Sec. 2. Pursuant to Act No. 27 of the Public Acts of 1960, as amended by PA 1989, No. 78, the Township of Union hereby creates and establishes an annuity or pension plan and program for the pensioning of its officers and employees, and, for such purposes, also hereby authorizes the Township Supervisor and the Township Clerk to contract, in the name of the Township subject to the approval of the Township Board, with any company authorized to transact such business within the State of Michigan for annuities or pensions.  
4.003 - Persons covered. 
Sec. 3. The annuity or pension plans created, established and contracted for under this Ordinance shall cover each person within the following classes of officers and employees: 
(XX)	All members of the Township Board.
(X)	All (Full-Time) Township employees who are employed for more than 40 hours per week on a regular basis.  
4.004 - Contributions by Township, employees; eligibility for coverage. 
Sec. 4. 
A.	The Township of Union shall annually contribute 75 per centum of that portion of the premium or charges arising under such annuity or pension contract for each person within the class of officers and employees enumerated in Section 3 [4.003] hereof. Such contributions shall be secured from the general fund of the Township. Each person within such class of officers and employees shall be responsible for the remainder of the premium or charges and the Township Treasurer is hereby authorized to deduct the same from each person's pay, salary or compensation and to apply the same to such person's responsibility. 
B.	Each employee who is employed on the effective date of the annuity or pension plan shall be eligible for coverage on that day provided he or she then meets the following requirements, otherwise to be eligible on the first entry date on which he or she meets them: 
1.	He or she has completed at least six months of continuous employment.
2.	His or her age (nearest birthday) is at least 18 years and not more than N/A years.
[C.]	Every employee who becomes subsequently employed shall be eligible on the first entry date on which he or she meets the following requirements: 
1.	He or she has completed at least six months of continuous employment.
2.	His or her age (nearest birthday) is at least 18 years and not more than N/A years.
[D.]	An employee's normal retirement date shall be the policy anniversary of the annuity or pension plan nearest his or her 65th birthday.  
4.005 - Vested rights. 
Sec. 5. Each person so covered under the annuity or pension plan shall have a vested right or interest in such plan two years from the date that the: 
(XX)	Plan becomes effective for such person.
()	Person becomes employed by the Township of ____________. 
4.006 - Previous plans. 
Sec. 6. The Township of Union hereby ratifies and confirms the validity of any annuity or pension plan in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance, notwithstanding any procedural error in the adoption of such plan, including the program adopted by Resolution of the Township Board at a regularly scheduled meeting held on the 8th day of January, 1992.  
4.007 - Effective date: repeal. 
Sec. 7. This Ordinance has been adopted pursuant to the provisions of MCLA 41.101(b) and shall take effect immediately on publication hereof. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
5.000 - PLANNING COMMISSION WITH ZONING AUTHORITY Ord. No. 2011-01 Adopted: April 27, 2011 
An ordinance to confirm the establishment under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., of the Charter Township Of Union Planning Commission; provide for the composition of that planning commission; provide for the powers, duties and limitations of that planning commission; and repeal any ordinance or parts of ordinances or resolutions in conflict with this ordinance. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION (UNION TOWNSHIP), ISABELLA COUNTY MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
 
5.001 - Scope, purpose and intent. 
Sec. 1. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted the township board under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101 et seq., to establish a planning commission with the powers, duties and limitations provided by those Acts and subject to the terms and conditions of this ordinance and any future amendments to this ordinance. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide that the Union Township Board shall hereby confirm the establishment under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., of the Union Township Planning Commission formerly established under the Township Planning Act, Public Act 168 of 1959, MCL 125.321 et seq., to establish the appointments, terms, and membership of the planning commission; to identify the officers and the minimum number of meetings per year of the planning commission; and to prescribe the authority, powers and duties of the planning commission.  
5.002 - Establishment. 
Sec. 2. The township board hereby confirms the establishment under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., of the Union Township Planning Commission formerly established under the Township Planning Act, Public Act 168 of 1959, MCL 125.321 et seq. The Union Township Planning Commission shall have 9 members. Members of the Union Township Planning Commission as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall, except for an ex officio member whose remaining term on the planning commission shall be limited to his or her term on the township board, continue to serve for the remainder of their existing terms so long as they continue to meet all of the eligibility requirements for planning commission membership set forth within the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq.  
5.003 - Appointments and terms. 
Sec. 3. The township supervisor, with the approval of the township board by a majority vote of the members elected and serving, shall appoint all planning commission members, including the ex officio member (one township board member, who is not the supervisor). 
The planning commission members, other than an ex officio member, shall serve for terms of 3 years each. 
A planning commission member shall hold office until his or her successor is appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. 
Planning commission members shall be qualified electors of the township, except that one planning commission member may be an individual who is not a qualified elector of the township. The membership of the planning commission shall be representative of important segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development of the township, in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the township, such as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public health, government, transportation, industry, and commerce. The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the township to the extent practicable. 
One member of the township board shall be appointed to the planning commission as an ex officio member. 
An ex officio member has full voting rights. An ex officio member's term on the planning commission shall expire with his or her term on the township board. 
No other elected officer or employee of the township is eligible to be a member of the planning commission.  
5.004 - Removal. 
Sec. 4. The township board may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing.  
5.005 - Conflict of interest. 
Sec. 5. Before casting a vote on a matter on which a planning commission member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the planning commission. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this ordinance constitutes malfeasance in office. 
For the purposes of this section, conflict of interest is defined as, and a planning commission member shall declare a conflict of interest and abstain from participating in planning commission deliberations and voting on a request, when: 
(a)	An immediate family member is involved in any request for which the planning commission is asked to make a decision. "Immediate family member" is defined as; The planning commission member's spouse, the member and member's spouse's children (including adopted) and their spouses, step-children and their spouses, grandchildren and their spouses, parents and step-parents, brothers and sisters and their spouses, grandparents, parents in-law, grandparents in-law, or any person residing in the planning commission member's household; 
(b)	The planning commission member has a business or financial interest in the property involved in the request or has a business or financial interest in the applicant's company, agency or association; 
(c)	The planning commission member owns or has a financial interest in neighboring property being within 300 feet of the subject property; 
(d)	There is a reasonable appearance of a conflict of interest, as determined by a majority vote of the remaining members of the planning commission.  
5.006 - Compensation. 
Sec. 6. The planning commission members may be compensated for their services as provided by township board resolution. The planning commission may adopt bylaws relative to compensation and expenses of its members for travel when engaged in the performance of activities authorized by the township board, including, but not limited to, attendance at conferences, workshops, educational and training programs and meetings.  
5.007 - Officers and committees. 
Sec. 7. The planning commission shall elect a chairperson and a secretary from its members, and may create and fill other offices as it considers advisable. An ex officio member of the planning commission is not eligible to serve as chairperson. The term of each office shall be 1 year, with opportunity for reelection as specified in the planning commission bylaws. 
The planning commission may also appoint advisory committees whose members are not members of the planning commission.  
5.008 - Bylaws, meetings and records. 
Sec. 8. The planning commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business. Bylaws in effect on the date of this ordinance shall be considered adopted. 
The planning commission shall hold at least 4 regular meetings each year, and shall by resolution determine the time and place of the meetings. 
Unless otherwise provided in the planning commission's bylaws, a special meeting of the planning commission may be called by the chairperson or by 2 other members, upon written request to the secretary. Unless the bylaws otherwise provide, the secretary shall send written notice of a special meeting to planning commission members at least 48 hours before the meeting. 
The business that the planning commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
The planning commission shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a planning commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, MCL 15.231 et seq.  
5.009 - Annual report. 
Sec. 9. The planning commission shall make an annual written report to the township board concerning its operations and the status of the planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the township board related to planning and development.  
5.010 - Authority to make master plan. 
Sec. 10. Under the authority of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., and other applicable planning statutes, the planning commission shall make a master plan as a guide for development within the township's planning jurisdiction. 
Final authority to approve a master plan or any amendments thereto shall rest with the planning commission unless the township board passes a resolution asserting the right to approve or reject the master plan.  
5.011 - Zoning powers. 
Sec. 11. The township board hereby confirms the transfer of all powers, duties, and responsibilities provided for zoning boards or zoning commissions by the former Township Zoning Act, Public Act 184 of 1943, MCL 125.271 et seq.; the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; or other applicable zoning statutes to the Union Township Planning Commission formerly established under the Township Planning Act, Public Act 168 of 1959, MCL 125.321 et seq. 
Any existing zoning ordinance shall remain in full force and effect except as otherwise amended or repealed by the township board.  
5.012 - Township board designates capital improvements plan to board, supervisor or other official. 
Sec. 12. To further the desirable future development of the Township under the master plan, the Township Board, after the master plan is adopted, shall prepare or cause to be prepared by the Township Supervisor or by a designated nonelected administrative official, a capital improvements program of public structures and improvements, showing those structures and improvements in general order of their priority, for the following 6-year period. The prepared capital improvements program, if prepared by someone other than the Township Board, shall be subject to final approval by the Township Board. The planning commission is hereby exempted from preparing a capital improvements plan.  
5.013 - Subdivision and land division recommendations. 
Sec. 13. The planning commission shall review and make recommendation on a proposed plat before action thereon by the township board under the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, MCL 560.101 et seq. Before making its recommendation, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed plat. A plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of the proprietor or other person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent. Not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing, notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be sent to that person at that address by mail and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed platted land.  
5.014 - Severability. 
Sec. 14. The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable, and if any part is declared invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the remainder of the ordinance, which shall continue in full force and effect.  
5.015 - Repeal. 
Sec. 15. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. The resolution or ordinance establishing the Charter Township of Union Planning Commission under the Township Planning Act, Public Act 168 of 1959, MCL 125.321 et seq. is hereby repealed.  
5.016 - Effective date. 
Sec. 16. This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days after publication date.  
15.000 - JUNK YARD ORDINANCE Ord. of February 7, 1957 
Moved by Burdette O'Connor and seconded by Mrs. Carroll, that the following Resolution be adopted: 
WHEREAS, various persons have established junk yards and places for the dismantling, wrecking and disposing of the junk and/or refuse material of automobiles in Union Township and there is a possibility that further such establishments may be established in Union Township, and 
WHEREAS, unless said establishments are regulated and licensed, they may be or become a nuisance to the Township and to the people residing near same and a menace to the public health, interests and general welfare of the Township, and 
WHEREAS, it is desirable that such establishments be regulated and licensed by the Township Board. 
 
15.001 - [License required; fee; when due.] 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that an annual license fee of $25.00 be required to be paid to the Township by the owners and/or operators of junk yards and places for dismantling, wrecking and disposing of the junk and/or refuse material of automobiles located in said Township of Union, said license fee to be paid on or before April 10th of each year commencing with the year 1957.  
15.002 - [Operation.] 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that the following rules, regulations and conditions for the operation of such establishments be adopted to best protect the public health, interests and general welfare of Union Township: 
1.	No such establishment shall be operated in or refuse burned in a built-up area.
2.	No such establishment shall be operated within 40 rods of any residence or house, church, school or any public building. 
3.	No such establishment shall be operated or refuse burned within 40 rods of any public highway. 
4.	The owners or operators of such establishments shall comply with the Statutes of the State of Michigan by preparing and mailing proper sworn statements to the commissioner of the department of public safety at East Lansing, Michigan, showing purchases made by such licensee. 
5.	Any violation of the foregoing rules and regulations or any violation of the Statutes and Laws of the State of Michigan in the operation of such establishments, shall be grounds for revoking any license herein granted. 
6.	The form of application for such license shall be available in the office of the Township Clerk.  
16.000 - ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING PROCEDURE AND STANDARDS RE: LICENSE TO SELL BEER AND WINE OR SPIRITS Ord. No. 1983-1 Adopted: March 2, 1983 
An Ordinance to establish procedures and standards for review of applications, renewals, and revocation of license to sell beer and wine or spirits. 
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN ORDAINS:
 
16.001 - Application for new license. 
Sec. 1. 
A.	Application: Applications for license to sell beer and wine or spirits shall be made to the Township Board in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a partnership or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)	The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; or in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to a share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the objects for which organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and, if a majority interest in the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, the name and address of such person. 
(2)	The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 
(3)	The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the object for which it was formed. 
(4)	The length of time said applicant has been in business of that character, or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued. 
(5)	The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(6)	A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application. 
(7)	A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this Ordinance or the laws of the State of Michigan. 
(8)	A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States or any ordinances of the Township in the conduct of its business. 
(9)	The application shall be accompanied by building and plat plans showing the entire structure and premises and in particular the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and, where appropriate, adequate plans for screening, and noise control. 
B.	Restrictions on licenses: No such license shall be issued to: 
(1)	A person whose license, under this Ordinance, has been revoked for cause.
(2)	A person who, at the time of application or renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. 
(3)	A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership shall qualify to obtain a license. 
(4)	A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or a stock owner or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason. 
(5)	A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee. 
(6)	A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor. 
(7)	A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full period for which the license is issued. 
(8)	Any law enforcing public official or any member of the Township Board, and no such official shall be interested in any way either directly or indirectly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor. 
(9)	For premises where there exists a violation of the applicable Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing or Fire Codes, applicable Zoning Regulations, or applicable Public Health Regulations. 
(10)	For any premises unless the sale of beer, wine, or spirits is shown to be incidental and subordinate to other permitted business uses upon the site, such as but not limited to food sales, motel operations, or recreational activities. 
(11)	For premises where it is determined by a majority of the Board that the premises do not or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, noise, or nuisance control. 
(12)	Where the board determines, by majority vote, that the proposed location is inappropriate considering the desirability of establishing a location in developed, commercial areas, in preference to isolated, undeveloped areas; the attitude of adjacent residents and property owners; traffic safety; accessibility to the site from abutting roads; capability of abutting roads to accommodate the commercial activity; distance from public or private schools for minors; proximity of the inconsistent zoning classification; and accessibility from primary roads or state highways. 
C.	Term of license: Approval of a license shall be for a period of one year subject to annual renewal by the township board upon continued compliance with the regulations of this Ordinance. Approval of a license shall be with the understanding that any necessary remodeling or new construction for the use of the license shall be commenced within six months of the action of the Township Board or the Michigan Liquor Control Commission approving such license, whichever last occurs. Any unusual delay in the completion of such remodeling or construction may subject the license to revocation. 
D.	License hearing: The Township Board shall grant a public hearing upon the license application. Following such hearing the Board shall submit to the applicant a written statement of its findings and determination. The Board's determination shall be based upon satisfactory compliance with the restrictions set forth in paragraphs 1.B(1) through 1.B(12) above.  
16.002 - Objections to renewal and request for revocation. 
Sec. 2. 
A.	Procedure: Before filing an objection to renewal or request for revocation of a license with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the Township Board shall serve the licenseholder, by first class mail, mailed not less than ten days prior to hearing with notice of a hearing, which notice shall contain the following: 
(1)	Notice of proposed action.
(2)	Reasons for the proposed action.
(3)	Date, time and place of hearing.
(4)	A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony and confront adverse witnesses. 
Following hearing, the Township Board shall submit to the licenseholder and the Commission a written statement of its findings and determination. 
B.	Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation: The Township Board shall recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license upon a determination by it that based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at hearing either of the following exist: 
(1)	Violation of any of the restrictions on licenses set forth in paragraphs [16.001]1.B(1) through 1.B(12) above; or, 
(2)	Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises. 
16.003 - Severability. 
Sec. 3. Should any section of this Ordinance be declared unconstitutional, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections of this Ordinance.  
16.004 - Effective date. 
Sec. 4. This Ordinance shall take effect on the 2nd day of March, 1983. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
17.000 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES Ord. No. 1989-9 Adopted: August 9, 1989 
At a regular meeting held on the 9th day of August, 1989, the Township Board for the Township of Union, County of Isabella, State of Michigan, adopted the following Ordinance which will control the location of certain adult entertainment business. Copies of the Ordinance are available at the office of the Township Clerk, 2010 South Lincoln Road, Mt. Pleasant, Michigan, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION HEREBY ORDAINS:
 
17.001 - Purpose. 
Sec. (A) The need for special regulation of certain business uses which, by their very nature are deemed to have unique characteristics and effects on surrounding properties, is recognized as a legitimate objective. Special regulation is needed to ensure these uses are not concentrated in any one area, thus preventing adverse effects upon the surrounding neighborhood, such as blight and urban deterioration, negative effects on economic development potential, social disorder and crime, negative effects on community standards for aesthetics, the reduction of property values and the subsequent negative impact on the community tax base. The primary objective is to prevent a concentration of these uses by establishing spacing standards and thus ensuring disbursement of these uses throughout the community.  
17.002 - Uses subject to special regulation. 
Sec. (B) The following uses are subject to these controls as follows: 
Group "AS" special regulated uses: 
1.	Adult bookstores.
2.	Adult motion picture theaters.
3.	Adult mini motion picture theaters.
4.	Massage establishments.
5.	Establishments for the consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises which also have adult entertainment. 
6.	Steam baths.
7.	Health clubs.
8.	Taxi dance halls.
9.	Other uses which provide goods or services which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," or which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."  
17.003 - Application to locate or establish a special regulated use. 
Sec. (C) An application to locate or establish any specified use as enumerated in this section shall be made to the Township Zoning Official who shall not approve any request unless the standards contained in the following subsections for location of the use are fully complied with, and all other required conditions for uses in the district are complied with.  
17.004 - Locational standards; relationship to similar uses. 
Sec. (D) 
1.	Group "AS" special regulated uses—[Distance from similar establishments.] An application to establish a group "AS" special regulated use shall not be approved if there is already in existence one or more group "AS" special regulated use within 1,500 feet of the boundaries of the site of the proposed regulated use, excepting as provided in subsection (E) [17.005], Waiver of location standards. 
2.	Group "AS" special regulated uses—[Distance from churches, schools, etc.] An application to establish a group "AS" special regulated use shall not be approved if the proposed location is within 1,500 feet from any residentially zoned district, trailer park, or church, and shall not be approved if the proposed location is within 2,650 feet from any K through 12 school, excepting as provided for in subsection (E) [17.005] below.  
17.005 - Waiver of location standards. 
Sec. (E) 
(1)	Relationship to similar uses. The Planning Commission may waive the locational standards of subsection (D) [17.005], limiting the location of group "AS" uses as they relate to similar uses if the following findings are made: 
(a)	The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and the spirit and intent of this Article [Ordinance] will be observed. 
(b)	The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a "skid row" area.
(c)	The establishment of an additional regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any program of urban renewal within the district. 
(d)	All applicable regulations of this Article [Ordinance] will be observed.
(2)	Relationship to residential areas. The planning commission may waive the locational standard of subsection (D) [17.004], limiting the location of group "AS" uses as they relate to residentially zoned districts, trailer parks, parks, or churches, provided a validated petition requesting such a waiver is presented to the Planning Commission, signed by the owners or purchasers of at least 51 percent of the parcels of land within 500 feet of the proposed location is presented to the Board. In addition to this requirement, the Planning Commission may waive the requirement that any group "AS" use be located no closer than 2,650 feet from schools only if the proponent also demonstrates that school children are not required to pass by the location while walking to or from school. Any petition presented to the Board shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(a)	A statement in the form of an affidavit attested to by the circulator of the petition that the circulator personally witnessed the signatures on the petition and the same were affixed to the petition by the person whose named appeared thereon. 
(b)	A statement on the petition so worded that the signers of the petition will attest to the fact that they are the owners or purchasers of the parcel of land identified by the permanent parcel number opposite their signature. 
(c)	For the purpose of this section, parcels of land shall equate to the permanent parcel numbers assigned by the Township to all property within the said 500 feet.  
17.006 - Application to the Planning Commission. 
Sec. (F) An applicant requesting a waiver of locational requirements shall file an application with the zoning official; however, the zoning official shall not accept an application for the waiver of locational requirements for group "AS" uses as they relate to residentially zoned districts, trailer parks, K through 12 schools, parks, or churches without a petition as required herein. Said petition shall be validated by the zoning official. The zoning official shall then notify the Planning Commission of the receipt of the requests and petition within 15 days of filing.  
17.007 - Conditions on waivers. 
Sec. (G) Prior to granting a waiver of locational requirements the Planning Commission may place any conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, or operations of regulated uses as may, in its judgment, be necessary for the protection of the public interest. Any evidence and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith will be fulfilled.  
17.008 - Definitions for purposes of this Article [Ordinance]. 
[Sec. (H)] 
Adult bookstore: An establishment, having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
Adult motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult entertainment: Any conduct, within an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its income from material, services or matters distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," which presents material by books, films, slides or the like or by live presentation which includes services to the patron of an establishment, which material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
Massage establishment: Any establishment where massages are administered for pay, including but not limited to massage parlors, health clubs, sauna baths, and steam baths. This definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist duly licensed by the State of Michigan, nor barbershop or beauty shop in which massages are administered only to the scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulders. This definition shall not be construed to include a public or nonprofit organization 
tion such as a school, park department, YMCA or YWCA operating a community center, swimming pool or other educational, cultural, recreational facilities for residents of the area. 
Residentially zoned area: For the purpose of this article shall mean any area designated as R-1, R-2, R-3, or P.U.D. 
Specified sexual activities: Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
Specified anatomical areas: Less than completely covered (a) human genitals, pubic region, (b) buttock, and (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. Also, human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Trailer park: For the purpose of this Article [Ordinance], trailer park shall mean any area zoned as R-4 or R-5 under the Zoning Ordinance.  
17.009 - Zoning district requirements for special regulated uses. 
Sec. (I) The special regulated uses itemized in this Article shall be limited to the following zoning districts: 
(1)	B-5 General Business District. 
Also each special regulated use shall be subject to the specific requirements of each zoning district in all other applicable regulations.  
17.010 - [Title.] 
Sec. (J) This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Union Township Adult Entertainment Ordinance No. 1989-9.  
19.000 - PAWNBROKERS Ord. No. 2005-010 Adopted July 27, 2005 
An Ordinance pursuant to the authority of MCL 446.201-446.219 to license pawnbrokers, provide for electronic submission of Records of Transactions and finger prints, and establish penalties for violations. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, HEREBY ORDAINS: 
 
19.001 - Title. 
Sec. 1. This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Charter Township of Union Pawnbrokers Ordinance."  
19.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. 2. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote quick and accurate electronic submission of Records of Transactions, and fingerprints, to allow for rapid recovery of stolen merchandise being offered for pawn, and the reduction of crimes of theft in the Charter Township of Union.  
19.003 - Pawnbroker Defined. 
Sec. 3. As used in this chapter, "pawnbrokers" mean those individuals identified in Section 3 of Act No. 469, of the Public Acts 2002, being cited as MCL 446.203.  
19.004 - License. 
A.	A person, corporation, or firm shall not carry on the business of pawnbroker in the Township without first having obtained a license as authorized by Act No. 469, of the Public Acts 2002, being cited as MCL 446.201 et seq. 
B.	A license fee that shall be required to be paid to the Charter Township of Union in order to acquire a pawnbroker license pursuant to this chapter shall be set by a resolution of the Charter Township Board. 
C.	As set forth in Section 2 of Act 469 of Public Acts 2002, the bond that is required to be given to the Charter Township of Union is $3,000.00.  
19.005 - Compliance to State Laws. 
Sec. 5. A pawnbroker shall comply with all of the requirements of Act No. 231 of the Public Acts of 1945, as amended, being cited as MCL 445.451, et seq., and Act No. 469 of the Public Acts 2002, being cited as MCL 446.201 et seq.  
19.006 - Required Submissions and Exemptions. 
A.	Every pawnbroker, except those exempted by operation of subsection (c), shall, within 48 hours, transmit to the Director of Public Safety by means of electronic transmission through a modem or similar device or by delivery of a computer disk, in such a format that the data are capable of direct electronic entry into the Charter Township of Union's computerized systems for identifying pawned property, all transactions in which the pawnbroker received used goods the preceding day by pawn, trade, purchase, or consignment. A transaction reported by electronic transmission under this subsection shall not be reported on paper forms unless the Director of Public Safety so requests. 
B.	When reporting, a thumbprint of the persons pawning property shall be electronically scanned and transmitted to the Director of Public Safety in the same manner as (A). 
C.	A pawnbroker need not report electronically transactions taking place at a business location where the number of pawn transactions in each 90-day period does not exceed ten. A pawnbroker reasonably believing a location at which he or she conducts a pawn shop qualifies under this subsection for exemption from computerized reporting and wishing to be exempt from the requirements of subsection (B) shall sign, under penalty of perjury, a declaration to the effect in a form developed by the Director of Public Safety or the Director of Public Safety's designee, and once the declaration is signed, so long as the volume of transactions does not exceed ten each 90-day period, pawn transactions taking place at that pawnshop need not be reported electronically, but shall be reported on paper forms.  
19.007 - Penalties. 
Sec. 7. If a licensee under this chapter or any of his or her employees is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter, the Director of Public Safety shall report such violation to the Township Clerk. The Township Clerk shall (a) notify the Township Supervisor and the licensee and provide the licensee notice that the Township intends to revoke his or her license and (b) shall provide the licensee an opportunity to a hearing before the Township Clerk. If the Township Clerk determines that the licensee has been found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter, the Township Supervisor shall then revoke the license. The violator, upon such revocation, shall not be issued a license as a pawnbroker for a period of one year from the date of the revocation.  
19.008 - Effective Date, 
Sec. 8. This Ordinance shall be effective thirty (30) days after publication in a local newspaper of general circulation.  
20.000 - MARIHUANA DISPENSARY AND MARIHUANA GROWING FACILITY LICENSES Ordinance No. 2011-04 Adopted: July 13, 2011 
 
20.001 - Purpose. 
Sec. I. The purpose of this section is to regulate the location, but not exclude the use and handling of the medical use of marihuana consistent with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, (MMMA) MCL 333.26421 et seq., by designating the specific locations for the medical use of marihuana. Under no circumstances is the use or handling of marihuana inconsistent with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act permissible in the Charter Township of Union. In creating these regulations, the Charter Township of Union acknowledges that the majority of voters in Michigan have found and declared that medical research has discovered beneficial uses for marihuana in treating or alleviating the pain, nausea, and other symptoms associated with a variety of debilitating medical conditions; that legalizing the medical use of marihuana will have the practical effect of protecting from arrest the vast majority of seriously ill people who have a medical need for that use; and that, although federal law currently prohibits any use of marihuana except under very limited circumstances, states are not required to enforce federal law or prosecute people for engaging in activities prohibited by federal law. 
While the Charter Township of Union defers to these findings, it recognizes that there are some uses which, by their very nature, present the potential for deleterious effects upon adjacent residential and commercial areas. It is the further intent of this Ordinance to comply with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act while protecting the health, safety and welfare of persons in the community and to address and minimize reasonably anticipated secondary effects upon members of the public that would include but are not limited to: danger to law enforcement and other members of the public; increases in criminal activity; and installation of plumbing and electrical facilities that create dangerous conditions. The Charter Township of Union also recognizes that the regulation of the use and handling of marihuana for medical use is necessary to minimize these risks while insuring that marihuana is available to persons registered under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.  
20.002 - Definitions. 
Sec. II. As used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
A.	Act means the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act being MCL 333.26421 et seq. 
B.	Code means any code or ordinance adopted by the Township. 
C.	Department means the Michigan Department of Community Health and/or the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (LARA). 
D.	Debilitating Medical Condition shall have the same meaning as is set forth in the Act. 
E.	Enclosed Locked Facility means a closet, room, or other enclosed area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by a Primary Caregiver or Qualifying Patient, built in a manner consistent with applicable building and property maintenance codes. 
F.	Marihuana means that term as defined in Section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368 being MCL 333.7106. 
G.	Marihuana Club means a location where an association or organization, whose purpose is to educate members regarding the medical use of marihuana, whose relationships are of a transitional nature involving three or more unrelated persons, meets. The term Marihuana Club does not include those medical marihuana accessory uses conditionally permitted by Section 8.2.F. of the Township's Zoning Ordinance, which occur in dwelling units. 
H.	Marihuana Dispensary means any structure or building where marihuana is transferred, delivered, acquired or sold to Qualifying Patients pursuant to the MMMA. The term Marihuana Dispensary does not include those medical marihuana accessory uses conditionally permitted by Section 8.2.F. of the Township's Zoning Ordinance, which occur in dwelling units. 
I.	Marihuana Growing Facility means any structure or building where marihuana is cultivated or manufactured for Qualifying Patients pursuant to the MMMA. The term Marihuana Growing Facility does not include those medical marihuana accessory uses conditionally permitted by Section 8.2.F. of the Township's Zoning Ordinance, which occur in dwelling units. 
J.	Medical Use of Marihuana means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer, or transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marihuana to treat or alleviate a registered Qualifying Patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the debilitating medical condition. 
K.	Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, governmental unit, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
L.	Primary Caregiver means a person who is at least twenty-one (21) years old and who has agreed to assist with a Qualifying Patient's medical use of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs and is currently registered pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. 
M.	Qualifying Patient means a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition and is currently registered pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. 
N.	Registry Identification Card means the non-transferable confidential document issued by the Department that identifies a person as a Qualifying Patient or Primary Caregiver. 
O.	School means any public or private institution of learning, elementary through secondary (K—12) and any preschool. 
P.	Township means the Charter Township of Union. 
Q.	Usable Marihuana means the dried leaves and flowers of the marihuana plant, and any mixture or preparation thereof, but does not include the seeds, stalks, and roots of the plant. 
R.	Written Certification means a document signed by a physician, stating the patient's debilitating medical condition and stating that, in the physician's professional opinion, the patient is likely to receive therapeutic or palliative benefit from the medical use of marihuana to treat or alleviate the patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the debilitating medical condition. 
S.	Zoning Official means an individual appointed by the Township Board delegated to administer the Charter Township of Union Zoning Ordinance.  
20.003 - License required. 
Sec. III. A Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility shall not operate in the Charter Township of Union without first obtaining a license from the Zoning Official pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance. The licensing requirements set forth in this Ordinance shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and/or permitting requirements imposed by state, or local law. A license granted under this Ordinance shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date the license was originally issued. 
(3.01)	License application. An applicant, shall submit to the Zoning Official, along with the License Application, the following: 
A.	The address of the proposed location of the Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility. 
B.	Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility. 
C.	If the owner(s) of the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility is not an individual, the name(s) and address(es) of any and all officer(s), director(s), and of any and all individuals(s) holding an ownership interest in the entity. 
D.	Name and address of all physicians who will render services on the premises of the Marihuana Dispensary. 
E.	A valid and current certificate of occupancy issued by the Building Official after all necessary inspections have been conducted, which may include but are not limited to electrical inspection, plumbing inspection and the mechanical inspection. 
F.	A copy of the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Cultivation Facility Articles of Incorporation and By-laws. 
G.	Name and address of the business manager(s) of the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility if the manager(s) is someone other than the owner(s). 
H.	A signed release on a form included with the Application form permitting the Isabella County Sheriff Department to perform a criminal background check to ascertain whether any person named on the application has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving any controlled substance or any felony under Michigan law, or the law of any other state or the United States. 
I.	Proof of ownership or legal right to possession of the premises upon which the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility will be operating at the time the application is submitted. If the premises upon which the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility is located will be leased, the application shall include written consent by the owner of the property permitting the premises to be used for a Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility. 
J.	An operating/business plan for the proposed Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility which includes the following: 
a.	For a Marihuana Dispensary, a written statement that will be conspicuously posted on the premises and provided to Qualifying Patients and Primary Caregivers, which includes the following: 
1)	A description of the potential side effects of marihuana; and
2)	A description of the Marihuana Dispensary's means of educating Qualifying Patient(s) and Primary Caregiver(s) on the right to engage in the medical use of marihuana; and 
3)	The licensee's policy to refuse service.
b.	A description of the activities that will be undertaken on the premises including all products and services to be offered. 
c.	Description of the means the Marihuana Dispensary shall employ to safely dispense marihuana. 
K.	For Marihuana Growing Facilities, a certificate signed by a qualified professional indicating that equipment necessary to handle heating, ventilation and air balance requirements has been installed to prevent the growth of harmful mold or other conditions harmful to individuals inside the facility. 
L.	A floor plan, drawn to scale, showing the layout of the premises upon which the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility will be operating and the principal uses of the floor area depicted. 
M.	Proof that the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility has developed, and will maintain on the premises, or has entered into a contractual relationship with an outside resource, to provide on-site training curriculum capable of meeting employee training needs which includes, but is not limited to, professional conduct, ethics and patient confidentiality. Upon completion of the on-site training, the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility shall submit to the Zoning Official an affidavit signed by every employee verifying the employee has completed the training. 
N.	A signed hold harmless agreement which protects the Charter Township of Union.
O.	Proof of payment of property taxes on the site to be licensed.
P.	Payment of all applicable fees as established by resolution of the Township Board and published in the Township Schedule of Fees. 
(3.02)	Indebtedness. An applicant shall not be indebted or obligated in any manner to the Township except for current taxes or current special assessments. However, if the applicant is otherwise qualified pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and the Township's Zoning Ordinance, and is currently subject to a Township approved payment plan for payment of an outstanding amount owed to the Township, and is current on payments under such plan, the applicant may be issued a license, in the discretion of the Township. In such event, the license shall state that it is subject to a payment plan and conditioned upon strict compliance with such payment plan. 
(3.03)	Nature of license. 
A.	A Marihuana Dispensary location or Marihuana Growing Facility location that has been issued a license pursuant to this Ordinance shall not be subject to penalty by the Charter Township of Union, solely for the medical use of marihuana, which is in accordance with this Ordinance, all other applicable Charter Township of Union ordinances, the Medical Marihuana Act and the Administrative Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time. 
B.	A license issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall be specific to the Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility site, does not run with the parcel, is not transferable and shall expire one (1) year after the date it is issued. If the Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility changes locations or ownership, a new application must be filed and all requirements for the issuance of a new license met. The license may be subject to terms and conditions as the Zoning Official deems necessary to carry out the terms, conditions, and intent of this Ordinance. 
C.	A license shall not be issued if any person required under this Ordinance to be named on the application has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving any controlled substance or any felony involving a controlled substance under Michigan law, or the law of any other state of the United States. 
D.	The license requirement in this Ordinance applies to all Marihuana Dispensaries and Marihuana Growing Facilities that exist on the effective date of this Ordinance or are established after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
E.	To the extent the State of Michigan adopts additional or stricter laws or regulations governing the medical use of marihuana, the additional or stricter laws or regulations shall control the establishment or operation of any Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility in the Township. Compliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be deemed an additional requirement for issuance, denial, or maintenance of any license under this Ordinance, and non-compliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license issued hereunder. 
F.	Any location subject to a license pursuant to this Ordinance may be required to demonstrate, upon demand by the Township or by local law enforcement officer, that the source and quantity of marihuana on the property upon which a Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility is located is in full compliance with any applicable state law or regulation. 
G.	Both a license pursuant to this Ordinance and a Zoning Permit pursuant to the Charter Township of Union's Zoning Ordinance are required for a Marihuana Dispensary and Marihuana Growing Facility. 
H.	The issuance of a license pursuant to this Ordinance shall not create an exception, defense, or immunity from state or federal prosecution or forfeiture of property. 
(3.04)	License requirements. A Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility that obtains a license pursuant to this Ordinance shall: 
A.	Prohibit persons under the age of eighteen (18) from entering the business unless they possess a Registry Identification Card or the equivalent, and the person is accompanied by their Primary Caregiver. 
B.	Limit all activity related to the Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility within an enclosed structure, to ensure that no activity is visible from the exterior of the building. 
C.	Operate only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., including deliveries to and from the premises. 
D.	Keep all marihuana in any form within an enclosed locked facility so that the marihuana is not visible from any location outside of the building. 
E.	Monitor and secure the premises twenty-four (24) hours per day by security measures that include at a minimum: 
1.	Installation and use of security cameras to continuously monitor and record all areas of the premises upon which the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility will be operating. Recordings from security cameras shall be maintained in a secure off-site location. 
2.	Any usable marihuana kept at the Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility premises overnight shall be secured in a safe. The safe must be permanently fixed to the premises. 
F.	Limit the entrance to a Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility to a single secure entrance with security measures to deter and prevent theft of marihuana, diversion of marihuana to illicit markets and unauthorized entrance into a structure. 
G.	Prominently display the license on the premises.
H.	Prominently display on the premises of a Marihuana Dispensary a written statement which includes the following: 
1.	A description of potential side effects of marihuana; and
2.	A description of the Marihuana Dispensary's means of educating Qualified Patient(s) and Primary Caregiver(s) on the right to engage in the medical use of marihuana; and 
3.	The Dispensary's policy to refuse service.
I.	Operate in compliance with any and all laws, rules and regulations administered by the Isabella County Health Department and any other applicable state requirements if a Marihuana Dispensary prepares food for human consumption on site. 
J.	Package the useable marihuana with a label that includes the name of the Marihuana Dispensary, the delivery date, dollar amount, weight, and a statement that: 
This product is for medical use and not for resale and is manufactured without any regulatory oversight for health, safety or efficacy. 
K.	Prohibit the ingestion, smoking or other consumption of controlled substances, including marihuana, on the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility property. 
L.	Refrain from emitting odors emanating from marihuana beyond the building.
M.	Refrain from growing, cultivating and manufacturing marihuana on the property of a Marihuana Dispensary. 
N.	Refrain from transferring, delivering, acquiring, supplying, selling or dispensing marihuana on the property of a Marihuana Growing Facility. 
O.	Limit all light trespass from lights used in the cultivation of marihuana at a Marihuana Growing Facility. 
P.	Prohibit any person on the premises of a Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility unless they: 
1.	Possess a Registry Identification Card or the equivalent;
2.	Assist a Qualifying Patient in the use or administration of marihuana;
3.	Are an owner of the premises or an employee of the Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility; or 
4.	Are a service worker engaged in maintenance activities, postal delivery or law enforcement, emergency personnel and/or zoning personnel.  
20.004 - Location requirements. 
Sec. IV. 
A.	A Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility shall not be located on the same parcel as a dwelling unit. 
B.	The parcel on which a Marihuana Dispensary is located shall be situated at least one thousand (1,000) feet from the parcel on which another Marihuana Dispensary, a Medical Marihuana Grow Facility, or a Marihuana Club is located, as measured between property lines. 
C.	The parcel on which a Marihuana Dispensary is located shall be situated at least five hundred (500) feet from a residential zoning district or a parcel on which a church, house of worship, school, licensed day care, community center or public park is located as measured between property lines or a property line and zoning district boundary when applicable. 
D.	The parcel on which a Marihuana Growing Facility is located shall be situated at least one thousand (1,000) feet from the parcel on which another Marihuana Growing Facility, a Marihuana Dispensary, or a Marihuana Club is located, as measured between property lines. 
E.	The parcel on which a Marihuana Growing Facility is located shall be situated at least one thousand (1,000) feet from a residential zoning district or a parcel on which a church, house of worship, school, licensed day care, community center or public park is located as measured between property lines or a property line and zoning district boundary when applicable.  
20.005 - Inspections. 
Sec. V. Marihuana Dispensaries and Marihuana Growing Facilities shall: 
A.	Prior to opening, be inspected by the Township to confirm that all necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits have been obtained. 
B.	Be inspected quarterly by the Township to confirm compliance with the Township's Ordinances and the Act. 
C.	Be inspected only during reasonable hours by the Township or their designee with the exception of probable cause inspections. 
D.	Be notified of the date and time of the inspection by first class mail at least thirty (30) days prior to the inspection date. Property owners shall be responsible for informing tenants of the inspection notice. 
E.	Be permitted to be inspected without prior notice if the Township has probable cause to believe that there exists, on the premises, a condition that makes the premises unsafe or there is evidence that an ordinance violation may exist. 
F.	Acknowledge that if access to the property or premises is denied, the Township may, upon showing probable cause exists for the inspection and for the issuance of an order directing compliance with the inspection requirements of this Ordinance, petition and obtain such order from a court which has jurisdiction. 
G.	Be issued a violation notice by the Township if a code violation exists. The licensee shall be advised of the time period to correct the violation(s). If upon inspection of the premises the Township determines that a violation presents an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, the violation shall be corrected immediately and operation of the Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility can not resume until reinspection and approval by the Township. 
H.	Be subject to reinspection of the premises upon correction of a violation on the date specified in the violation notice or sooner if requested by the licensee and if Township scheduling permits. 
I.	Permit the Township to inspect its records ensuring that transfers of marihuana quantities do not exceed the maximum amount allowed under the Act. Said records shall be redacted to insure confidentiality, anonymity, and privacy to Qualifying Patients and Primary Caregivers. 
J.	The Zoning Official and their designee are authorized to conduct inspections in the manner prescribed in this Ordinance.  
20.006 - Enforcement. 
Sec. VI. Enforcement of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Official. 
(6.01)	Suspension and revocation. 
A.	The Zoning Official may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this Ordinance upon any of the following findings: 
1.	A violation of any of the regulations or provisions outlined within this Ordinance or any other applicable Charter Township of Union Ordinance, the MMMA and the Administrative Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time. 
2.	Operation of a Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility in an unlawful manner or in such a manner contrary to the public health, safety and welfare. 
3.	An attempt by a licensee to transfer the license to another or to use the same improperly.
4.	The information provided to the Township was falsified, incomplete, and/or inaccurate.
5.	If the operation of a Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
6.	Abandonment of the premises upon which the Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility is operating. For the purpose of this section, the cessation of the use of the property for two (2) months or more and a clear intent by the licensee to abandon the use shall constitute abandonment. 
7.	Conviction, of any person required to be named on the application, of a crime which, if occurring prior to submittal of the application, could have been cause for denial of the license application. 
8.	Temporary or permanent closure, or other sanction of the business, by the Township, or by the County, or State Public Health Department or other governmental entity with jurisdiction, for failure to comply with health and safety provisions of this Ordinance or other applicable law. 
B.	Upon serving notice on the licensee of a license suspension by the Zoning Official, all activity related to the medical use of marihuana at the property upon which a Marihuana Dispensary and/or Marihuana Growing Facility is conducted shall cease immediately. 
C.	A Person aggrieved by the suspension of a license shall have the right to a hearing before the Township Manager, provided that a written request thereof is filed with the Township Manager within five (5) business days of the receipt of the notice of license suspension. The hearing shall be conducted within five (5) business days from receipt of the notice by the Township Manager provided scheduling permits. The Township Manager shall, after the holding a hearing, reinstate, reinstate with conditions, or revoke the license. Any decision made by the Township Manager shall be final. No person or entity whose license has been revoked shall be eligible to receive another license to operate within the Township for two (2) years from the date of the license revocation. 
(6.02)	Appeals and exceptions. 
A.	Appeals. Any Person aggrieved by a decision relating to the enforcement of this Ordinance, other than a suspension of the Zoning Official, may appeal such decision to the Township Manager. Such appeal shall be filed in writing and given to the office of the Township Manager within fifteen (15) business days from the date of the decision. The Township Manager may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, interpretation, or decision of the Zoning Official. 
B.	Exceptions. Whenever the strict application of the requirements of this Ordinance would accomplish a result contrary to same, an appeal for an exception from such requirements may be filed with the Zoning Official on a form provided for such purpose. The Zoning Official may except a provision of this Ordinance only after determining that unique conditions exist where an exception would not adversely impact neighboring properties and could not be addressed by other methods proscribed by this Ordinance, and is otherwise satisfactory, complies with the intent of this Ordinance, and is not detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(6.03)	Violations and penalties. 
1.	A Person who violates any provision of this Ordinance, or any condition of an approval granted pursuant to this Ordinance is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, plus costs including all direct and indirect expenses incurred by the Township in connection with the municipal civil infraction. However, in no case shall costs of less than $9.00 or more than $500.00 be ordered. 
2.	In addition to the issuance of a municipal civil infraction, the Sheriff's Department, the Zoning Official, or the Zoning Official's designee, shall have the authority to issue a cease and desist order for any operation found to be in violation of any of the terms of this Ordinance, other Township Ordinances, the MMMA or Administrative Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health. 
3.	The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude any Township official from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct, remove, or otherwise abate a violation of this Ordinance.  
20.007 - Severability. 
Sec. VII. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this Ordinance shall for any reason be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment is rendered.  
20.008 - Repeal. 
Sec. VIII. All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Charter Township of Union inconsistent herein are hereby repealed so far as they may be inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance.  
20.009 - Effective date. 
Sec. IX. This Ordinance shall take effect on August 5, 2011.  
30.000 - CONSUMERS POWER COMPANY GAS AND/OR ELECTRIC FRANCHISE ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1992-1 Adopted: February 26, 1992 
An Ordinance, granting to Consumers Power Company, its successors and assigns, the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services, and to construct, maintain and commercially use electric lines consisting of towers, masts, poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges and other public places, and to do a local gas and/or electric business in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, for a period of 30 years. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN ORDAINS:
 
30.001 - Grant term. 
Sec. 1. The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, hereby grants to the Consumers Power Company, a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called the "Grantee," the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services, and to construct, maintain and commercially use electric lines consisting of towers, masts, poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges and other public places, and to do a local gas and/or electric business in the Charter Township of [Union], [Isabella] County, Michigan for a period of 30 years.  
30.002 - Consideration. 
Sec. 2. In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, said Grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.  
30.003 - Conditions. 
Sec. 3. No street, alley, bridge, highway or other public place used by said Grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair, and shall be restored to the same order and condition as when said work was commenced. All of Grantee's structures and equipment shall be so placed on either side of the highways as not to unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes. All of Grantee's wires carrying electricity shall be securely fastened so as not to endanger or injure persons or property in said highways. The Grantee shall have the right to trim trees if necessary in the conducting of such business, subject, however, to the supervision of the highway authorities.  
30.004 - Hold harmless. 
Sec. 4. Said Grantee shall at all times keep and save the Charter Township free and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent construction and maintenance of the structures and equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against the Charter Township on account of the permission herein granted, said Grantee shall, upon notice, defend the Township and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance.  
30.005 - Franchise not exclusive. 
Sec. 5. The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive. The right to do a gas business and the right to do an electric business hereunder are several, and such rights may be separately exercised, owned and transferred. Either manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder.  
30.006 - Extensions. 
Sec. 6. Said Grantee shall from time to time extend its gas and electric systems to and within said Charter Township, and shall furnish gas or electricity to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations.  
30.007 - Rates. 
Sec. 7. The Grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said Charter Township for gas and/or electricity furnished therein, the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to which Commission or its successors authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas and electric rates and rules regulating such service in said Charter Township, are hereby granted. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either said Charter Township acting by its Township Board, or by said Grantee.  
30.008 - Revocation. 
Sec. 8. The franchise granted by this Ordinance is subject to revocation upon 60 days' written notice by the party desiring such revocation.  
30.009 - Michigan Public Service Commission, jurisdiction. 
Sec. 9. Said Grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service, both gas and electric, not herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to gas or electric service in said Charter Township.  
30.010 - Effective date. 
Sec. 10. This Ordinance shall take effect upon the day after the date of publication thereof; provided, however, it shall cease and be of no effect after 30 days from its adoption unless within said period the Grantee shall accept the same in writing filed with the Township Clerk. Upon acceptance and publication hereof, this Ordinance shall constitute a contract between said Charter Township and said Grantee.  
31.000 - MICHIGAN CONSOLIDATED GAS COMPANY GAS FRANCHISE ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1993-2 Adopted: March 10, 1993 
An Ordinance, granting to Michigan Consolidated Gas Company, its successors and assigns, the right, power, and authority to lay, maintain, and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridge and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan for a period of 30 years. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION ORDAINS:
 
31.001 - Grant of gas franchise and consent to laying of pipes, etc. 
Sec. 1. Subject to all the terms and conditions mentioned in this Ordinance, consent is hereby given to Michigan Consolidated Gas Company, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of Michigan (the "Company"), and to its successors and assigns, to lay, maintain, operate, and use gas pipes, mains, conductors, service pipes, and other necessary equipment in the highways, streets, alleys, and other public places in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, and a franchise is hereby granted to the Company, its successors and assigns, to transact local business in said Charter Township of Union for the purposes of conveying gas into and through and supplying and selling gas in said Charter Township of Union and all other matters incidental thereto.  
31.002 - Gas service and extension of system. 
Sec. 2. If the provisions and conditions herein contained are accepted by the Company, as in Section 6 [31.006] hereof provided, then the Company shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations; and provided further that such initial installation and any extensions shall be subject to the Main Extension provisions, the Area Expansion Program provisions (if and where applicable), and other applicable provisions now or from time to time hereafter contained in the Company's Rules and Regulations for Gas Service as filed with the Michigan Public Service Commission or successor agency having similar jurisdiction.  
31.003 - Use of streets and other public places. 
Sec. 3. The Company, its successors and assigns, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the passage of any of the highways, streets, alleys, or other public places within said Charter Township of Union and shall within a reasonable time after making an opening or excavation, repair the same and leave it in as good condition as before the opening or excavation was made. The Company, its successors and assigns, shall use due care in exercising the privileges herein contained and shall be liable to said Charter Township of Union for all damages and costs which may be recovered against [the] Charter Township of Union arising from the default, carelessness, or negligence of the Company or its officers, agents, and servants. 
No road, street, alley, or highway shall be opened for the laying of trunk lines or lateral mains except upon application to the Highway Commissioner or the Charter Township of Union or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises, stating the nature of the proposed work and the route. Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of the Highway Commissioners or the Township Board, or such other authority as may have jurisdiction, to issue a permit to the Company to do the work proposed.  
31.004 - Standards and conditions of service; rules, regulations, and rates. 
Sec. 4. The Company is now under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Public Service Commission to the extent provided by statute; and the rates to be charged for gas, and the standards and conditions of service and operation hereunder, shall be the same as set forth in the Company's schedule of rules, regulations, and rates as applicable in the several cities, villages, and townships in which the Company is now rendering gas service, or as shall hereafter be validly prescribed for the Charter Township of Union under the orders, rules, and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises.  
31.005 - Successors and assigns. 
Sec. 5. The words "Michigan Consolidated Gas Company" and "the Company," wherever used herein, are intended and shall be held and construed to mean and include both Michigan Consolidated Gas Company and its successors and assigns, whether so expressed or not.  
31.006 - Effective date; term of franchise ordinance; acceptance by Company. 
Sec. 6. This Ordinance shall take effect the day following the date of publication thereof, which publication shall be made within 30 days after the date of its adoption, and shall continue in effect for a period of 30 years thereafter, subject to revocation at the will of the Charter Township of Union at any time during said 30-year period; provided, however, that when this Ordinance shall become effective the Township Clerk shall deliver to the Company a certified copy of the Ordinance accompanied by written evidence of publication and recording thereof as required by law, and the Company shall, 60 days after the date this Ordinance takes effect, file with the Township Clerk its written acceptance of the conditions and provisions hereof.  
31.007 - Effect and interpretation of ordinance. 
Sec. 7. All ordinances and resolutions, and parts thereof, which conflict with any of the terms of this Ordinance are hereby rescinded. In the case of conflict between this Ordinance and any such ordinances or resolutions, this Ordinance shall control. The catchline headings which precede each section of this Ordinance are for convenience in reference only and shall not be taken into consideration in the construction or interpretation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance.  
32.000 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1995-5 Adopted: October 11, 1995 
An Ordinance to regulate the cable communication operations within the Charter Township of Union and the Mid-Michigan Cable Communications Consortium. 
 
32.001 - Title. 
Sec. 1.0. This Ordinance shall be known as the Cable Communications Systems Ordinance.  
32.002 - Definitions. 
Sec. 2.0. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, words, phrases and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is permissive. Words appearing in this Ordinance which are not defined in this section shall have their common and ordinary meanings. 
Access channel means any program or signal channel available for nonprofit use by government agencies, educational institutions, community groups and individual members of the public under terms established by the franchise agreement. 
Administrator is the chief administrative officer of the Grantor or that person designated or provided with the authority to execute this Ordinance. 
Application shall mean any proposal seeking authority from the Grantor to construct, develop, reconstruct, or redevelop and operate a cable system within the jurisdiction of the Grantor pursuant to this Ordinance. It shall include any initial proposal as well as all amendments and informal correspondence related thereto, all subsequent renewal proposals and in each and every instance it shall mean the inclusion of all information requested in this Ordinance. 
Basic service means at least all of the following: 
1)	The retransmission to all subscribers of all broadcast television channel signals authorized by the Federal Communications Commission and provided for in the franchise agreement; 
2)	The cablecasting to all subscribers of programming on the local origination channel and all public, educational, government and community access channels; 
Broadcast signal means a television or radio signal that is transmitted over the air and is received by a cable communications system off the air through a microwave or satellite link, and retransmitted to cable system subscribers. 
Cablecast means to distribute programs originating locally to subscribers to the cable system. 
Cable facility means a nonbroadcast signal that originates within the facilities of the cable communications system. 
Cable communications system or "system" means a system of antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave links, cablecasting studios, and any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of distributing video programming to home subscribers and for producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing or distributing audio, video, digital, or other forms of electronic or electric signals. 
Channel means a frequency band, which is capable of carrying either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other nonvideo signals or some combination of such signals. 
Community access group means any nonprofit group or organization designated as eligible to utilize access channels and facilities. 
Converter is an electronic device which converts signals transmitted as cable service to a frequency which permits their reception on subscriber's television receivers. 
Drop means the cable and related hardware including grounding materials which connect a subscriber's premises to the cable system. 
Easement shall mean the right to occupy and use public rights-of-way, including public utility easements for the operation of a cable system. 
Education access channel means any channel where local educational institutions are the primary designated programmers. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed designee, agent or successor. 
Franchise means the rights granted pursuant to this Ordinance to construct, own, operate and maintain a system as defined by the Ordinance, within the jurisdiction of the Grantor. Any such authorization, in whatsoever form granted, shall not mean nor include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the jurisdiction of the Grantor as required by other Ordinances and laws of the Grantor. 
Franchise agreement means a written agreement between the Grantor and the Grantee, including the specifications, franchise applications and other related material establishing the Grantee's rights and responsibilities relating to construction, operation and maintenance of a cable communications system. 
Government access channel means any channel where local governmental agencies are the designated programmer. 
Grantee means the franchisee, its successors or its delegate(s) acting within the scope of its franchise. 
Grantor means the community or its designee. 
Gross receipts means all revenues derived directly or indirectly by a Grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents and any person in which a Grantee owns any interest from or in connection with the operation of the cable system for the delivery of cable service including, but not limited to, all monthly and subscriber fees for basic service and any premium services, installation and reconnection charges, equipment rental charges for converters, video cassette recorders, video production equipment and video tape programming, advertising revenue and leased channel revenue, provided, however, that this term does not include revenues generated from the sale or lease of capital assets unrelated to the operation of the cable system within the community or to the delivery of cable service outside of the community. 
Headend means any location which houses the electronic equipment that transmits the necessary signal and services for the cable system, and includes sub-headends and similar facilities. 
Installation refers to the complete process of constructing a subscriber drop which connects a television receiver to the cable system. 
Leased access or leased access channel means any channel or portion of a channel available for lease and programming by persons or entities other than the Grantee. 
Local origination channel means any channel where the Grantee is the primary designated programmer and provides local programs to subscribers. 
Parental control lock-out device means a special electronic circuit or other appropriate device designed to permit a subscriber to scramble, block or trap temporarily any signal that cannot be viewed without the use of a code or physical "key" apparatus. 
Pay cable or pay television means the delivery of television signals over the cable communications system for a fee or charge to subscribers, over and above the charge for basic service on a per-program, per-channel or other subscription basis. 
Person is any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Public access channel, community access channel or community channel means any channel where any member of the general public or any noncommercial organization may be a programmer, without charge, on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
Street is the surface of as well as the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or extension, now or later held by the Grantor for any public purpose and shall include any other easements or rights-of-way or extensions as may be later held by the Grantor which shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the Grantor and its Grantee to their use. 
Theft of service means the unauthorized reception of cable service, and shall include the action of any person who shall intercept or receive or assist in intercepting or receiving any cable service offered over a cable system, unless such actions are specifically or otherwise authorized by a Grantee or authorized by law.  
32.003 - Purpose. 
Sec. 3.0. The Grantor finds that the development of the cable communications system has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon its citizens. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the Grantor further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the Grantor or such persons as the Grantor shall designate. It is the purpose of this Ordinance and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters and any franchise issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall be deemed to include this finding as an internal part. Further, it is recognized that cable communications systems have the capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to the community residents, but can provide a variety of interactive communication services to institutions and individuals. Many of these services involve municipal agencies and other public institutions, by providing governmental, educational, or health care communications. 
For these purposes to the extent practicable, the following goals underlie these regulations contained herein: 
a)	The cable communications system should be capable of accommodating both the present and reasonably foreseeable future communications needs of the community. 
b)	The cable communications system should be improved and upgraded if necessary during the franchise term so that the new facilities necessary for the operation of this system shall be integrated to the maximum extent possible with existing facilities. 
c)	The cable communications system authorized by this Ordinance shall be responsive to the needs and interests of the community, and shall provide a wide diversity of information sources and services to the public. 
d)	That the public, educational, and governmental needs for access to the cable communications system are met.  
32.004 - Franchise required. 
Sec. 4.0. No person shall own or operate a cable communications system in the jurisdiction without first making application and receiving approval for a franchise in the form of a franchise agreement between the Grantor and the Grantee which shall comply with all of the terms and specifications contained in this Ordinance. Franchise agreements shall authorize the use of public easements for the construction and operation of cable communication systems but they shall not convey any property rights to any Grantee. No franchise agreement shall either expressly or impliedly be deemed to restrict the granting of subsequent agreements nor shall any franchise agreement create any right to renewal. The failure to obtain a franchise agreement as required by this Ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor.  
32.005 - Application process. 
Sec. 5.0. Applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures of this section. Persons seeking to obtain a franchise may at any time file a written application with the Grantor's administrator or designee in conformity with the minimum requirements of this section. The Grantor reserves the right to issue more specific requests for proposals (RFP) from time to time as circumstances may require, in which case, all information specified must be supplied. 
(1)	Basic information. In order to be reviewed in accordance with this section, all applications must include an application fee as set by the Grantor or the Grantor's designee and present the following detailed information: 
a)	The applicant's legal name and principal business address.
b)	A listing of the applicant's officers, directors, and/or other principals with sufficient biographical information to permit the Grantor to evaluate the expertise of the applicant. 
c)	A listing of stockholders or other equity investors or owners having a minimum of two percent interest at the time of the application and an indication of the person having control of the application together with conformed copies of any articles of incorporation and bylaws. 
d)	A complete set of financial statements prepared by an independent firm of certified public accountants with certification by a financial officer of the applicant which include a profit and loss statement and balance sheet covering the operation of the current system for the past two years in the case of a renewal application or covering any other cable communication system(s) which the applicant has owned for the past two fiscal years of operation in the case of an initial application. 
e)	A consolidated statement of net worth containing sufficient detailed information such that, when reviewed together with the required financial statements, the Grantor would be able to readily determine the financial responsibility of the applicant. 
f)	A general description of the status of the current system or proposed design for any planned new system with detailed maps for construction or reconstruction showing where the applicant has used or will use public right-of-way, antenna/tower locations, trunk and feeder design, channel capacity, extent of two-way capability, addressability and microwave facilities. 
g)	A detailed description of currently existing or proposed video production capability together with the proposed plans for developing the usage of such capability. 
h)	A description of the cable services to be provided over the system and where service is to be offered in packages or tiers, some designation of the services available on each tier as well as any technical devices required to receive such services 
i)	A detailed discussion of the specific plans which the applicant intends to pursue in order to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community. 
j)	In the case of renewal applications, a detailed statement of the activities of the Grantee which meet or exceed the requirements of any current franchise. 
k)	A sworn statement by the chief executive officer of the applicant, certifying the truth of all information contained in the application. 
(2)	Review procedure. Upon receipt, the applicant shall be reviewed. If the application does not appear to be complete, it shall be returned to the applicant with an indication of what additional information is required. 
The review shall consider the relevant strengths and weaknesses of every applicant on its own merits. The service record of the applicant in other communities, as well as the past service record within the jurisdiction in the case of a renewal application shall be relevant criteria among others. In particular, the review may focus upon the demonstrated ability of an applicant to develop new and advanced uses of its technology, its plans to develop community interest and usage of the technology, the price/value relationship between current or proposed services and the satisfaction of the subscribers or probable subscribers, the strength of on-site management as well as any other criteria which the Grantor deems relevant. 
(3)	Public hearings. The Grantor shall not execute a franchise agreement for a term of years in compliance with this Ordinance unless legal, financial, technical and operational qualifications of the Grantee are established as well as the adequacy and feasibility of the proposed contractual arrangements. Where an applicant demonstrates that it can provide cable services deemed to be in the best interest of the community, the application may be approved. Following a preliminary determination that an application appears to be in the best interest of the community, the Grantor shall notify the applicant of the date and time set for a public hearing on the proposed contractual arrangements and the findings of the Grantor to date. This hearing shall be preceded by public notice published at least ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the community. If the Grantor approves the findings made at this public hearing it may grant a franchise to the applicant in the form of a franchise agreement which shall constitute a contract between the Grantor and the Grantee. 
(4)	Negotiated provisions of the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or provisions as may be negotiated between the Grantor and the Grantee. 
(5)	Grantee acknowledgement. A Grantee shall acknowledge its acceptance of a franchise agreement by written affidavit in a form approved by the Grantor wherein it shall be recited that the Grantee has reviewed in detail the terms and conditions contained therein with legal counsel of its choice and that it is satisfied and accepts such terms as its negotiated agreement to provide cable service and that it knowingly accepts all business risks.  
32.006 - Franchise requirements. 
Sec. 6.0. A franchise agreement executed pursuant to this Ordinance shall incorporate the terms and conditions set forth in this Ordinance whether or not such terms and conditions are fully reproduced therein, which incorporation shall commit a Grantee to be bound by the rules and regulations established in accordance with the provisions of this section and all other sections of this Ordinance. 
(1)	Franchise term. The maximum term for any franchise agreement between the Grantor and a Grantee shall be 15 years and the minimum term shall be one year. The Grantor shall approve the term which it deems to be in the best interest of the community and in furtherance of the public health, safety and convenience according to all of the facts and circumstances of each application. 
(2)	Each applicant for a franchise to provide cable service shall, in its application, define the initial service area and provide a line extension and drop policy for extending areas outside of the initial service area. 
Upon execution of a franchise agreement, the Grantee shall proceed as soon as may be practical to construct or reconstruct the cable system so as to be in compliance with this Ordinance and any franchise agreement. The failure or neglect to complete construction, reconstruction or maintenance within the allotted time or any extension, shall render any franchise agreement voidable upon written notice from the Grantor of its intention to cancel the contract. 
(3)	Franchise fee. As compensation for the use of the streets, public ways and places, and other facilities, for the construction, operation, maintenance, modification or reconstruction of a cable system, and for the Grantor's costs of maintenance, improvement and supervision thereof, and for the Grantor's costs of establishing and conducting the regulatory activities required by virtue of the granting of a franchise pursuant to this Ordinance, the Grantee shall pay to the Grantor five percent of its annual gross receipts for the term of its franchise agreement or any portion thereof while it is operating a cable system in accordance with this Ordinance. 
a)	The Grantor expressly reserves the right to negotiate a lower percentage fee in any franchise agreement in the event that it determines that such a lower percentage is in the best interest of the community. 
b)	The franchise fee set forth in any franchise agreement shall be due and payable on a monthly basis. The Grantee shall prepare a monthly report stating its gross receipts by revenue category for the immediately preceding month. This gross receipts report shall be submitted to the administrator or the Grantor designee with the franchise fee percentage payment no later than the close of business on the 30th day of the month following the reporting period. 
c)	At the end of any calendar year the franchise fees paid by a Grantee shall be adjusted to account for any under or over payments. In no event shall the franchise fees paid to the Grantor exceed five percent of the gross receipts derived from any 12-month period of operation of the cable system, including the time value of money, which would have lawfully been collected if such fees had been paid per annum in arrears. The Grantee shall be solely responsible for determining the amount of its monthly payments in this regard. To the extent that overpayments occur, any amounts paid in excess of that which was due, shall be deemed to be credited to the following month's payment. The failure to remit the full balance due in any month shall be cured at year end by a complete audit. The Grantee shall submit complete financial statements to the Grantor no later than April 15th of each year of operation, prepared by an independent certified public accountant, detailing its operation by month for the preceding calendar year. Interest on any under paid amounts shall accrue from the date such payments were due until they are paid at the maximum allowable rate under Michigan law. 
d)	Nothing in this section shall in any way restrict or nullify any liquidated damage provisions relating to nonpayment of franchise fees on a timely basis contained elsewhere in this Ordinance or in a franchise agreement and nothing in this section shall restrict the authority of the Grantor to tax the Grantee in the ordinary course of its operations solely because of its status as a franchisee. 
(4)	Indemnification. Each applicant for a franchise to own and operate a cable system in the community shall agree in its application to indemnify the Grantor against liability for any and all claims arising out of the application process, renewal process, installation, operation, maintenance, construction or reconstruction, extension or removal of the cable system. The agreement to indemnity the Grantor shall be stated in every franchise agreement executed and shall expressly include a reference to the reimbursement of all expenses incurred by the Grantor in defending itself in the event that any claims are made against it by way of lawsuit or otherwise. The Grantor shall notify the Grantee or applicant within 30 days following the receipt of any claim of demand for which the Grantee or applicant would be liable according to its indemnification responsibilities. Any such notice will be given in writing to the person, and at the place, named in the franchise agreement or application for a franchise. 
(5)	Insurance. In order to provide for the general welfare and convenience of the public and to protect the interests of the Grantor, every applicant for a franchise shall indicate its ability to obtain insurance in a form and amount which satisfies this section. 
The Grantor shall not execute a franchise agreement in accordance with this Ordinance unless and until an approved Grantee provides adequate proof of insurance, together with written proof of payment of all such premiums as may be required to put the coverage described in full force and effect, it shall be the duty of every Grantee to file annually with the Grantor proof of insurance coverage including copies of policies. 
a)	Each Grantee shall obtain and shall keep in full force and effect at all times during the term of any franchise agreement or extension thereof, a policy of broad form comprehensive general liability insurance which includes personal injury liability, and blanket contractual liability. Said policy shall provide the following minimum coverages for the benefit of the Grantor: 
1.	To maintain insurance of not less than $1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death to any one person, and $3,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence, as well as $3,000,000.00 for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence. 
2.	To furnish the Grantor a bond for the faithful performance of its obligations under the contract if awarded under this Ordinance, in an amount not less than $10,000.00. 
These coverage limits may be achieved in the primary policy, or in combination with an umbrella/excess liability policy. If umbrella or excess policies are used, the policy shall include a "broad as primary" endorsement. 
b)	Each Grantee shall obtain and shall keep in full force and effect at all times during the term of any franchise agreement or extensions thereof, all risk liability damage insurance (excluding only flood and earthquake coverage) covering losses arising with respect to the following real and personal property incidental to the operation of its cable system: All buildings, offices, studios and other realty or personality ordinarily contained therein; all headend electronics or any subheadends; all earth stations, antenna towers, microwave transmission towers and all vehicles. No physical damage insurance shall be required for the distribution system (neither trunk, feeder or drop lines), amplifiers or passive hardware or converters. It shall be the sole responsibility of any Grantee to pay for all premiums due from the coverage outlined in this section. 
c)	Each policy of insurance required by this section shall contain a 90-day cancellation or nonrenewal provision which shall expressly require the carrier to give written notice to the Grantor administrator 90 days prior to cancellation, nonrenewal or material alteration of coverage. 
d)	Any policy of insurance issued pursuant to the requirements of this section, shall only satisfy this Ordinance if it shall be issued by a responsible and nonassessable insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the State of Michigan, which company must have been rated at least B+ by Best's during each of the preceding five years. 
e)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to excuse a Grantee from the faithful performance of its obligations under any franchise agreement or to limit is liability under any provision of this Ordinance. 
(6)	Security fund. Prior to the execution of a franchise agreement, the Grantee shall provide and maintain a security fund for the period and in the sum specified in the franchise agreement, as security for the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of this franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the Grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the franchise, and the payment by the Grantor of any claims, liens and taxes due the Grantor which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. The security fund may be assessed by the Grantor for purposes including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.	Failure of the Grantee to pay the Grantor sums due under the terms of the franchise;
2.	Reimbursement of costs borne by the Grantor to correct franchise violations not corrected by the Grantee, after due notice; 
3.	Liquidated damages assessed against the Grantee due to default or violation of franchise requirements, which result in financial damages to the Grantor; 
4.	Liquidated damages assessed against the Grantee due to revocation pursuant to Franchise requirement (10) Termination. 
a)	The letter of credit shall both contain the following unrestricted endorsement: "The drawee acknowledges that this letter of credit may not be cancelled by the surety under any circumstances without written authorization from the Charter Township of Union." 
The statement of the clerk of the Grantor in the following form, shall be sufficient to draw against the said letter of credit upon presentment: I (We) certify that ____________ now holds a Franchise to operate a cable television system within the Charter Township of Union, and ____________ is now in material breach of its agreements with the Grantor. 
b)	Use of the performance bond and letter of credit. Prior to drawing upon the letter of credit or performance bond for the purpose described in this section, the Grantor shall notify the Grantee in writing that payment is due and the Grantee shall have ten days from the receipt of the written notice to make a full and complete payment. If the Grantee does not, make the payment within ten days, the Grantor may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and penalties, from the letter of credit or the performance bond. 
c)	Notification. Within three days of a withdrawal from the letter of credit or performance bond, the Grantor shall send to the Grantee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal. 
d)	Replenishment of letter of credit and performance bond. No later than 30 days after mailing to the Grantee by certified mail notification of a withdrawal pursuant to paragraph B above, the Grantee shall replenish the letter of credit or performance bond in an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn unless Grantee has challenged such withdrawal and/or the basis thereafter. Failure to make timely replenishment of such amount to the letter of credit and/or performance bond shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 
(7)	Liquidated damages. In order to facilitate an orderly regulatory framework and to provide for the common interests of the Grantor and the Grantee, any franchise agreement executed pursuant to this Ordinance shall contain negotiated dollar amounts to serve as fixed and liquidated damages for the violation of this Ordinance or of the franchise agreement. The Ordinance violations which are to be specified in detail in the franchise agreement shall be those for which ongoing monitoring and enforcement are unduly burdensome for the Grantor and which are such that it would be impossible to determine the actual dollar value of damage to the Grantor or the public. Similarly the franchise agreement violations which are to be specified for purposes of liquidated damages shall be those which are not ordinarily capable of being cured by compensatory or punitive damages at law. It being the express purpose of this section to identify the common interests of the Grantor and the Grantee in such a way as to forestall resort to termination of the contract as a remedy for material breaches of same or this Ordinance and to thereby protect the investment of the Grantee and to insure continuity of service for the community. 
a)	The liquidated damages specified in a franchise agreement shall serve as the primary pecuniary remedy for the specified violations. However, nothing in this section shall prevent or bar the Grantor from pursuing any remedies at law or in equity where a material breach of a franchise agreement persists notwithstanding the payment of liquidated damages. 
(8)	Regulatory authority. 
a)	Governing requirements. At all times during the term of the franchise, Grantee shall comply with all laws, rules or regulations of the Grantor, state or Federal Government, their regulatory agencies or commissions which are now applicable or may be applicable hereafter to the construction and operation of the cable communications system, including without limitations, all laws, Ordinances, or regulations now in force or hereafter enacted; provided that any law, regulation or Ordinance hereafter enacted shall not materially affect the rights under the franchise. Nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver of Grantee's right to challenge the validity of any such law, rule or regulation. The Grantee shall comply with new laws and regulations, such as the American with Disabilities Act. 
b)	Change in law or regulation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance to the contrary, the Grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the local, state and federal government. In the event that any actions of the state or federal government or any agency thereof, of any court of competent jurisdiction upon final adjudication, substantially reduce in any way the power or authority of the Grantor under this Ordinance or franchise, or if in compliance with any local, state or federal law or regulation, the Grantee finds conflict with the terms of this Ordinance, the franchise, or any law or regulation of the Grantor, then as soon as possible following thereof, the Grantee shall notify the Grantor of the point of conflict believed to exist between such law or regulation and the law or regulations of the Grantor, this Ordinance and the franchise. The Grantor, at its option, may notify the Grantee that it wishes to negotiate those provisions which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations or statutory authority. Thereafter, the Grantee shall negotiate in good faith with the community in the development of alternative provisions which shall, to the extent permitted by law, materially maintain the rights of the community as established under the terms of this Ordinance and the franchise. The community shall have the duty, based upon the results of such negotiations, to modify any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this Ordinance and the franchise and the agreement reached in negotiations. 
c)	Reservation of-rights for regulation. The Grantor reserves the right to exercise the maximum plenary authority, as may be lawfully permissible, to regulate the cable communications system, the franchisee and the Grantee. Should applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time permit regulation not presently permitted to the Grantor, the Grantor may without approval of the Grantee engage in any such regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not contemplated by this Ordinance or the franchise including without limitations, regulations regarding franchise fees, taxes, programming, rates charged to subscribers and users, consumer protection, or any other similar or dissimilar matter. 
d)	Right of inspection of records. The Grantor shall have the right to inspect all books, records, reports, maps, plans, financial statements of the Grantee and any parent company to the extent such materials are relevant to the Grantee's performance of its obligations under this Ordinance and the franchise, and other like materials of the Grantee, at any time during normal business hours upon 24 hours prior notice to the Grantee. 
e)	Right of inspection of cable facilities. The Grantor shall have the right to inspect all cable facilities or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other pertinent provisions of the law. 
f)	Franchise nonexclusive. Any franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be nonexclusive. The Grantor specifically reserves the right to (1) grant at any time such additional franchises for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate, and/or (2) build, operate and own such cable communications system or systems as it deems appropriate. 
g)	Expense reimbursement to Grantor. The Grantee shall pay the Grantor a sum of money which will, when added to any application fees received, reimburse all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of an initial franchise, including, but not limited to, consultant fees, attorney's fees, publication fees, travel expenses and all other direct costs. To the extent allowed by law, the Grantee shall pay the Grantor a sum of money which will, reimburse all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by it in connection with the extending or renewing a franchise, including, but not limited to, consultant fees, attorney's fees, publication fees, travel expenses and all other direct costs. The Grantor shall submit a detailed schedule of all such costs. Such payment shall be made within 30 days after the Grantor furnished the Grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(9)	Reports required. 
a)	Annual reports required. The Grantee shall file the following reports which shall be submitted 90 days after the end of the Grantee's fiscal year with the Grantor administrator: 
1)	Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical miles of cable plant construction, reconstruction and cable plant in operation. The report shall also indicate modifications to the headend and other areas of system operations (billing, converters, equipment for new services). 
2)	Financial reports. The following financial report for the franchise area shall be submitted annually to the Grantor 90 days after the end of the Grantee's fiscal year: 
i)	An ownership report, indicating all persons, who at any time during the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in the franchise of one percent or more. 
ii)	An annual, fully audited and certified financial statement from the previous calendar year, including subscriber revenue from each category of service and every source of non-subscriber revenue. 
iii)	An annual list of officers and members of the Board of Grantee and of any parent corporation.
3)	Operational report. The following system and operational report shall be submitted annually to the Grantor 90 days after the end of the Grantee's fiscal year: 
i)	A report on the system's technical tests and measurements as set forth herein and in the franchise. 
ii)	A report of new services added and a projection for services planned for the future.
iii)	A report on support provided by the Grantee for public, educational, governmental channels and other public benefit projects. 
iv)	A compilation of the monthly reports to provide year end analysis.
b)	Monthly reports required. The Grantee shall provide a monthly operational report which will provide a concise overview of the following system activity: 
1)	A subscriber report indicating end of month subscriber numbers for all levels of service, an analysis of disconnects and a review of revenues from all other services. 
2)	A gross receipt report, which shall state the gross receipts by revenue category for the immediately preceding month. 
3)	A technical summary of cable system service log indicating the types of service problems, the length of time between detection and resolution and the action taken to correct the problems. 
4)	A statement of current status of video production equipment provided by the Grantee. Report shall also indicate maintenance issues and any equipment in need of replacement. 
c)	Additional reports. The Grantee shall prepare and furnish to the Grantor at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with respect to the operation, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the Grantor in connection with this Ordinance or the franchise. 
(10)	Termination. In the event that a Grantee causes or creates a material breach of a franchise agreement executed pursuant to the Ordinance, or violates the provisions of this Ordinance in a significant and material manner, the Grantor may elect to terminate any franchise granted hereunder. Any termination for cause shall be made by resolution of the Grantor stating that such cancellation is for cause, and the specific reasons alleged to constitute such cause, and the Grantee shall have the right to appear before the Grantor at a duly noticed and scheduled public meeting to present its position with regard to the finding made under this section. A material breach shall include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
a)	Any uncured violation of a material provision of a franchise agreement or this Ordinance which is not cured within a period of thirty days following receipt of written notice of same by the Grantee. 
b)	Any attempts to sell, transfer or dispose of the capital assets related to the cable system without giving written notice of such attempts 90 days prior to same to the Grantor administrator. 
c)	Any attempt to evade the provisions of this Ordinance by deceit, fraud or misrepresentation.
The foregoing action shall only be mitigated by circumstances beyond the control of the Grantee. Simple negligence, mistake or neglect shall not excuse such actions. A Grantee shall at all times be solely responsible for proving the existence of circumstances beyond its control. 
(11)	Rate regulation. The community shall comply with rules of the Federal Communications Commission set forth in Subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of Part 76 (Cable Television Service) of Ordinance I of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulation regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and associated equipment, as amended. 
After a cable operator has submitted for review its existing rate for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs of a proposed increase in these rates, the clerk or the Grantor designee shall post a public notice of the rates and costs giving interested parties, including the cable operator, a reasonable opportunity to file written comments which shall be available in the office of the community clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
The community shall comply with procedures set forth in 47 CFR § 0.459 regarding confidential business information submitted by the cable operator in a rate regulation proceeding. A cable operator which willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order directed specifically at the cable operator shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture as determined by the community following the procedures set forth in 47 USC § 503.  
32.007 - Programming. 
Sec. 7.0. Programming. Concurrently with the activation of the cable communications system in the community, the Grantee shall provide all services to subscribers as described herein. 
(1)	Programming as specified in franchise. The system shall carry programming as specified in the franchise. Any such change in program or services offered shall comply with the conditions and procedures contained in the franchise, and shall be reported to the clerk of the Grantor or other designee of Grantor at least 30 days prior to the proposed implementation. The Grantee shall use its best effort to ensure diversity of programming. 
(2)	Basic service tier. A basic service tier shall be offered to subscribers throughout the term of the Ordinance and the franchise to the extent required by law. 
(3)	Access. The Grantee shall provide the number of access and community channels specified in the franchise agreement executed pursuant to this Ordinance. All residential subscribers who receive all or any part of the total services offered on the system shall also receive all access channels at no additional charge. These channels shall be activated upon system activation and thereafter maintained as needed. The Grantee shall establish rules and regulations for the use of community access channels which shall be approved by the Grantor before implementation and thereafter shall not be altered or amended without the approval of the Grantor. In preparing these rules, the Grantee shall: 
a)	Provide an equal opportunity for community use of access service.
b)	Present a needs assessment of the community to be served and provide a plan to meet those needs. 
c)	Develop a plan to allocate to the Grantor a reasonable use and fair schedule of channel time and use of equipment and facilities so that the Grantor can send and receive programming fitted to its needs. Such plan shall be approved by the Grantor before implementation and thereafter shall not be altered or amended without approval of the Grantor. 
d)	Describe all equipment and facilities and any charges for their use.
e)	Comply, at a minimum, with the requirements of the Grantor now or hereafter adopted or determined regarding access channels. 
(4)	Program guide. The Grantee shall provide a program guide which shall be delivered in electronic form. 
(5)	Institutional network. The Grantee shall provide an institutional network as specified in the franchise. 
(6)	Emergency override. The Grantee shall, without charge, provide, service and maintain public emergency transmission facilities in the community, as described in the franchise.  
32.008 - Minimum design requirements. 
Sec. 8.0. In order to provide for a technologically advanced cable system which will satisfy the communication needs of the community, all applicants for a franchise shall agree to provide certain minimum design features in their applications. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or in any way discourage the development of more extensive systems or better facilities and equipment. The Grantor is expressly authorized to negotiate any state of the art improvements with applicants which will serve to ensure that the Grantor maintains a modern cable system. 
(1)	Channel capacity. All applicants for a franchise shall agree to construct and maintain the following minimum channel capacities: 
a)	A cable system constructed to provide sufficient bandwidth capacity such that, when used with an appropriate converter device at a subscriber's receiver, it shall enable the reception of a minimum of 54 downstream video channels and 400 megahertz on a single cable. 
b)	A cable system having at least 36 activated video channels at all times.
(2)	Allocation of public benefit channel capacity. All applicants for a franchise shall provide a percentage of system channel capacity to support the cablecasting of public, educational and governmental access programming. 
(3)	Community installations. Cable service shall be provided to every school building, fire station, city hall, community center, library, police station and other public buildings with not less than one outlet on each floor at no cost to the user. 
(4)	Parental control devices. All applicants shall make available upon request by any subscriber, a converter or other device capable of removing from a subscriber's service both the video and audio of any channel which the subscriber considers offensive. The Grantee shall inform subscribers of this capability in writing and the appropriate device shall be installed and maintain at no additional cost to the subscriber. Grantee may charge a deposit. 
(5)	Video production capability. All applicants shall purchase and maintain video production capability within the cable system for the production of local programming. Ownership of such equipment shall remain with the Grantee, and the maintenance of such facilities and equipment shall be the responsibility of the Grantee. Whenever it is necessary to replace equipment, the Grantee shall replace such equipment with new equipment reflecting advances in the state of the art, provided that such equipment is compatible with the balance of the system. The franchise agreement shall specify the type, quality and quantity of equipment with a cash value of the proposed equipment package. This package shall provide character generated services. The Grantor reserves the right to specify equipment which best suits the needs of the communities. All Grantees shall purchase and maintain such video production capability as to be able to produce both live and video-taped programming from remote points in the cable system including all necessary equipment to transmit upstream signals to the headend for immediate processing and retransmission downstream to subscribers. The Grantor shall designate remote points for live cablecasting in the franchise agreement, which points may be changed by the Grantor from time to time upon 30 days' prior written notice to the Grantee. 
(6)	Leased access channels. Every Grantee shall at all times comply with the provisions of the Cable Act of 1984 pertaining to the availability and use of leased channel space.  
32.009 - Guidelines for providing cable service. 
Sec. 9.0. In addition to the minimum design requirements established by this Ordinance, it is the intention of the Grantor to provide for minimum procedures for the delivery of cable service to subscribers as a matter of the general welfare and convenience. To this end, each applicant for a franchise shall maintain certain records, and administer certain procedures in compliance with this section. 
(1)	Business office. A Grantee shall maintain a reasonably convenient business office with established office hours for responding to billing or service related problems. The Grantor maintains the right to vary this requirement if it is deemed advisable. 
(2)	Policy statement. A Grantee shall adopt and maintain a written set of rules and regulations for the conduct of its business such that, upon request, any member of the general public may receive such rules prior to subscribing for cable service. At a minimum, a Grantee shall address each of the items set forth in this section in a way which satisfies all requirements stated herein. A written notice of the availability of these polices shall be given to each subscriber at the time of initial installation. 
a)	In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing, Grantee shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the Grantor engineer, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surfacing of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before said work was commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in an approved condition for a period of five years. 
b)	In the event that at any time during the existence of a franchise, the Grantor shall lawfully widen, realign, or otherwise alter pavement, change the grade of any water main, fire hydrant, sewer or appurtenances, the Grantee and anyone acting for it in connection with the use of the streets, upon reasonable notice by the Grantor, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
c)	In conduit districts now or later established by Ordinances of the Grantor, and as amended or altered, and in such other areas of the Grantor in which telephone lines and electric utility lines are underground, all of Grantee's lines, cable and wires shall be underground. 
(3)	Service disconnection procedure. Upon receipt of notice of a request to disconnect service, written or oral, a Grantee shall proceed to close the subscriber's account and remove all equipment from the subscriber's premises. Subscribers shall have the right to have cable service disconnected without charge unless otherwise specified in the FCC rules. A refund of unused service charges shall be paid to the customer within 60 days from the date of termination of service. In any event all such requests shall be completed within ten days of the receipt of same absent some circumstances beyond the control of the Grantee. In case of a disconnect for nonpayment of service charges, a Grantee shall not disconnect cable service for delinquent payment without first sending written notice of such pending disconnection to the delinquent subscriber at least ten days prior to the physical disconnection of service. 
(4)	Protection of subscriber privacy mandatory. Grantee shall at all times protect the privacy of subscribers, as provided in this Ordinance and other applicable Federal, State and local laws. 
(5)	Theft of service. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a Grantee from immediately disconnecting any person who shall illegally attempt to receive cable service; however, in the event of a theft of service problem, a Grantee shall make all reasonable efforts to ascertain that the occurrence is not the result of a prior billing problem prior to disconnection. 
(6)	Prohibition against providing television services. A Grantee shall not sell television or radio receiving sets or parts to its CATV subscribers except that it may repair and service to the extent necessary to establish the validity of its CATV signal. As converters or other parts become necessary for the reception of any and all channels, or for additional outlets of FM service the Grantee shall provide converters to all subscribers on a deposit basis, sale or rental. 
(7)	Customer service standards: 
a)	Definitions. When used in this subparagraph: 
1.	Normal business hours means those hours during which similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
2.	Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
3.	Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
b)	Exceptions. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent or prohibit: 
1.	The Grantor and a cable operator from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this section. 
2.	The Grantor from enforcing throughout the franchise term pre-existing customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this section and are contained in current franchise agreements. 
3.	The Grantor from enacting or enforcing any consumer protection law.
4.	The establishment or enforcement of any section or regulation concerning customer service that imposes customer service requirements that exceed or address matters not addressed by the standards set forth in this section. 
c)	Customer service standards. A cable operator is subject to the following customer service standards certified quarterly by the cable operator: 
1.	The cable operator will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Trained company representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
2.	After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquires received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
3.	Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a company representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions measured on a quarterly basis. 
4.	Under normal operating conditions, the customers may receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
5.	Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located. 
6.	Under normal operating conditions, each of the following five standards will be set no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
a)	Standard installations will be performed seven business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are located not more than 125 feet from the existing distribution system. 
b)	Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, a cable operator shall begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The cable operator must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
c)	The appointment window for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour block during normal business hours. The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. 
d)	A cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
e)	If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted, the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
7.	The cable operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
a)	Products and services offered;
b)	Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
c)	Installation and service maintenance policies;
d)	Instructions on how to use the cable service;
e)	Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and
f)	Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the cable operator and of the Municipal Building. 
8.	All subscribers shall receive a monthly bill. Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including operational charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, a cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
9.	Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but not later than:
a)	The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
b)	The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated.
10.	Credits will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
d)	Enforcement. The Grantor may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's consent agreement with the community) for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the community pursuant to this section, any requirements of this section, or any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the community pursuant to this section, any requirements of the section, or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's consent agreement.  
32.010 - Franchise renewal. 
Sec. 10.0. Under completion of the term of any franchise granted under this Ordinance, the Grantor may in its discretion grant or deny renewal of the franchise of the Grantee in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act.  
32.011 - Transfer of ownership. 
Sec. 11.0. In no event shall a Grantee of a franchise executed pursuant to this Ordinance transfers any rights granted therein or engage in a transfer of 50 percent or more of ownership or control without first receiving the prior written approval of the Grantor. Any transfer, encumbrance or other disposition of any controlling interest in the Grantee shall constitute an immediate material breach and violation of this Ordinance subjecting the franchise to termination unless written notice of any such attempt is given to the Grantor at least 120 days prior to any such attempted action.  
32.012 - Purchase of cable system by Grantor. 
Sec. 12.0. In the event that a franchise is not renewed or is terminated for cause, the Grantor shall have the absolute right, which right shall be made a part of every franchise agreement by reference to this section, to buy the cable system if it chooses to do so. If the Grantor elects to buy the system the price shall be determined at fair market value with no value attributed to the franchise per se but with the system valued as a going concern not at depreciated book value. The Grantor and the Grantee shall each appoint an appraiser, the two of which shall appoint a third appraiser or if they cannot agree, a circuit judge from the appropriate jurisdiction shall, acting in an administrative capacity, appoint a third appraiser. The three appraisers shall independently evaluate the value of the system. The average of the three appraisals shall be deemed the purchase price. Each party shall pay the costs of its appraiser and one half of the cost of the third appraiser.  
32.013 - Removal of cable system. 
Sec. 13.0. In the event that a franchise terminates for any reason and the Grantee has not sold or otherwise transferred ownership of the cable system to the Grantor or a third party, the Grantee shall forthwith remove its facilities from all public easements. If the Grantee fails to take prompt action in this regard, the Grantor may proceed to remove the system and charge the security fund or the Grantee directly.  
32.014 - Delegation of Authority of Grantor. 
Sec. 14.0. The Grantor reserves the right to delegate from time to time any of its rights or obligations under the franchise to any body or organization. Any such delegation shall be effective upon written notice thereof to the Grantee. Upon receipt of such notice the Grantee shall be bound by all terms and conditions of the delegation not in conflict with the franchise. Any such delegation or revocation thereof, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed to be an amendment to the franchise or require the Grantee's consent.  
32.015 - Regional interconnect. 
Sec. 15.0. The Grantor shall retain the right to require a Grantee to interconnect its cable system with any other communications facilities in the service area.  
32.016 - Separability. 
Sec. 16.0.  
(1)	Any other provisions of this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, a Grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the federal, state, county and Grantor governments and all administrative agencies thereof; provided, however, that if any law or regulation shall prohibit a Grantee expressly from performing a service required hereunder, such that it would be in conflict with the terms of this Ordinance or the provisions of the Grantor's Code of Ordinances, then as soon as such a conflict becomes known to the Grantee, the Grantee shall notify the Grantor in writing of what it believes the conflict to consist of and in particular what law or regulation it believes to be in conflict with this Ordinance or the Grantor's Code of Ordinances, and the Grantee shall be thereby excused from performance hereunder, provided that it acts in good faith reliance thereon, pending an authoritative resolution of such conflict. 
(2)	If any provision of this Ordinance or any related Ordinances is held by any court of by any federal, state or county agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal, state, or county law, rule or regulation, said provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this Ordinance such other Ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of any other of these. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changes, so that the provisions which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the laws, rules and regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall be binding on the parties, provided that the Grantor shall give the Grantee 30-days' written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision. 
(3)	If the Grantor determines that a material provision of this Ordinance or any related Ordinances is affected by such action of a court or of the federal, state or county government, the Grantor shall have the right to modify any of the provisions herein or in such related Ordinances to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this Ordinance.  
32.017 - Miscellaneous. 
Sec. 17.0. All Ordinances, resolutions or orders or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are to the extent of such conflict, repealed.  
[32.018 - Effective date.] 
Sec. 18.0. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately after publication.  
33.000 - WATER TREATMENT PLANT FRANCHISE Ord. No. 1996-13 Adopted: October 23, 1996 
AN ORDINANCE, granting to the City of Mount Pleasant the right, power, and authority to lay, maintain, and operate a sewer line and water mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the roadways in the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan for a period of ten (10) years. 
The Township of Union ordains: 
SECTION I  
33.100 - TITLE 
 
33.101 - Title. 
Sec. 1.1. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the City Water Treatment Plant Franchise Ordinance and it shall be sufficient to any action for enforcement of the provision hereof to define the same by suck [such] title or reference to the number hereof.  
SECTION II  
33.200 - PURPOSE 
 
33.201 - Purpose. 
Sec. 2.1. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to grant the City of Mt. Pleasant the right, power, and authority only as specified in Exhibit A to lay, maintain, and operate a sewer line and water mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the roadways in the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan.  
SECTION III  
33.300 - DEFINITION 
 
33.301 - Consent of laying of pipes, inc. 
Sec. 3.1. Subject to the terms of this Ordinance, consent is hereby given to the City of Mt. Pleasant, a municipal corporation organized under the laws of the State of Michigan (the "City"), to lay, maintain, operrate (operate) and use a sewer line and water mains, service pipes, and other necessary equipment in the roadways in the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, only as set forth on the attached Exhibit A.  
33.302 - Use of roadways and other public places. 
Sec. 3.2. The City shall not unnecessarily obstruct the passage of any of the roadways or other public places within the Union Township and shall within a reasonable time after making an opening or excavation, repair the roadway in as good condition as before the opening or excavation was made. The City shall use due care in exercising the privileges as granted and shall be liable to the Township of Union for all damages and costs which may be recovered against Union Township arising from the default, carelessness, or negligence of the City or its employees, agents and servants. 
No road shall be opened for the laying of trunk lines or lateral mains except upon application to the Isabella County Road Commission or the Township of Union or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises, stating the nature of the proposed work and the route. Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of Isabella County Road Commissioners or the Union Township Board, or such other authority as my [may] have jurisdiction to issue a permit to the City to do the work proposed.  
33.303 - Term of franchise ordinance: acceptance by City. 
Sec. 3.3. This ordinance shall continue in effect for a period of ten (10) years thereafter, subject to revocation at the will of the Township of Union at any time during said ten (10) year period; provided, however, that when this ordinance shall become effective the Township Clerk shall deliver to the City a certified copy of the ordinance accompanied by written evidence of publication and recording thereof as required by law, and the City shall, sixty (60) days after the date of this ordinance takes effect, file with the Township Clerk its written acceptance of the conditions and provisions hereof.  
33.304 - Effect and interpretation of Ordinance. 
Sec. 3.4. All ordinances and resolutions, and parts thereof, which conflict with any of the terms of this ordinance are rescinded. In the case of conflict between this ordinance and any such ordinances or resolutions, this ordinance shall control. The catch line headings which precede each Section of this ordinance are for convenience in reference only and shall not be taken into consideration in the construction of interpretation of any provisions of this ordinance. 
EXHIBIT A
Location of Water Mains 
The water mains shall be located as follows: 
(1)	A water main on the south side of Broomfield Road from the City limits west to the location of the Water Treatment Plant. 
(2)	A water main on the south side of Broomfield Road running from the location of the Water Treatment Plant west to McGuirk Street. 
(3)	A water main running from the Ranney Well system in a southeasterly course to the west side of McGuirk Street to the south side of Broomfield Road and continuing east to the location of the Water Treatment Plant. 
Location of Sewer Line 
The sewer line shall be located as follows: 
A sewer line on the south side of Broomfield Road from the location of the Water Treatment Plant east to the City limits to Connection Point #5.  
45.000 - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE ORDINANCE Ord. No. 2011-05 Adopted: September 14, 2011 
An Ordinance enacted pursuant to MCL 257.951 to 257.955 and MCL 42.15, 42.23 and 41.181 to adopt by reference the Uniform Traffic Code of Michigan Cities, Townships and Villages as promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act 306 of 1969, as amended (MCL 24.201 et seq.) and made effective October 30, 2002, and to adopt by reference certain state laws; and to repeal all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, HEREBY ORDAINS:
 
45.001 - Title. 
Sec. 1. This Ordinance and the provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code and state laws adopted by reference herein shall be collectively known and may be cited as the "Charter Township of Union Traffic Code Ordinance".  
45.002 - Adoption of Uniform Traffic Code by reference. 
Sec. 2. The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages as promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act 306 of 1969, as amended (MCL 24.201 et seq.) and made effective October 30, 2002, is hereby adopted by reference. All references in said Uniform Traffic Code to a "governmental unit" shall mean the Charter Township of Union.  
45.003 - Adoption of provisions of Michigan Vehicle Code by reference. 
Sec. 3. The following provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended (MCL 257.1 et seq.) are hereby adopted by reference: 
A.	Chapter I (Words and Phrases Defined): MCL 257.1 to 257.82
B.	Chapter II (Administration, Registration): MCL 257.225, 257.228, 257.243, 257.244, 257.255, and 257.256. 
C.	Chapter III (Operator's and Chauffeur's License): MCL 257.310e, 257.311, 257.312a, 257.324, 257.325, 257.326, and 257.328. 
D.	Chapter VI (Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws): MCL 257.601 to 257.601b, 257.602 to 257.606, 257.611 to 257.616, 257.617a to 257.622, 257.624a to 257.624b, 257.625 (except felony provisions), 257.625a, 257.625m, 257.626 to 257.626b, 257.627 to 257.627b, 257.629b, 257.631 to 257.632, 257.634 to 257.647 to 257.655, 257.656 to 257.662, 257.667 to 257.675d, 257.676 to 257.628b, 257.683 to 257.710e, 257.716 to 257.724. 
E.	Chapter VIII (License Offenses): MCL 257.904 to 257.904a, 257.904e, 257.905. 
45.004 - Adoption of other state laws by reference. 
Sec. 4. The following provisions of state law are hereby adopted by reference: Section 3102 of the Michigan Insurance Code of 1956, 1956 Public Act 218, as amended, pertaining to required insurance (MCL 500.3102).  
45.005 - Penalties. 
Sec. 5. The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code and the provisions of the state laws hereinabove adopted by reference are hereby adopted as the penalties for violations of the corresponding provisions of this Ordinance.  
45.006 - Severability. 
Sec. 6. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this Ordinance or the Uniform Traffic Code or a statutory provision adopted by reference herein to be unenforceable, in whole or in part, such declaration shall only affect the provision held to be unenforceable and shall not affect any other part or provision; provided that if a court of competent jurisdiction declares a penalty provision to exceed the authority of the Township, the penalty shall be construed as the maximum penalty that is determined by the court to be within the authority of the Township to impose.  
45.007 - Repeal of conflicting provisions and effective date. 
Sec. 7. This Ordinance shall take effect upon publication as required by law. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed; provided that any violation charged before the effective date of this Ordinance under an ordinance provision repealed by this Ordinance shall continue under the Ordinance provision then in effect.  
60.000 - ANTI-NOISE AND ANTI-NUISANCE ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1991-10 Adopted: June 26, 1991 
An Ordinance enacted pursuant to the authority of MCLA 41.181, MCLA 41.184, and MCLA 42.15 to prevent, reduce, and eliminate excessive noise and nuisances within the Charter Township of Union; to preserve, promote, and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the persons and property within the Township; to provide for the enforcement hereof; and to provide penalties for the violation hereof including a provision that violations will constitute a misdemeanor, and to establish that any violation shall be a public nuisance. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN ORDAINS:
 
60.001 - Title. 
Sec. 1.0. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Charter Township of Union Anti-Noise and Anti-Nuisance Ordinance," and it shall be sufficient to any action for enforcement of the provisions hereof to define the same by such title or reference to the number hereof.  
60.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. 2.0. It is the purpose of this Section to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents and property owners of the Township by preventing, reducing, and eliminating excessive noises and nuisances in the Township by preventing or eliminating noises and disturbances which now exist or may in the future exist within the Township.  
60.003 - Excessive noises and nuisances. 
Sec. 3.0. The following noises and disturbances are declared to be a violation of this Ordinance; however the enumeration of the same in this Ordinance is not to be construed to exclude other violations not specifically enumerated: 
a.	The playing of any radio, phonograph, television, or other electronic or mechanical sound producing device including any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume as to unreasonably upset or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons during the following times: 
From Sunday at 11:00 p.m. until Monday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Monday at 11:00 p.m. until Tuesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Tuesday at 11:00 p.m. until Wednesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Wednesday at 11:00 p.m. until Thursday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Thursday at 11:00 p.m. until Friday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Friday at 11:30 p.m. until Saturday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Saturday at 11:30 p.m. until Sunday at 5:00 a.m. 
b.	Yelling, shouting, hooting or singing on the public streets or at any time or place so as to unreasonably upset or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. Under no circumstances shall such behavior be allowed during the following times: 
From Sunday at 11:00 p.m. until Monday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Monday at 11:00 p.m. until Tuesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Tuesday at 11:00 p.m. until Wednesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Wednesday at 11:00 p.m. until Thursday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Thursday at 11:00 p.m. until Friday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Friday at 11:30 p.m. until Saturday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Saturday at 11:30 p.m. until Sunday at 5:00 a.m. 
c.	The emission or creation of any excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the operation of any school, church, hospital or court. 
d.	The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl, which emanates frequent or extended noise which shall unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity; such as allowing or permitting any dog to bark repeatedly in an area where such barking can be clearly heard from nearby residential property. 
e.	The operation of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair or so loaded or constructed as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other unreasonable noise including the noise resulting from exhaust, which is clearly audible from nearby properties and unreasonably disturbing to the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. The modification of any noise abatement device on any motor vehicle or engine, or the failure to maintain same so that the noise emitted by such vehicle or engine is increased above that emitted by such vehicle as originally manufactured, shall be in violation of this section. 
f.	The sounding of any horn or other device on any motor vehicle unless necessary to operate said vehicle safely or as required by the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code. 
g.	The discharging outside of any enclosed building of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or motor boat engine except through a muffler or other similar device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises. The modification of any noise abatement device on any motor vehicle or engine, or the failure to maintain same so the noise emitted by such vehicle or engine is increased above that emitted by such vehicle as originally manufactured shall be in violation of this section during the following times: 
From Sunday at 11:00 p.m. until Monday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Monday at 11:00 p.m. until Tuesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Tuesday at 11:00 p.m. until Wednesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Wednesday at 11:00 p.m. until Thursday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Thursday at 11:00 p.m. until Friday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Friday at 11:30 p.m. until Saturday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Saturday at 11:30 p.m. until Sunday at 5:00 a.m. 
h.	The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or premises in any part of the Township, and including the streets and highways, in such a manner as to emanate noise or disturbance unreasonably annoying to other persons, other than between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and sundown on any day, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of the public health and safety. In such case, a permit shall be obtained from the building inspector or Ordinance Enforcement Officer of the Township, which permit shall limit the periods that the activity may continue. 
i.	The creation of a loud or excessive noise unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity in connection with the operation, loading, or unloading of any vehicle, trailer, railroad car, or other carrier or in connection with the repairing of any such vehicle in or near residential areas during the following times: 
From Sunday at 11:00 p.m. until Monday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Monday at 11:00 p.m. until Tuesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Tuesday at 11:00 p.m. until Wednesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Wednesday at 11:00 p.m. until Thursday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Thursday at 11:00 p.m. until Friday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Friday at 11:30 p.m. until Saturday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Saturday at 11:30 p.m. until Sunday at 5:00 a.m. 
j.	The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale, display, or other commercial purpose which, by the creation of such noise, shall be unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity during the following times: 
From Sunday at 11:00 p.m. until Monday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Monday at 11:00 p.m. until Tuesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Tuesday at 11:00 p.m. until Wednesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Wednesday at 11:00 p.m. until Thursday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Thursday at 11:00 p.m. until Friday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Friday at 11:30 p.m. until Saturday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Saturday at 11:30 p.m. until Sunday at 5:00 a.m. 
k.	The operation of any loudspeaker or other sound-amplifying device upon any vehicle on the streets of the Township with the purpose of advertising, where such vehicle, speaker or sound amplifying equipment emits loud and raucous noises easily heard from nearby adjoining residential property during the following times: 
From Sunday at 11:00 p.m. until Monday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Monday at 11:00 p.m. until Tuesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Tuesday at 11:00 p.m. until Wednesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Wednesday at 11:00 p.m. until Thursday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Thursday at 11:00 p.m. until Friday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Friday at 11:30 p.m. until Saturday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Saturday at 11:30 p.m. until Sunday at 5:00 a.m. 
l.	The operation of any machinery, equipment or mechanical device so as to emit unreasonably loud noise which is disturbing to the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person during the following times: 
From Sunday at 11:00 p.m. until Monday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Monday at 11:00 p.m. until Tuesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Tuesday at 11:00 p.m. until Wednesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Wednesday at 11:00 p.m. until Thursday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Thursday at 11:00 p.m. until Friday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Friday at 11:30 p.m. until Saturday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Saturday at 11:30 p.m. until Sunday at 5:00 a.m. 
m.	The operation of any racetrack, proving ground, testing area, or obstacle course for motor vehicles, motorcycles, boats, racers, automobiles, or vehicles of any kind or nature in any area of the Township where the noise emanating therefrom would be unreasonably disturbing and upsetting to other persons in the vicinity. Under no circumstances shall any racetrack, proving ground, testing area or obstacle course operate during the following times: 
From Sunday at 11:00 p.m. until Monday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Monday at 11:00 p.m. until Tuesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Tuesday at 11:00 p.m. until Wednesday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Wednesday at 11:00 p.m. until Thursday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Thursday at 11:00 p.m. until Friday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Friday at 11:30 p.m. until Saturday at 5:00 a.m.; 
From Saturday at 11:30 p.m. until Sunday at 5:00 a.m.  
60.004 - Exceptions. 
Sec. 4.0. None of the prohibitions hereinbefore enumerated shall apply to the following: 
a.	Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine or emergency vehicle while engaged in necessary emergency activities. 
b.	Warning devices emitting sound for warning purposes as authorized by law. 
60.005 - Enforcement officer. 
Sec. 5.0. The Union Township Zoning Officer is charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance as more fully hereinafter set out.  
60.006 - Enforcement and penalties for failure to comply with this Ordinance. 
Sec. 6.0. 
[6.1.] Any person who shall violate any terms of this Ordinance or any person who shall permit, encourage, promote, or cause a violation of any terms of this Ordinance to occur on his premises shall, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both, plus costs of prosecution. Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall prevent the Township Board, public official, or private citizen from taking lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this Ordinance. 
[6.2.] Nuisance provision: Noises and disturbances in violation of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. A court of competent jurisdiction may order such nuisance abated and the owner or agent in charge of the premises where such nuisance is located may be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se.  
60.007 - Severability. 
Sec. 7.0. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
60.008 - Effective date. 
Sec. 8.0. This Ordinance will take effect 30 days after publication. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
61.000 - NUISANCE PARTY ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1993-3 Adopted: May 12, 1993 
An Ordinance enacted pursuant to the authority of MCL 41.181, 41.184 and 42.15, to prevent, reduce, and eliminate nuisance parties within the Charter Township of Union; to preserve, promote, and protect the health, safety and general welfare of the persons and property within the Township; to provide for the enforcement hereof; and to provide penalties for the violation hereof including a provision that violations will constitute a misdemeanor and to establish that any violation shall be a public nuisance. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
 
61.001 - Title. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Nuisance Party Ordinance," and it shall be sufficient to any action for enforcement of the provisions hereof to define the same by such title or reference to the number hereof.  
61.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residence [residents] and property owners of the Township by preventing, reducing, and eliminating nuisance parties within the Township.  
61.003 - Nuisance party. 
Sec. III. 
3.1.	Nuisance party defined: A social gathering or party which is conducted on premises within the Charter Township of Union, and which, by reason of the conduct of those persons in attendance, results in any one or more of the following conditions or occurrences: public drinking or drunkenness; public urination or defecation; the unlawful sale, furnishing, or consuming of intoxicating beverages; the unlawful deposit of trash or litter on public or private property; the destruction of public or private property; the generation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic which obstructs the free flow of residential traffic or interferes with the ability to render emergency services; excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise which disturbs the comfort and quiet repose of the neighborhood; public disturbances, brawls, fights or quarrels; or which results in any similar conduct or conditions which annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, comfort, or repose of the neighboring residents, or results in any indecent or obscene conduct, or results in any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure by persons at the social gathering or party, is hereby declared to be an unlawful public nuisance. 
3.2.	Nuisance party prohibited: Any person being the owner, occupant, tenant or otherwise having any possessory control, individually or jointly with others, of any premises who either sponsors, conducts, hosts, invites, suffers, permits, continues, or allows to continue a social gathering or party which is or during the course thereof becomes a public nuisance as defined in 3.1 [61.003(3.1)] above is hereby deemed to have committed a violation of this Ordinance, and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties as provided herein. In any prosecution for a violation of this Section, proof of specific of intent shall not be required as a necessary element. 
3.3.	Persons attending nuisance parties: Any person in attendance at a nuisance party as defined by 3.1 [61.003(3.1)] above, whether or not such person has any possessory control, shall be deemed to have committed a violation of this Ordinance and upon conviction shall be punished as provided herein.  
61.004 - Enforcement and penalties for failure to comply. 
Sec. IV. 
4.1.	Penalties: Any person who shall violate any terms of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days or both, plus costs of prosecution. Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall prevent the Township Board, public official, or private citizen from taking lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this Ordinance. 
4.2.	Nuisance provision: Actions in violation of this Ordinance are declared to be a nuisance per se. A court of competent jurisdiction may order such nuisance abated and the person violating the ordinance may be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se.  
61.005 - Effective date. 
Sec. V. This Ordinance shall take effect 30 days after publication. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
61.006 - Severability. 
Sec. VI. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
61.007 - Miscellaneous. 
Sec. VII. 
7.1.	All ordinances, resolutions or orders or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed. 
7.2.	This Ordinance shall be published once in the Morning Sun, a newspaper of general circulation within the boundaries of the Township, and qualified under state law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and the same shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Township and such recording authenticated by signatures of the Supervisor and Township Clerk.  
62.000 - MINOR PURCHASE OF ALCOHOL ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1993-5 Adopted: July 14, 1993 
An Ordinance enacted pursuant to the authority of MCLA 41.181 and MCLA 41.184 to prevent, reduce, and eliminate purchase of alcohol by minors in Union Township; to preserve, promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of the persons and property within Union Township; to provide for the enforcement hereof; to provide penalties for the violation hereof, including a provision that a violation will constitute a misdemeanor. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN ORDAINS:
 
62.001 - Title. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Charter Township of Union Minor Purchase of Alcohol Ordinance," and it shall be sufficient to any action for enforcement of the provisions hereof to define the same by such title or reference to the number hereof.  
62.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Union Township by preventing, reducing and eliminating the purchase of alcohol by minors.  
62.003 - Unlawful behavior. 
Sec. III. 
3.01. Age misrepresentation prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to falsely represent himself to be of the age of 21 years or over when purchasing, offering to purchase or attempting to purchase or procure beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages, or to give any false information regarding his age to any law enforcement officer or to any other person selling beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages for the purpose of securing a sale thereof to himself. 
3.02. Alcoholic beverages; procuring for minors, prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false representation in order to procure the sale or furnishing of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of 21 years.  
62.004 - Misdemeanor. 
Sec. IV. Any person who shall violate any of the terms of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both, plus costs of prosecution.  
62.005 - Severability. 
Sec. V. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
62.006 - Effective date. 
Sec. VI. This Ordinance will take effect 30 days after publication. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
63.000 - PUBLIC NUDITY Ord. No. 2003-08 Adopted: June 25, 2003 
An Ordinance enacted pursuant to the authority of MCL 41.181,41.184 and 42.15 to prohibit public nudity within the Township of Union, to preserve, promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of the persons and property within the township to provide for the enforcement hereof, and to provide penalties for the violation hereof including a provision that violations will constitute a misdemeanor and to establish that any violation shall be a public nuisance. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN ORDAINS:
 
63.001 - Title 
Sec. I. 
1.1	This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Public Nudity Ordinance and it shall be sufficient to any action for enforcement of the provisions hereof to define the same by such title or reference to the number hereof.  
63.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. 
2.1	It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the township by prohibiting public nudity.  
63.003 - Definition. 
Sec. III. 
3.1	"Public Nudity" shall mean knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by a person including, but not limited to, payment or promise of an admission fee, any individual's genitals or anus with less than fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breasts with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. Public nudity does not include a woman's breastfeeding of a baby, whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding, material as defined in Section 2 of Act 343 of the Public Acts of 1984 being Section 752.362 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or sexually explicit visual material as defined in Section 3, Act 33 of the Public Acts of 1978, being Section 722.673 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.  
63.004 - Certain conduct prohibited. 
Sec. IV. 
4.1	No persons shall engage in public nudity. No business establishment including, but not limited to owners, officers, persons in charge of or control of the premises, shall permit persons to engage in public nudity.  
63.005 - Enforcements and penalties for failure to comply. 
Sec. V. 
5.1	Any person who shall violate any terms of the Ordinance shall upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days or both plus costs of prosecution. Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall prevent the township board, public official or private citizen from taking lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this Ordinance. 
5.2	Nuisance provision, actions and violation of this Ordinance are declared to be a nuisance per se. A court of competent jurisdiction may order such nuisance abated and the person violating the Ordinance may be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se.  
63.006 - Effective date. 
Sec. VI. 
6.1	This Ordinance shall take effect in 30 days. 
63.007 - Severability. 
Sec. VII. 
7.1	The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
63.008 - Miscellaneous. 
Sec. VIII. 
8.1	All ordinances, resolutions or orders or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are to the extent of such conflict, repealed. 
8.2	This Ordinance shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the boundaries of the township, and qualified under state law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and the same shall be recorded in the Ordinance book of the Township and such recording authenticated by signature of the Township Supervisor and Township Clerk.  
75.000 - TOWNSHIP PARKS Ord. No. 1994-5 Adopted: October 12, 1994 
This Ordinance prohibits acts by individuals that would cause damage to the area or to the public, and prohibits acts that would interfere with the enjoyable use of the Union Township Parks by others. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
 
75.001 - Definitions. 
Sec. I. 
1.01. As used in these rules: 
(A)	Proper written permission means a written permit issued by the Park Director, his authorized representatives, or the Township Administrator. 
(B)	Township parks includes Jamieson Park and McDonald Park within the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, State of Michigan. 
(C)	Unlicensed vehicle means any motorized device.  
75.002 - Township parks: prohibited acts. 
Sec. II. 
2.01. A person shall not: 
(A)	Enter, use, or occupy lands when the lands are posted prohibiting such entry, use, or occupancy. 
(B)	Destroy, damage, or remove Township property, trees, shrubs, wildflowers, planted grass, or other vegetation without first obtaining proper written permission. This does not apply to the picking and removal of mushrooms, berries, and edible fruits or nuts. 
(C)	Enter or remain in the Township parks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless proper written permission is obtained. 
(D)	Peddle or solicit business of any nature; distribute handbills or other advertising matter; post signs on any lands, structures, or property; or use such areas as a base of commercial operations without first obtaining proper written permission. 
(E)	Use a loudspeaker, public address system, or sound-amplifying equipment of any kind without proper written permission. Permission shall not be granted if such equipment is capable of interfering with the use and enjoyment of the park by others. A person shall not operate any motor, motor vehicle, radio, television, phonograph, tape recorder, or any other device in such manner as to create excessive noise that may disturb or annoy others. 
(F)	Engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, wanton, profane, obscene, or otherwise disorderly conduct tending to create a breach of the peace; disturb or annoy others; loiter, sit, or lie upon walks, passages, steps, or roads thereby obstructing the free passage of others; remove or damage the property of another. 
(G)	Build fires, except in designated stoves or grills that are approved by the park director or his representative. 
(H)	Dump, place, throw, leave, or cause or permit the dumping, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter in the park, except in containers provided; deposit refuse or waste material that has originated outside the park in receptacles or dumpsters provided for park users; set fire to the contents of a refuse or trash container; or place or burn garbage in a fire stove or grill. 
(I)	Store or leave a boat, trailer, camper, or other property in the park without first obtaining proper written permission. 
(J)	Possess an intoxicating beverage within the park grounds; be under the influence of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances in any park. 
(K)	Bring in, have in possession, set off, or otherwise cause to explode, discharge, or burn any firecrackers, rockets, other fireworks, or explosives of inflammable material, discharging them or throwing them into any such area land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture, or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. [For] any fireworks that are allowed [a person] must obtain a permit from the Union Township Board of Trustees.  
75.003 - Motor vehicles: prohibitive acts. 
Sec. III. 
3.01. A person shall not: 
(A)	Operate or park a motor vehicle except on designated roads or designated parking areas; operate a motor vehicle on a park road or parking lot at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour, in an unsafe manner, at a speed greater than that posted, or to disobey traffic or parking signs. When a motor vehicle is found parked in the Township parks, the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of the vehicle is the person who parked it there. 
(B)	Operate a motor-driven vehicle or any motorized device except on roads and parking lots constructed for the operation of licensed vehicles. 
(C)	Operate an unlicensed vehicle on a park road or parking lot. 
75.004 - Recreational uses: prohibitive acts. 
Sec. IV. 
4.01. A person shall not: 
(A)	Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Park employees shall have the authority to regulate activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for comfort and convenience of all. Park users shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(B)	Violate the regulation that use of the individual grills, together with tables and benches, follows generally the rule of first-come, first-served. 
(C)	Leave a picnic area before the cooking grill is fully extinguished, and before all trash in [the] nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. 
(D)	Set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure, or special vehicle to be used or [which] could be used for such purposes as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like unless proper written permission is obtained. 
(E)	Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown, or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The unsupervised playing of rough, or comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball, soccer, and softball are prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor.  
75.005 - Animals: prohibitive acts. 
Sec. V. 
5.01. A person shall not: 
(A)	Possess a dog or other animal unless it is under immediate control on a leash not exceeding six feet in length. 
(B)	Bring a dog, except leader dogs, or other animals into an enclosed park building or leave a dog or other animal unattended at any time; permit a dog or other animal to run loose or create a disturbance; or to fail to properly control a dog or other animal. Any dog or other animal found not in possession of, or under immediate control of, its owner or the owner's agent, or any animal creating a nuisance or disturbance, may be removed from the park. 
(C)	Ride, permit, or allow horses or other riding animals, within the Township parks. 
75.006 - Firearms and hunting: prohibitive acts. 
Sec. VI. 
6.01. A person shall not: 
(A)	Carry or have in possession a firearm, or bow and arrow.
(B)	Hunt, trap, kill, wound, capture, or intentionally disturb any bird, animal, or other wildlife. 
(C)	Discharge any device that propels a projectile by gas, air, spring, or rubber. 
75.007 - Violation of rules. 
Sec. VII. 
7.01. Violation of any park rule may result in eviction from the park. Violation of any park rule may also result in a criminal complaint being initiated. Violation of any rule or failure to perform any act set forth in the rules is punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 and costs of prosecution, and/or by the imprisonment in the discretion of the court.  
75.008 - Exemptions. 
Sec. VIII. 
8.01. Township employees acting in the line of duty or persons performing specific acts authorized by written permission are exempt from the provisions of these rules.  
75.009 - Title. 
Sec. IX. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Charter Township of Union Ordinance Number 1994-5, Park Ordinance."  
75.010 - Severability. 
Sec. X. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
75.011 - Effective date. 
Sec. XI. This Ordinance shall take effect 30 days after publication by the Charter Township of Union Board of Trustees.  
76.000 - PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY USE BY TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDERS Ord. No. 2002-06 Adopted: December 11, 2002 
 
76.001 - Purpose. 
Sec. 1. The purposes of this ordinance are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the Township qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act.  
76.002 - Conflict. 
Sec. 2. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law.  
76.003 - Terms defined. 
Sec. 3. The terms used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings: 
Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
Township means the Charter Township of Union. 
Township Board means the Township Board of the Charter Township of Union or its designee. This Section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the Township Board. 
Township Superintendent means the Township Superintendent or his or her designee. 
Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this ordinance to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the Township for its telecommunications facilities. 
All other terms used in this ordinance shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
Public Right-of-Way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
Telecommunication Facilities or Facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
Telecommunications Provider, Provider and Telecommunications Services mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this ordinance only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(a)	A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service.
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(c)	A person providing broadband Internet transport access service. 
76.004 - Permit required. 
Sec. 4. 
(a)	Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the Township for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this ordinance. 
(b)	Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the Township Clerk, one copy with the Township Superintendent, and one copy with the Township Attorney. Upon receipt, the Township Clerk shall make six copies of the application and distribute a copy to the Township Board. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)	Confidential Information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)	Application Fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)	Additional Information. The Township Superintendent may request an applicant to submit such additional information, which the Township Superintendent deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the Township Superintendent. If the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the Township, the Township or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)	Previously Issued Permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the Township under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the Township to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this ordinance. 
(g)	Existing Providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the Township as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the Township an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (c) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act.  
76.005 - Issuance of permit. 
Sec. 5. 
(a)	Approval or Denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the Township Superintendent. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the Township Superintendent shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under Section 4(b) [76.004(b)] of this ordinance for access to a public right-of-way within the Township. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the Township Superintendent shall notify the MPSC when the Township Superintendent has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The Township Superintendent shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)	Form of Permit. If an application for permit is approved, the Township Superintendent shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)	Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the Township Superintendent may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)	Bond Requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the Township Superintendent may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use.  
76.006 - Construction/engineering permit. 
Sec. 6. A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the Township without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit.  
76.007 - Conduit or utility poles. 
Sec. 7. Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this ordinance does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.  
76.008 - Route maps. 
Sec. 8. Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the Township, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the Township. The route maps should be in paper and electronic format unless and until the Commission determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act.  
76.009 - Repair of damage. 
Sec. 9. Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the Township, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.  
76.010 - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
Sec. 10. In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the Township set forth in subsection 4(d) [76.004(d)] above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the Township's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act.  
76.011 - Modification of existing fees. 
Sec. 11. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the Township hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the Township also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the Township's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The Township shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this ordinance, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the Township's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the Township, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error.  
76.012 - Savings clause. 
Sec. 12. Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under Section 11 [76.011] above shall be void from the date the modification was made.  
76.013 - Use of funds. 
Sec. 13. Pursuant Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the Township from the Authority shall be used by the Township solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the Township from the Authority shall be deposited into the 101-General Fund maintained by the Township under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951.  
76.014 - Annual report. 
Sec. 14. Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the Township Superintendent shall file an annual report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the Authority.  
76.015 - Cable television operators. 
Sec. 15. Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the Township shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services.  
76.016 - Existing rights. 
Sec. 16. Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this ordinance shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the Township may have under a permit issued by the Township or under a contract between the Township and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.  
76.017 - Compliance. 
Sec. 17. The Township hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this ordinance is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The Township shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)	Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231, 215.246, as provided in Section 4(c) [76.004(c)] of this ordinance; 
(b)	Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with Section 4(f) [76.004(f)] of this ordinance; 
(c)	Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500 application fee, in accordance with Section 4(g) [76.004(g)] of this ordinance; 
(d)	Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the Township, in accordance with Section 5(a) [76.005(a)] of this ordinance; 
(e)	Notifying the MPSC when the Township has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with Section 5(a) [76.005(a)] of this ordinance; 
(f)	Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with Section 5(a) [76.005(a)] of this ordinance; 
(g)	Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in Section 5(b) [76.005(b)] of this ordinance; 
(h)	Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with Section 5(c) [76.005(c)] of this ordinance; 
(i)	Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider, which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with Section 5(d) [76.005(d)] of this ordinance; 
(j)	Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with Section 6 [76.006] of this ordinance; 
(k)	Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the Township's right-of-way fees with a copy of this ordinance, in accordance with Section 11 [76.011] of this ordinance; 
(l)	Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with Section 14 [76.014] of this ordinance; and 
(m)	Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with Section 15 [76.015] of this ordinance.  
76.018 - Reservation of police powers. 
Sec. 18. Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this ordinance shall not limit the Township's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the Township's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.  
76.019 - Severability. 
Sec. 19. The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this ordinance.  
76.020 - Authorized Township officials. 
Sec. 20. The Township Superintendent or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized Township official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this ordinance as provided by the Township Code.  
76.021 - Municipal civil infraction. 
Sec. 21. A person who violates any provision of this ordinance or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to a violation of this ordinance shall be a violation of the Township Code. Nothing in this Section 21 [76.021] shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the Township in the event of a violation by a person of this ordinance or a permit.  
76.022 - Repealer. 
Sec. 22. 
(a)	All ordinances and portions of ordinances inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(b)	Township Ordinance 1999-01 is hereby repealed. 
76.023 - Effective date. 
Sec. 23. This ordinance shall take effect on December 16, 2002.  
90.000 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1992-9 Adopted: November 11, 1992 
THE TOWNSHIP BOARD OF THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, COUNTY OF ISABELLA, STATE OF MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:  
ARTICLE 1  
90.100 - SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
[Sec. 1.00.] This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Union Township Stormwater Management Ordinance," and shall be referred to as Ordinance No. 1992-9. 
 
90.101 - Statement of findings. 
Sec. 1.01. As a result of the preparation and conclusions of the stormwater management plan, adopted by the Township Planning Commission on September 16, 1992, the Charter Township of Union finds that: 
A.	Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development throughout a watershed: (1) increases flood flows and velocities, (2) contributes to erosion and sedimentation, (3) overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, (4) greatly increases the cost of public facilities, (5) hinders control efforts in downstream communities, (6) reduces groundwater recharge, and (7) threatens public health and safety. 
B.	A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of development activities causing accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of the people, resources, and environment of the Township. 
C.	The Township Board of the Charter Township of Union further finds that uncontrolled drainage and development of land has a significant adverse impact upon the community. More specifically: 
1.	Stormwater runoff can carry pollutants into receiving water bodies, degrading water quality. 
2.	The increase in nutrients, such as phosphorus and nitrogen, accelerates eutrophication of receiving waters, adversely affecting flora and fauna. 
3.	Improperly channeling water increases the velocity of runoff, thereby increasing erosion and sedimentation. 
4.	Siltation of water bodies resulting from increased erosion decreases their capacity to hold and transport water, interferes with navigation, and harms flora and fauna. 
5.	Impervious surfaces increase the volume and rate of stormwater runoff inhibiting percolation into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge. 
6.	Improperly managed stormwater runoff can increase the incidence of flooding and the level of floods that occur, endangering property and human life. 
7.	Improperly managed stormwater runoff can interfere with the maintenance of optimum salinity in estuarine areas, thereby disrupting biological productivity. 
8.	Many future problems can be avoided if land is developed in accordance with sound stormwater runoff management practices.  
90.102 - Purpose. 
Sec. 1.02. 
[A.]	The purpose of this Ordinance is to reduce or eliminate the hazards to public health and safety caused by excessive stormwater runoff; to reduce the economic losses to individuals and the community at large; to enhance broader social and economic objectives; and to protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and water resources. The provisions of this Ordinance further supplement ordinances regulating: 
[1.]	The use and development of floodplain and flood-prone lands.
[2.]	The subdivision, layout, and improvement of lands located within the Charter Township of Union. 
[3.]	The development of areas of unique physical characteristics.
[4.]	The excavating, filling, and grading of lots and other parcels or areas.
[5.]	The development of business districts.
[6.]	The construction of buildings and the drainage of the sites on which those structures are located, including parking and other paved areas. 
[7.]	Soil erosion and sedimentation.
[8.]	The design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities and systems.
[9.]	The alteration, filling, and development of wetland areas.
[B.]	The further purpose of this Ordinance shall be:
[1.]	To protect the public health, safety, and welfare by requiring stormwater management whenever new, expanded, or modified developments are proposed. 
[2.]	To promote the most efficient and beneficial uses of land and water resources.
[3.]	To assure that stormwater runoff from development is controlled so that water quality is protected, siltation is minimized, and flooding problems are avoided. 
[4.]	To provide for cost-effective and functionally effective stormwater management and to reduce the need for future remedial projects. 
[5.]	To use the natural drainage system for conveying and receiving stormwater runoff and to minimize the need to construct storm drain pipes. 
[6.]	To encourage multiple-purpose stormwater management that enhances the environmental character of the Charter Township of Union. 
[7.]	To allow wetlands to be used for stormwater detention in selected locations, while ensuring that the natural functions and the quality of wetlands throughout the Township are protected to the maximum feasible extent. 
[8.]	To recognize the private responsibility of incorporating stormwater management systems into the early stages of site planning and design. 
[9.]	To allow for off-site stormwater management under specified conditions.
[10.]	To ensure that all stormwater conveyance and detention facilities will be properly maintained. 
[11.]	To provide penalties for violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
90.103 - Authority. 
Sec. 1.03. This Ordinance is adopted in accordance with the Charter Township Ordinance Act of 1947 and the Subdivision Control Act of 1967.  
90.104 - Conflicting ordinances. 
Sec. 1.04. The provisions of the Ordinance shall be deemed as additional requirements to standards required by other ordinances of the Township. In case of conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply.  
90.105 - Separability. 
Sec. 1.05. The provisions and sections of the Ordinance shall be deemed separable and the validity of any portion of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remainder.  
90.106 - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. 
Sec. 1.06. Permits and approvals issued pursuant to this Ordinance do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. If more stringent requirements concerning regulation of stormwater or erosion and sedimentation control are contained in the other code, rule, act, or ordinance, the more stringent regulation shall apply.  
90.107 - Regulated activities. 
Sec. 1.07. The following activities are included within the scope of this Ordinance: 
A.	Subdivisions of land.
B.	Land development use regulations requiring site plan review as stated in the Zoning Ordinance of the Charter Township of Union. 
C.	Earth-moving involving a parcel of one or more acres.
D.	Construction of new impervious surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
E.	Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
F.	Diversion or piping of any natural or manmade stream channel.
G.	Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto. 
ARTICLE 2  
90.200 - DEFINITIONS 
Detention basin: A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. A detention basin can be designed to drain completely after a storm event, or it can be designed to contain a permanent pool of water. 
Developer: A person (or persons), partnership, association, corporation, other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof that undertakes the activities covered by this Ordinance. 
Development: The improvement of one or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose, including buildings that include but are not limited to streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features, such as planned unit developments, site condominiums, and multifamily residences. 
Erosion: The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other geological agents. 
Impervious surface: A surface that prevents the penetration of water into the ground, such as asphalt, concrete, rooftops, soil cement, and other compacted mixtures of clay, stone, and gravel. 
Infiltration facilities: A structure designed to direct runoff into the ground (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, and seepage trenches). 
Land disturbance: Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging, or filling of ground; stripping of vegetation; or any other activity that causes land to be exposed to the danger of erosion. 
Municipality: The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, except where otherwise stated. 
Retention basin: An area of excavated earth for the collection and storage of runoff without subsequent discharge to surface waters and into which surface water is directed into the ground. 
Runoff: That part of precipitation that flows over the land. 
SCS: Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
Sediment: Soil material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, that is being transported, or that has been moved from its site of origin by water. 
Site: Any tract, lot, or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots, or parcels of land that are in one ownership or that are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision, or project. 
Storm event: A precipitation event of specific frequency and duration having a 100 percent chance of occurring in any one year of the specified frequency (i.e., a 25-year, 24-hour storm event). 
Stormwater: Water that results from precipitation that is not absorbed by the soil or vegetation or evaporated and that flows over the ground surface or is collected in channels or conduits. 
Subdivision: The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development. 
Swale: A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water runoff. 
Township: The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, except where otherwise stated.  
ARTICLE 3  
90.300 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
 
90.301 - Applicability. 
Sec. 3.01. The stormwater management plan must be submitted and approved before: 
A.	A plat is recorded; or
B.	An existing drainage system is altered, rerouted, deepened, widened, enlarged, or obstructed; or 
C.	A residential development having a gross aggregate area including roads, utility rights-of-way, and any other dedicated lands of one or more acres [is constructed]; 
D.	Any new commercial, industrial, institutional, or utility development is commenced; and 
E.	Any activity pursuant to Section 1.07 [90.107] of this Ordinance is commenced. No final subdivision plat shall be approved, and no building permits shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management plan has been reviewed and approved by the Township.  
90.302 - Exemptions. 
Sec. 3.02. The following development activities shall be exempted from some or all of the provisions of this Ordinance at the discretion of the Township. 
A.	The development of single-family or two-family residential dwelling units and their accessory structures (such as fences, storage shed, and septic tanks) in an existing subdivision or on a lot of less than one acre in size. 
B.	Any maintenance, alteration, use, or improvement to an existing structure not changing or affecting quality, rate, volume, or location of surface water discharge. 
C.	Land disturbance associated with existing one- and two-family dwellings.
D.	Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
E.	Agriculture when operated in accordance with the SCS Best Management Practices for that district. 
F.	The division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access. 
G.	Logging operations that are operating under an approved Isabella County erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
Exempted activities may be required to provide a simplified stormwater management plan that would identify stormwater facilities and how stormwater would be managed on site and the expected off-site impact. Simplified plans may utilize creative and innovative stormwater management techniques, such as: 
Swales in back-lot areas. 
Parking lot depressions. 
Leaching basins and underground storage. 
Gravel berms. 
Fill ditches. 
Gravel underlayments.  
90.303 - Plan content. 
Sec. 3.03. The required stormwater management plan shall identify means for controlling the stormwater runoff release rate from the development and providing storage potential for the excess stormwater runoff (where required). All computations, plans, and specifications related to the implementation of this Ordinance must be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in Michigan. 
The stormwater management plan shall contain but not be limited to the following information unless specifically excluded by the Township: 
A.	A topographic map of the project site and adjacent areas of suitable scale and contour interval that shall define the location of streams; the extent of floodplains; the calculated high water elevations; the shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps, and detention basins, including their inflow and outflow structures, if any. 
B.	Map(s) of the project area showing:
1.	The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or other identifiable landmarks. 
2.	Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15 percent), five-foot contour intervals may be used. 
3.	Streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the project area or that will be affected by runoff from the project. 
4.	Other physical features, including existing drainage swales and areas of natural vegetation to be preserved. 
5.	Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers, and water lines.
6.	An overlay showing soil types and boundaries.
7.	Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
8.	Areas to be cut or filled.
9.	Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
10.	Final contours at intervals of two feet. In area of steep slopes (greater than 15 percent), five-foot contour intervals may be used. 
C.	The location and flow line elevation of all existing sanitary, storm, or combined sewers. 
D.	Detailed determination of runoff anticipated for the entire project site following development indicating design volumes and rates of proposed runoff for each portion of the watershed tributary to the storm drainage system, the calculations used to determine said runoff volumes and rates and restatement of the criteria that have been used by the project engineer throughout his/her calculations. 
E.	A layout of the proposed stormwater management system, including the location and size of all drainage structures, storm sewers, channels and channel sections, detention basins, and analyses regarding the effect said improvements will have upon the receiving channel and its high water elevation. 
F.	The slope, type, and size of all existing and proposed storm sewers and other waterways.
G.	For all detention basins, a plot or tabulation of storage volumes with corresponding water surface elevations and of the basin outflow rates for those water surface elevations. 
H.	A profile and one or more cross-sections of all existing and proposed channels or other open drainage facilities, showing existing conditions and the proposed changes thereto, together with the high water elevations expected from stormwater runoff under the controlled conditions called for by these regulations and the relationship of structures, streets, and other utilities to such channels. 
I.	The staging of all earth-moving activities must be described, including cuts and fills, streets, underground utilities, sewer and water lines, buildings, driveways, parking areas, open-space areas, and other structures. 
J.	Maintenance program: A maintenance program for all stormwater management control facilities must be included. This program must include the proposed ownership of the control facilities and detail the financial responsibility for any required maintenance. Township-owned facilities shall be maintained by the Township. Privately owned facilities shall be maintained by the owner.  
90.304 - Design and performance standards. 
Sec. 3.04. 
A.	General performance standards for stormwater management: 
1.	Stormwater management conveyance, storage, infiltration measures, and facilities shall be designed to prevent flood hazards and water pollution related to stormwater runoff and soil erosion from the proposed development. 
2.	Alterations to natural drainage patterns shall not create flooding or water pollution for adjacent or downstream property owners. Stormwater from upstream and off-site locations shall be conveyed around or through the site or may be stored on site. 
3.	A primary storage system that manages runoff from storms up to a 25-year frequency and 24-hour duration shall be provided. 
4.	Detention basins and conveyance systems shall be designed to safely control and accommodate a secondary drainage system to direct runoff from storms greater than a 25-year and 24-hour frequency and duration up to a 100-year event. 
5.	For the 25-year frequency and 24-hour duration storm event, the discharge runoff rate shall not exceed the peak rate of 0.1 cfs per acre for the entire site. Where these standards cannot realistically be achieved, the applicant shall demonstrate that existing higher runoff rates meet the intent and spirit of this Ordinance. 
6.	Unless otherwise approved, stormwater discharge shall be conveyed through swales and vegetated buffer strips so as to decrease runoff velocity, to allow for natural infiltration, to allow suspended sediment particles to settle, and to remove pollutants. 
7.	Watercourses shall not be dredged or cleared of vegetation or deepened, widened, straightened, stabilized, or otherwise altered without applicable permits or approvals from the Township Board and the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. If the watercourse is a designated county drain, approval from the Isabella County Drain Commissioner shall be obtained. Any other applicable permit requirements shall also be obtained prior to approval. 
8.	Design criteria, based upon professionally accepted principles, to trap or contain discharge of runoff from any site that may contain oil, grease, toxic chemicals, or other polluting materials shall be incorporated to meet the requirements of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and the Charter Township of Union. 
9.	Drainage systems shall be designed to protect public health and safety and to be visually attractive. 
10.	Phased development shall provide storage of stormwater for the entire site as part of the initial phase of construction. 
B.	Soil erosion standards: 
1.	Sediment resulting from accelerated soil erosion shall be removed from runoff water before it leaves the site of the development or earth change. 
2.	Surface water must be discharged or conveyed around, through, or from the development or earth change area at a controlled release rate sufficient to prevent erosion. 
3.	If lakes, ponds, rivers, creeks, streams, or other watercourses and wetlands are located on or near the site, erosion control measures that trap sediment shall be encouraged. Other measures may be required if reasonably determined to be necessary to protect a watercourse or wetland. 
4.	The creation or retention of vegetated buffer strips shall be encouraged along the edges of all lakes, ponds, creeks, streams, other watercourses, and wetlands when reasonably determined to be necessary to protect the watercourse. 
C.	Stormwater storage and infiltration structure standards: 
1.	Stormwater storage and/or infiltration structures that protect water quality and minimize flooding shall be required for all developments. Storage facilities may include but are not limited to detention basins, retention basins, infiltration trenches, swales with check dams, and other facilities. 
2.	All detention basins shall be designed to maximize the ability of the basin to hold and trap sediment. The following types of basins, listed in order of preference with "(a)" being the most desirable, meet the requirements of the Charter Township of Union: 
(a)	Infiltration facilities, provided that soils and groundwater conditions are suitable.
(b)	Detention basins with a fixed minimum water elevation between runoff events (wet basins). Wet basins that serve to trap soil particles on site are preferable to dry basins. 
(c)	Detention basins that hold stormwater from the one-year storm event for more than 24 hours before completely draining to become a dry basin (extended detention). 
3.	Detention and retention basins shall be safely and adequately designed to control runoff. Retention and detention basins shall have an overflow system designed to safely control a 100-year frequency storm event. Basins shall be permanently stabilized to minimize erosion. 
4.	Unless a variation is approved, detention and retention basins with banks steeper than one on three (vertical to horizontal) shall not be permitted. 
5.	Detention basins and associated berms and landscaping shall be designed to protect public safety and to be visually attractive (refer to the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service Agricultural Handbook No. 590; Ponds—Planning, Design, Construction). 
D.	Discharge of stormwater runoff to wetland standards: 
1.	Stormwater runoff discharged to wetlands must be diffused to nonerosive velocities before it reaches the wetland. 
2.	Wetlands may be used for stormwater detention if the following conditions are met:
(a)	If the provisions of Act 203, the Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act of Michigan, are met. 
(b)	If the wetland storage or detention area is set back at least 100 feet from the edge of any lake or stream. 
(c)	If the wetland does not have significant wildlife habitat or ecological values that would likely be impaired or destroyed. 
(d)	If the wetland has sufficient holding capacity for stormwater, based upon calculations prepared by the proprietor and reviewed and approved by the township. 
(e)	If adequate on-site sediment control is provided to protect the natural functioning of the wetland. 
(f)	If proper Department of Natural Resources (DNR) permits are obtained.
(Ord. No. 1993-13, 12-8-93) 
90.305 - Plan submission. 
Sec. 3.05. 
A.	The plan shall be accompanied by the required fee.
B.	Five copies of the completed plan must be submitted. 
90.306 - Exceptions. 
Sec. 3.06. The Charter Township of Union may grant written exceptions from any requirements for this Ordinance using the following criteria: 
A.	There are special circumstances applicable to the subject property of its intended use. 
B.	The granting of an exception will not:
1.	(Significantly) increase or decrease the rate or volume of surface water runoff.
2.	Have a (significant) adverse impact on a wetland, watercourse, or water body.
3.	(Significantly) contribute to the degradation of water quality.
4.	Otherwise (significantly) impair attainment of the objectives of this Ordinance.
C.	The following types of development shall not be eligible to receive an exception:
1.	Shopping centers.
2.	Industrial or commercial facilities.
3.	Platted subdivisions in accordance with P.A. 288 of 1967 or site condominiums in accordance with P.A. 59 of 1978. 
4.	Impervious surfaces greater than 10,000 square feet. 
90.307 - Waiver option in lieu of on-site stormwater detention. 
Sec. 3.07. The use of off-site stormwater conveyance, infiltration, and/or detention areas may be proposed. In such cases, the proprietor shall request a waiver of the requirements for on-site stormwater detention. 
Off-site stormwater management areas may be shared with other landowners, provided that maintenance agreements have been approved by the Township Board and recorded. 
A.	Review by the Township Board: The Township Board may delegate its review and accept the recommendation of a designated agent of the Township. The final decision on a waiver request shall be made by the Township Board. 
B.	Stormwater management plan submittal: The waiver request shall be submitted with a stormwater management plan as provided in Article 3 [90.300 et seq.], including proposed stormwater management measures, on-site and off-site. 
C.	Applicable standards: In addition to the stormwater management standards specified in Article 3 [90.300 et seq.] of this Ordinance, the proprietor must demonstrate and provide assurances for the following: 
1.	Stormwater flows and management controls shall not result in excessive stream channel erosion, on site and off site. 
2.	High value or unique wetlands and natural areas shall not be significantly altered by on-site or off-site stormwater flows. 
3.	Soil erosion shall be managed on site as well as off site.
4.	Off-site stormwater facilities shall be protected through appropriate easements.
5.	Adequate provision and agreements for maintenance of stormwater management facilities shall be made. 
D.	Performance guarantees, inspections, maintenance, and enforcement: All provisions of Articles 4 [90.400 et seq.] and 5 [90.500 et seq.] shall apply to off-site stormwater conveyance and detention.  
ARTICLE 4  
90.400 - BONDS, MAINTENANCE ASSURANCE, AND FEES 
 
90.401 - Performance bonds and other assurance for completion and operation. 
Sec. 4.01. Upon approval of the stormwater management plan but before the issuance of a building permit or site plan approval, the Township shall require the applicant to post a performance bond, cash escrow, certified check, or other acceptable form of performance security in an amount sufficient to ensure the execution of the plan. After determination by the Township that all facilities are constructed in compliance with the approved plan, the performance bond or other securities shall be released.  
90.402 - Maintenance agreement. 
Sec. 4.02. 
A.	Drainage facilities shall be dedicated to the Charter Township of Union, where they are determined to be appropriately a part of the Charter Township of Union's maintained regional system or are unlikely to be adequately maintained by the developer or owner of the property. 
B.	The systems maintained by the owner shall have adequate easements to permit the Charter Township of Union to inspect and, if necessary, to take corrective action should the owner fail to properly maintain the system. Before taking corrective action, the Charter Township of Union shall give the owner written notice of the nature of the existing defects. If the owner fails, within 30 days from the date of notice to commence corrective action or to appeal the matter to the special hearing examiner, the Charter Township of Union may take necessary correction [corrective] action, the cost of which shall become a lien on the real property until paid.  
90.403 - Fee. 
Sec. 4.03. A permit fee will be collected at the time the stormwater management plan or application for waiver is submitted and will reflect the cost of administration and management of the permitting process. The Charter Township of Union shall establish, by resolution, a prorated fee schedule based upon the relative complexity of the project. The fee schedule may be amended, by resolution, from time to time, by the Charter Township of Union. Notice of such resolution shall be published no less than 15 days prior to adoption. No permit to begin any work on the project shall be issued until the requisite fees have been paid.  
90.404 - Modification of plans. 
Sec. 4.04. An application for modification to an approved stormwater management plan shall not be reviewed until the additional fees have been paid by the applicant.  
ARTICLE 5  
90.500 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
90.501 - Plan approval. 
Sec. 5.01. 
A.	The Township shall forward a copy of the plan to the Planning Commission, Zoning Administrator, and the County Department of Resource Management. 
B.	The Township Planning Commission shall review the plan and comments from the Zoning Administrator and the County Department of Resource Management and shall recommend whether the plan be approved or disapproved. 
C.	The Township shall notify the applicant of its decision within 60 days from receipt of a complete plan submission. A complete plan submission shall include all required forms, documents, and information. 
D.	A disapproval shall contain the reasons for disapproval and a listing of the plan deficiencies. 
E.	Failure of the municipality to render a decision within the 60-day time limit shall be deemed an approval.  
90.502 - Modification of plans. 
Sec. 5.02. A modification to an approved stormwater management plan that involves a change in control methods or techniques, that involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the approved application shall be considered following review by the Township in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.  
90.503 - Inspection. 
Sec. 5.03. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Township Board or duly authorized representative may enter, at all reasonable times, in or upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting or investigating the condition and practices that may be a violation of this Ordinance. A written notice shall be sent to the person, firm, or corporation who is deemed to be in violation.  
90.504 - Enforcement. 
Sec. 5.04. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Township Board or by such person(s) as the Township Board may delegate to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.  
90.505 - Penalties. 
Sec. 5.05. For any and every violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, the owner, agent, contractor, lessees, or tenant of the premises, building, or part thereof, where such violation has been committed, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The owner, agent, architect, builder, or any person who commits, takes part in, or assists in such violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or any person who maintains any buildings or premises in which any such violation exists shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Violations of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.  
90.506 - Additional remedies. 
Sec. 5.06. In addition to the above remedies, the Township Board may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any erection, construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, or use of any structure or premises constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance; to restrain, correct, or abate such violation; and to prevent any unlawful act, business activity, or other use in or about such premises.  
90.507 - Appearance tickets. 
Sec. 5.07. The Township Board is specifically authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets, based on probable cause, on any person, business, or organization in violation of any other provisions of the Ordinance and for which a fine, imprisonment, or both may be levied as a result of such violation. 
Appearance ticket means a complaint or notice upon which the Township Board shall record an occurrence involving one or more violations of the Ordinance by the person cited. Each citation shall consist of the following parts: 
A.	The original, which shall be a complaint or notice to appear by the Township Board and filed with the court. 
B.	The second copy, which shall be retained by the Township.
C.	The third copy, which shall be delivered to the alleged violator. Such citation may be appropriately modified as to content or number of copies to accommodate ordinance enforcement and local court procedures and practices.  
ARTICLE 6  
90.600 - PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
[Sec. 6.00.] In order to exercise the necessary control over stormwater management activities and to provide a mechanism for collection of fees, a permitting system is needed. 
 
90.601 - Permit requirements. 
Sec. 6.01. All activities as specified in Sections 1.07 [90.107] and 3.01 [90.301], except those specifically exempt from permit requirements by Section 3.02 [90.302], shall be conducted only after the issuance of a stormwater discharge permit.  
90.602 - Land disturbance activities. 
Sec. 6.02. The applicant shall obtain the required permit after obtaining the required plan approval as specified in Articles 3 [90.300 et seq.] and 5 [90.500 et seq.] of this Ordinance. This permit will be issued by the Township when the plan is approved.  
90.603 - Modification of plans. 
Sec. 6.03. A modification to an approved stormwater management plan, when required under Article 5 [90.500 et seq.] of this Ordinance, shall require a new permit. The permit shall be issued following approval of the revised plan.  
90.604 - Application for permit. 
Sec. 6.04. All applications for permits required by this Ordinance shall be made on forms supplied by the Township. Such application shall provide a brief description of the stormwater management controls and the development activity. This application shall become part of the plan submission required by Article 3 [90.300 et seq.] of this Ordinance.  
90.605 - Expiration and renewal. 
Sec. 6.05. 
A.	All permits shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless construction is commenced prior to this date. 
B.	A renewal of an expired permit may be issued by the Township following a resubmittal of the permit application form and its approval by the Township. 
C.	The refusal of the Township to reissue an expired permit shall contain the reasons for such refusal.  
90.606 - Suspension and revocation. 
Sec. 6.06. 
A.	Any permit issued under this Ordinance may be suspended or revoked by the Township for: 
1.	Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the permit.
2.	A violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the project. 
3.	The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during construction or development that constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance or that endangers the life or property of others. 
B.	A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the Township when:
1.	The Township has inspected and approved the corrections to the stormwater management control measure(s) or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or 
2.	The Township is satisfied that the violation of the Ordinance, law, or rule and regulation has been corrected. 
C.	A permit that has been revoked by the Township cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the procedures outlined in this Ordinance.  
ARTICLE 7  
90.700 - IMPLEMENTATION 
 
90.701 - Effective date. 
Sec. 7.01. The amendatory provisions of this Ordinance shall take effect on February 1, 1993.  
110.000 - SEWER RATE AND MANDATORY CONNECTION ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1979-4 Adopted: June 28, 1979 
An Ordinance establishing rates and charges and providing for the enforcement thereof for the use and service of the Sanitary Sewage Disposal System of the Township of Union, Michigan and to provide for the mandatory connection to said System and to provide for other matters relative to said System. 
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION ORDAINS:
 
110.001 - Declaration of necessity. 
Sec. 1. It is hereby determined to be desirable and necessary, for the public health, safety and welfare of the Township of Union, that the Township's Sanitary Sewage Disposal System be operated by said Township on a public utility rate basis in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended.  
110.002 - Definitions. 
Sec. 2. When used in this Ordinance, unless otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply: 
(2.1) B.O.D. (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 [degrees] Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
(2.2) Classes of users shall mean the division of sanitary sewer customers into classes by similar process or discharge flow characteristics, as follows: 
Residential user shall mean an individual home or dwelling unit including mobile homes, apartments, condominiums or multi-family dwellings that discharge only segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
Commercial user shall mean any retail or wholesale business engaged in selling merchandise or a service and that discharges only segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
Institutional user shall mean any educational, religious or social organization such as a school, church, nursing home, hospital or other similar entity that discharges only segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
Industrial user shall mean any manufacturing establishment which produces a product from raw or purchased material. 
For the purpose of Industrial Cost Recovery System only, an industrial user (pursuant to 40 CFR 35.905-8) is any non-governmental user of the publicly owned treatment works that discharges an industrial waste and is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, under Divisions A, B, D, E, or I. 
(2.3) Debt service charge shall mean those charges levied to meet principal and interest costs for monies borrowed to construct the Sewage System. 
(2.4) Industrial cost recovery shall mean the recovery from each eligible industrial user of that portion of U.S. Environmental Protection Agency grants which are allocable to the collection and treatment of industrial wastes from said users. 
(2.5) Normal strength sewage shall mean a sanitary waste water flow containing an average daily BOD of not more than 200 mg/l or an average daily suspended solids concentration of not more than 250 mg/l. 
(2.6) Operation and maintenance costs shall mean all costs, direct and indirect, necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection and treatment on a continuing basis, to conform with all federal, state and local wastewater management requirements, and to assure optimum long-term management of the sewage works. Operation and maintenance costs shall include replacement costs. 
(2.7) Replacement costs shall mean expenditures made during the service life of the System to replace equipment and appurtenances necessary to maintain the intended performance of the System. 
(2.8) Residential equivalents shall mean the factor representing a ratio of the estimated sewage generated by other than a single-family residential user. 
(2.9) Revenues and net revenues mean the same definition as provided for in Section 3, Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
(2.10) Sewer service charge shall mean the fees billed to all customers attached to the System for support of the cost of the System. This charge includes sewer use charges, debt service charges and replacement costs. 
(2.11) Sewer user charge shall mean the costs that are levied to cover the cost of operation and maintenance of the System and replacement cost. 
(2.12) System shall mean the complete Union Township Sewage System including all sewers, pumps, lift stations, flowage rights in interceptors of other systems, treatment facilities or interests therein, and all other facilities used or useful in the collection, treatment and disposal of domestic, commercial or industrial wastes, including all appurtenances thereto and including all extensions and improvements thereto which hereafter [may] be acquired. 
(2.13) Township shall mean the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 1980-2, 11-20-80) 
110.003 - [Management and operation of System.] 
Sec. 3. The operation, maintenance, alteration, repair and management of the System shall be under the supervision and control of the Township Board. Said Township may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the System and may make such rules, orders and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the System.  
110.004 - Charges. 
Sec. 4. 
(4.1) Commencing with the effective date of this Ordinance, charges for sewer disposal services to each premises within the service area having any connection to the System shall be as follows or as specified and provided for at any time hereafter by a resolution of the Township Board: 
(4.1.1) Sewer use charges. Sewer service charges to each single-family residential premises served by the System shall be a charge of $67.50 per quarter. Each premises other than a single-family residence shall pay quarterly charges in the foregoing amount multiplied by a Residential Equivalents factor as determined from Table 1, which is incorporated as a part of this Ordinance; provided, however, that the minimum quarterly charge to any premises shall be $67.50. 
Sewer service charges for new connections to the System shall be pro rated from the first day of the month following the date in which connection to the system takes place. 
(4.1.2) Special rate. The Township Board may fix by resolution from time to time rates for miscellaneous or special services. When industrial users as defined in 40 C.F.R. 905-8 are serviced by the collecting sewers constructed by Grant C262790-02, funded under Title II of Public Law 92-500, an Industrial Cost Recovery System in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 35.923 will be established for those portions of the collecting and treatment system funded under Title II of Public Law 92-500. 
(4.1.3) Review of rates. The Township Board will provide for a review of rates in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 35.929-2B. 
(4.1.4) Billing. Bills will be rendered quarterly on January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1, payable without penalty within 35 days after the date thereon. Payments received after such period shall bear a one-time penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the bill. When [the] due date falls on a holiday or non-business day, payment without penalty may be made the following business day. Mail payments postmarked by due date will be accepted without penalty if received the following day. 
(4.1.5) Enforcement. The charges for services which are under the provisions of Section 21, Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, made a lien on all premises served thereby, unless notice is given that a tenant is responsible, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien, and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six months, the Township official or officials in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually, on September 1st of each year, to the tax-assessing officer of the Township the facts of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be by him entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general Township taxes against such premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced. Provided, however, where notice is given that a tenant is responsible for such charges and service as provided by Section 21 [sic], no further service shall be rendered such premises until a cash deposit in the amount of $100.00 shall have been made as security for payment of such charges and service. 
In addition to the foregoing, the Township shall have the right of [to] shut off sewer service to any premises for which charges for sewer service are more than three months delinquent, and such service shall not be re-established until all delinquent charges and penalties and a turn-on charge, to be specified by the Township Board, have been paid. Further, such charges and penalties may be recovered by the Township by court action. 
(4.1.6) General The rates hereby fixed are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the System as are necessary to preserve the same good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for said System as this Ordinance may require. Such rates shall be fixed and revised periodically by Board resolution as may be necessary to produce these amounts. Further the rates for use of the System shall be based on the following: 
(a)	Debt retirement charge. Each user of the System, who has not been special assessed or who has not paid a lateral benefit charge, shall pay a quarterly debt retirement charge in the amount of $37.50. Each user of the System who has been special assessed or who has paid a lateral benefit charge shall pay a quarterly debt retirement charge in the amount of $10.50. 
(b)	Operation and maintenance charge. Each user of the System shall pay a quarterly operation and maintenance charge in the amount of $30.00. 
(c)	Surcharges. Each user that discharges wastewater strengths, exceeding "normal strength sewage" as defined, shall pay appropriate surcharges for treatment of excess waste strengths, as may be determined from time to time by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 1980-2, 11-20-80; Ord. No. 1981-2, 3-3-81; Ord. No. 1982-2, 1-6-82; Ord. No. 1982-3, 2-3-82; Ord. No. 1986-4, 11-5-86; Ord. No. 1987-4, 7-8-87; Ord. No. 1992-10, 11-11-92; Ord. No. 1999-10, 12-29-99)  
110.005 - [Free service.] 
Sec. 5. No free service shall be furnished by said System to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality.  
110.006 - [Rate sufficiency; revision.] 
Sec. 6. The rates hereby fixed are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation, such expenses for maintenance of the said System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for said System as this Ordinance may require. Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts.  
110.007 - [Connection and transportation fees.] 
Sec. 7. 
[a]	Applications for sewer service shall be filed with the Township Clerk upon a form to be supplied by the Township. The application shall state the name of the applicant and the premises to be served. All applications filed after the commencement of the operation of the system shall be accompanied by a fee of $2,150.00 per residential equivalent payable to the Township Treasurer as a connection charge. 
[b]	All sewer system users connecting to sewer lines within the West Downtown Development Association Sewer Project shall be exempted from the foregoing $110.00 administration fee but shall pay the $90.00 transportation fee required under the Comprehensive Agreement between the Charter Township of Union and the City of Mt. Pleasant dated December 12, 1991. This exemption shall remain in effect until June 30, 1993, at which time all sewer system users connecting to sewer lines within the West Downtown Development Association Sewer Project shall pay the full $200.00 charge. 
[c]	Any sewer system user within a residential subdivision wherein a private individual has installed the sewer lines, wyes and leads, at no cost to the Township, in accordance with Township specifications and inspected and approved by Township personnel, shall have the connection fee reduced to $50.00 per hook-up. This reduction shall not apply to the $90.00 transportation charge pursuant to the comprehensive agreement between the Charter Township of Union and the City of Mt. Pleasant dated December 12, 1991. This transportation fee shall be payable by all individuals within districts where this fee is required by this Ordinance and by any agreement between the City of Mt. Pleasant and the Charter Township of Union. 
(Ord. No. 1991-17, 1-8-92; Ord. No. 1992-10, 11-11-92; Ord. No. 1993-1, 1-14-93; Ord. No. 1994-3, 8-24-94; Ord. No. 1997-14, 11-12-97; Ord. No. 1998-2, 1-28-98)  
110.008 - [Billing.] 
Sec. 8. It is hereby made the duty of the Township Treasurer to render bills for sewer service and all other charges in connection therewith and to collect all monies due therefrom.  
110.009 - [Fiscal year.] 
Sec. 9. The System shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on April 1st and ending on March 31st the next following. 
(Ord. No. 1982-1, 1-6-82) 
110.010 - [Mandatory sewer connection.] 
Sec. 10. It is hereby determined and declared that public sanitary sewers are essential to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Township; that all premises on which structures in which sanitary sewage originates are situated shall connect to the system at the earliest, reasonable date as a matter for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the Township, and therefore, all premises on which structures in which sanitary sewage originates are situated or become situated and to which sewer services of the System shall be available shall connect to said System within ninety (90) days after the mailing or posting of notice of such premises by the appropriate Township official that such services are available. Said notification and enforcement of this section shall be in conformity with Act 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978. 
(Ord. No. 1999-09, 12-8-99) 
110.011 - [Severability.] 
Sec. 11. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance.  
110.012 - [Repealer.] 
Sec. 12. All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.  
110.013 - [Publication; recordation.] 
Sec. 13. This Ordinance shall be published once, in full, in the Morning Sun, a newspaper of general circulation within the boundaries of the Township, and qualified under state law to publish legal notices, promptly after its adoption, and the same shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Township and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the Supervisor and Township Clerk.  
110.014 - [Effective date.] 
Sec. 14. This Ordinance is hereby determined to be immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace, health and safety of the Township and shall become effective immediately upon its adoption.  
111.000 - SEWER USE AND CONNECTION ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1980-1 Adopted: July 23, 1980 
An Ordinance providing for the operation and maintenance of the Union Township Sewer System and to establish rules and regulations governing the System, and to provide for connections to the System and to provide penalties for violations and providing for other related matters. 
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION HEREBY ORDAINS: 
ARTICLE I  
111.100 - TITLE 
 
111.101.1 - Title. 
Sec. 1.1. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as The Union Township Sewer Use and Connection Ordinance, Number 1980-1.  
111.101.2 - Finding of necessity. 
Sec. 1.2. A public sanitary sewage system is essential to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Township. Failure or potential failure of septic tank disposal systems poses a menace to health, presents a potential for the transmission of disease, and for economic blight, and constitutes a threat to the quality of surface and subsurface waters of the Township. The connection of structures in which sewage originates to an available public sanitary sewer system at the earliest reasonable date; the proper design, construction and use of public and private sewers and drains and private sewage disposal facilities; and protective limitations on the discharge of certain waters and wastes into the public sewer system are all matters for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and are necessary in the public interest, which is hereby declared.  
111.101.3 - Operation and maintenance. 
Sec. 1.3. The operation and maintenance of the System shall be under the supervision and control of the Township. The Township retains the exclusive right to make such rules or regulations and employ such person or persons as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient establishment, operation and maintenance of the System to comply with the terms of the sewer service Agreement with the City of Mount Pleasant and the requirements of the state and federal regulatory agencies.  
111.101.4 - Definitions. 
Sec. 1.4. When used in this Ordinance, unless otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.4.1 Available public sanitary sewer system means a public sanitary sewer system located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, or public way which crosses, adjoins, abuts upon property and passing not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure in which sanitary sewage originates. 
1.4.2 B.O.D. (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter. 
1.4.3 Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the sewage discharge from plumbing fixtures inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer. The building drain extends to a point five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
1.4.4 Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, and includes the wye and riser installation. 
1.4.5 Classes of users shall mean the division of sanitary sewer customers into classes by similar process or discharge flow characteristics, as follows: 
Residential user shall mean an individual home or dwelling unit including mobile homes, apartments, condominiums or multi-family dwellings that discharge only segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
Commercial user shall mean any retail or wholesale business engaged in selling merchandise or a service and that discharges only segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
Institutional user shall mean any educational, religious or social organization such as a school, church, nursing home, hospital or other similar entity that discharges only segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
Industrial user shall mean any manufacturing establishment which produces a product from raw or purchased material. 
For the purpose of Industrial Cost Recovery System only, an industrial user (pursuant to 40 CFR 35.905-8) is any non-governmental user of the publicly owned treatment works that discharges an industrial waste and is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, under Divisions A, B, D, E, or I. 
1.4.6 Combined sewer means a sewer receiving roof drainage, surface runoff and sewage. 
1.4.7 Compatible pollutant shall mean biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants identified in the City of Mount Pleasant-Union Township NPDES permit, if the treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact can remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. The term "substantial degree" generally means removals in the order of 80 percent or greater. 
1.4.8 Footing drain means a buried pipe surrounding a building for the purpose of draining ground water away from the building footing. 
1.4.9 Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
1.4.10 Incompatible pollutant shall mean any pollutant that is not a compatible pollutant, as defined in Item 7 [1.4.7] above. 
1.4.11 Infiltration shall mean any waters entering the system from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from inflow. 
1.4.12 Inflow shall mean any waters entering the system through such sources as, but not limited to, building downspouts, footing or yard drains, cooling water discharges, seepage lines from springs and swampy areas and storm drain cross connections. 
1.4.13 Infiltration/inflow shall mean the total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow. 
1.4.14 Inspector shall mean any person or persons authorized by the Township to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers, private sewers and their connection to the public Sewer System. 
1.4.15 Local health department means the Central Michigan District Health Department. 
1.4.16 Major contributing industry shall mean an industrial user, as defined, that discharges: 
(a)	A flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day;
(b)	A flow exceeding five percent of the total treatment plant flow;
(c)	Toxic pollutants in toxic amounts as defined in the NPDES permit; or
(d)	A flow with a significant impact on the treatment plant when considered alone or in combination with other industrial users. 
1.4.17 Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
1.4.18 Normal strength sewage shall mean a sanitary waste water flow containing an average daily BOD of not more than 200 mg/l or an average daily suspended solids concentration of not more than 250 mg/l. 
1.4.19 NPDES permit shall mean the permit issued pursuant to the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System for the discharge of waste waters into the waters of the state. 
1.4.20 Person means a person as defined in Section 1106 of the Michigan Public Health Code being Public Act 368 of 1978, or a governmental entity. 
1.4.21 pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
1.4.22 Pretreatment means a process for treating an industrial waste to the extent that it can be discharged to the public sanitary sewer without endangering the municipal sewage treatment system or the watercourse to which the treatment plant discharges its effluent. 
1.4.23 Private sewage disposal systems shall mean any septic tanks, lagoons, cesspools, or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sanitary sewage other than via the public sanitary sewer. 
1.4.24 Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
1.4.25 Public Sanitary Sewer System means a sanitary sewer used or intended for use by the public for the collection and transportation of sanitary sewage for treatment or disposal. 
1.4.26 Roof drain means a system for collection of precipitation which falls on a building roof and includes roof gutters and downspouts. 
1.4.27 Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are meant to be excluded. 
1.4.28 Sewage shall mean a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments (including polluted cooling water), together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
The three most common types of sewage are: 
Sanitary sewage shall mean the combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities. 
Industrial sewage shall mean a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and resulting from a trade or process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the wastes from pre-treatment facilities and polluted cooling water). 
Combined sewage shall mean wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial sewage, storm water, infiltration and inflow carried to the waste water treatment facilities by a combined sewer. 
1.4.29 "Sewage treatment plant" means any arrangement of equipment and structures used for treating sewage. 
1.4.30 "Sewage works" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
1.4.31 Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
1.4.32 Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration flow rate during normal operation. 
1.4.33 Structure in which sanitary sewage originates or structure means a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing, or other facilities which generate water-carried sanitary sewage are used or are available for use for household, commercial, industrial, or other purposes. 
1.4.34 Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and most industrial wastes. Unpolluted industrial cooling water is an example of industrial waste acceptable in a storm drain. 
1.4.35 Surcharge shall mean the additional charge which a user discharging waste water having strength in excess of the limits set by the Township for transmission and treatment within the sanitary sewage system will be required to pay to meet the cost of treating such excessively strong waste water. 
1.4.36 Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are removable by standard laboratory filtering techniques. 
1.4.37 Township means the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
1.4.38 Waste water shall mean water which contains, or previous to treatment has contained, pollutants such as sewage and/or industrial wastes. 
1.4.39 Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
1.4.40 Water quality standard means the maximum amount of various foreign substances in water that safely may be discharged into a natural outlet.  
ARTICLE II  
111.200 - REQUIRED USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 
 
111.201 - [Unlawful discharges on property.] 
Sec. 2.1. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the Township (or any area under its jurisdiction) any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.  
111.202 - [Unlawful discharges to natural outlets.] 
Sec. 2.2. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provision of this Ordinance.  
111.203 - [Privies prohibited.] 
Sec. 2.3. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.  
111.204 - [Connection to public sewer required.] 
Sec. 2.4. Each person having control of a structure in which sanitary sewage originates, and each owner and each occupant of such a structure, shall cause such structure to be connected to an available public sanitary sewer. Such connection shall be completed promptly but in no case later than 90 days from the date of occurrence of the last of the following events: 
2.4.1 Publication of a notice by the Township Clerk of the availability of the public Sanitary [Sewer] System in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. 
2.4.2 Modification of a structure so as to become a structure in which sanitary sewage originates. 
2.4.3 This Ordinance becomes effective.  
111.205 - Failure to complete connection. 
Sec. 2.5. Where the structure in which sanitary sewage originates has not been connected to an available public sanitary sewer within the 90 days of the period provided in Section 2.4 [111.204] above, the Township Clerk shall require the connection to be made forthwith after notice by first class mail or certified mail to the owners, occupants and persons having control of the property on which the structure is located. The notice shall give the approximate location of the public sanitary sewer which is available for connection of [to] the structure involved and shall advise such persons of the requirements and the enforcement provisions of this Ordinance.  
111.206 - [Non-compliance.] 
Sec. 2.6. Where any structure in which sanitary sewage originates is not connected to an available public Sanitary Sewer System within 90 days after the date of mailing or posting of the written notice, the Township may bring an action for a mandatory injunction or order in the district, or circuit court in Isabella County to compel the owner to connect to the available Sanitary Sewer System forthwith. The Township, in one or more of such actions, may join any number of owners of structures situated within the Township to compel each owner to connect to the available Sanitary Sewer System forthwith.  
ARTICLE III  
111.300 - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
 
111.301 - [Connection.] 
Sec. 3.1. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions hereof, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with all requirements of the State Board of Health and the local Health Department.  
111.302 - [Operation.] 
Sec. 3.2. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Township.  
111.303 - [Abandonment.] 
Sec. 3.3. At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided herein, a direct connection shall be made to the public Sanitary Sewer System in compliance with this Ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, and filled with suitable material.  
111.304 - [Additional requirements.] 
Sec. 3.4. No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the State Board of Health and the local Health Department.  
ARTICLE IV  
111.400 - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
 
111.401 - [Permit required; bond.] 
Sec. 4.1. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Township. Before a permit may be issued for excavating for plumbing in any public street, way, or alley, the person applying for such permit shall have executed unto the Township and deposited with the Treasurer, a corporate surety in the sum of $1,000.00 conditioned and that he will perform faithfully all work with due care and skill, and in accordance with the laws, rules, and regulations established under the authority or any ordinances of the Township pertaining to plumbing or sewer connections. This bond shall state that the persons will indemnify and save harmless the Township and the owner of the premises against all damages, costs, expenses, outlays, and claims of every nature and kind arising out of unskillfulness or negligence on his part in connection with plumbing or excavating for plumbing as prescribed in this Ordinance. Such bond shall remain in force and must be executed for a period of one year, except that on such expiration it shall remain in force as to all penalty claims, and demands that may have accrued thereunder prior to such expiration.  
111.402 - [Classes of permits.] 
Sec. 4.2. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)	For residential and commercial service; and
(2)	For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the Township. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the Township. The fee for the connection permit and inspection shall be as provided for in a separate ordinance or resolution, which fees shall be paid to the Township at the time the application for a permit is filed. A permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Upon application approved by the Township, a permit may be renewed for an additional one-year period. Installation shall be completed during the period the permit is valid.  
111.403 - [Costs and expenses.] 
Sec. 4.3. All costs and expense incidental to the installation, connection and maintenance of a building sewer shall be borne by the property owner. The property owner or contractor installing or maintaining a building sewer shall indemnify the Township from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly result from the installation or maintenance of the building sewer.  
111.404 - [Available capacity.] 
Sec. 4.4. No connection to the System will be permitted unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains, and the sewage treatment plant, including capacity for treatment of B.O.D. and suspended solids.  
111.405 - [Permitted contractors.] 
Sec. 4.5. All connections to the System will be made by a licensed contractor or plumber, provided, however, that a property owner may make his own installation and connection in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and law so long as he has secured a connection permit. This does not allow a property owner to hire an unlicensed contractor to do his work.  
111.406 - [Copies of licenses to be filed.] 
Sec. 4.6. All licensed contractors and plumbers making connections to the System shall file with the Township a copy of their plumber's or contractor's license from the State of Michigan and a copy of their liability insurance prior to performing any connections to the System.  
111.407 - [Separate sewer for each building.] 
Sec. 4.7. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no public sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, easement or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.  
111.408 - [Use of existing sewers.] 
Sec. 4.8. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and tested by the Township, to meet all requirements of this Ordinance.  
111.409 - [Sewer and connection specifications.] 
Sec. 4.9. Building sewers and connections thereof to the public sanitary sewer shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)	Commercial or industrial building sewers shall be of sufficient diameter to carry the estimated volume of flow and, unless specifically approved by the Township, shall not be less than six inches in diameter. 
(b)	Residential building sewers shall be of sufficient diameter to carry the estimated volume of flow, and in no event less than four inches in diameter. 
(c)	Except as provided in paragraph (d) [111.409(d)] below, building sewers and connections thereof to the public sewer shall be constructed of the following materials: 
(1)	PVC schedule 40 with chemical weld joint or elastomeric gasket joints.
(2)	ABS extra strength pipe with chemical weld joint.
(3)	Ductile iron with rubber O-ring joint.
(d)	Building sewers and connections thereof to the public sewer lying within 75 feet of a private water well or 200 feet of a municipal water well shall be constructed of special materials as specified by the Michigan Department of Public Health. 
(e)	A building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade. The slope of a building sewer shall be not less than one-quarter inch per foot for four-inch pipe and not less than one-eighth inch per foot for six-inch pipe. 
(f)	Connections to the public sewer shall be made only where wyes or risers are provided in the line. If a wye or riser is not available, the building sewer connection shall be subject to approval by the Township and installed with approved fittings by a licensed plumber. 
(g)	A building sewer line shall be straight, with any change in alignment subject to approval by the Township inspector. Only long radius elbows shall be used for changing alignment of building sewers. 
(h)	Cleanouts on long building sewers shall be installed at approximately 100-foot intervals and at locations where alignment is changed, if required by the Township inspector. 
(i)	Where different pipe materials are to be joined together, only manufactured adapters made for that purpose shall be used. 
(j)	Where rock or hard clay excavation is required, a six-inch sand or gravel cushion shall be placed around the pipe. 
(k)	Connection of a building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements shown in Figure 1 below or as set forth in the applicable specifications of the American Society of Test Materials and the Manual of Practice No. 9 of the Water Pollution Control Federation. All connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation from the procedures and materials set forth herein may be made only with the approval in writing of the Township before installation.  
111.410 - [Sewer elevation.] 
Sec. 4.10. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.  
111.411 - [Runoff connections prohibited.] 
Sec. 4.11. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area-way drains or other sources of surface run-off or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.  
111.412 - [Inspection.] 
Sec. 4.12. The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the Township at least 24 hours prior to the time that the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The entire building sewer shall be left uncovered until inspected and the connection shall be made under the supervision of the Township.  
111.413 - [Excavation safety.] 
Sec. 4.13. All excavations for building sewers shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights for the protection of the public. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored as near as practicable to the original condition.  
111.414 - [Abandoned building sewers.] 
Sec. 4.14. Abandoned or discontinued building sewers shall be bulk-headed, capped or sealed in a manner to prevent leakage of liquids or gasses therefrom. The work shall be subject to inspection by the Township. All costs shall be the owner's. In the event that an owner refuses or fails for any reason adequately to bulkhead, cap or seal an abandoned or discontinued building sewer, the Township, after notice to the owner by ordinary or certified mail, may cause the work to be completed. All costs incurred by the Township shall be a lien upon the property and shall be assessed against the real property on the next succeeding Township tax roll.  
ARTICLE IV(A)  
111.400A - SEWER EXTENSIONS 
 
111.401A - Lateral benefit charge. 
Sec. 4A.1. There shall be paid on behalf of any premises making a direct private service line connection to any sewer line of the system which has not been either privately constructed and paid for on behalf of said premises or publicly financed at least in part by means of special assessments levied against the property on which said premises are located, for the privilege of making use of said public sewer line as a sanitary sewer lateral, at the time of application for a tap permit, a lateral benefit charge measured by the footage abutting the line tapped. Any unpaid lateral installments are hereby recognized to constitute a lien on all premises served thereby. Whenever any such installments shall be delinquent for 60 days, the Supervisor shall, on September 1st next ensuing, enter the same upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and said delinquent installment charges shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general real estate property taxes are collected and the lien thereof enforced. 
(Ord. No. 1987-3, 7-7-87) 
111.402A - Special assessment. 
Sec. 4A.2. Whenever a sewer extension has been publicly financed at least in part by means of special assessments levied against the property on which said premises are located, said special assessments will stand in lieu of any lateral benefit charge. 
(Ord. No. 1987-3, 7-7-87) 
111.403A - Debt retirement charge. 
Sec. 4A.3. Users of the system who have been special assessed or who have paid a lateral benefit charge will pay a quarterly debt retirement charge in the amount of 28 percent of the rate charged to users of the System that were included in the initial sewer service area who were not special assessed or who did not pay a lateral benefit charge. 
(Ord. No. 1987-3, 7-7-87) 
ARTICLE V  
111.500 - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEMS 
 
111.501 - General. 
Sec. 5.1. 
(a)	All plans and specifications for additions to or the extension or relocation of the Township sanitary sewer system shall be prepared in accordance with the adopted sanitary sewer works standards of the Township and be approved by the Township. 
(b)	No additions to or extensions or relocations of the Township sanitary sewer system shall be placed in service and no building drain connections shall be made thereto until satisfactory test results have been received by the Township and the addition, extension, or modification has been approved by the Township. 
(c)	Any sanitary sewer, meeting requirements applicable to public sewers, which services two or more separate buildings or dwellings, shall be deemed a public sewer, unless the buildings are part of a singly owned industrial or commercial complex or a public complex where future division of ownership is not anticipated. 
(d)	Combined sewer systems shall not be permitted. 
111.502 - Connection of Privately Constructed Sanitary Sewer Systems to the System. 
Sec. 5.2. Before any sanitary sewer system constructed by private, as distinguished from public, funding, hereinafter referred to as the "private sanitary sewer," shall be permitted to connect to the System, the owner of said system, hereinafter referred to as "the developer," shall do and provide the Township with the following: 
A.	Provide the Township with the developer's plans and specifications for construction that conform to the adopted Township standards, an estimate of the cost of construction, and deposit with the Township the estimated cost of review of construction plans covering the cost of hiring a registered professional engineer to review plans and specifications, which monies shall be placed by the Township in an escrow account in the name of said developer. 
B.	Obtain approval of the Township of the plans and specifications.
C.	Secure all necessary permits for construction.
D.	Upon commencement of construction of the private sanitary sewer, deposit with the Township in the escrow account referred to in paragraph A of this Section the estimated cost of inspection by the Township. 
E.	Upon satisfactory completion of the private sanitary sewer to the System and prior to connection to the Township System, provide the Township with any easement required, provide the Township with an affidavit of completion by the contractor, a bill of sale, as-built drawings certified by a professional engineer, and a one-year warranty bond equal to the cost of the sewage work project. Any monies remaining in the developer's escrow account shall be returned to the developer. Any additional expenses incurred by the Township in assuring the Township that the private sanitary sewer is properly constructed and operating shall be deducted therefrom or charged directly to the developer, at the option of the Township. An accounting of expenditures shall be made to the developer by the Township. 
F.	Thereafter, the Township will accept the privately constructed sewer and it shall become a public sewer.  
ARTICLE VI  
111.600 - USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS 
 
111.601 - General. 
Sec. 6.1. 
6.1.1 The Township Board shall prohibit any new connections from inflow sources to the System and shall refuse to accept inflow sources from existing connections which are not consistent with the System's design capacity including discharge of storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, foundation drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer; and shall further prohibit new connections unless there is capacity in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and treatment plant facilities, including capacity for BOD and suspended solids. 
6.1.2 No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public sewers any harmful water or wastes, whether liquid, solid or gas, capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works, or other interferences with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
6.1.3 The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having harmful or objectionable characteristics shall be subject to review and approval of the Township, who may prescribe limits on the strength and character of these waters or wastes. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Township, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to treat these wastes prior to discharge to the public sewer. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the [approval of] the Township and of the appropriate state agency and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
6.1.4 When required by the Township, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install and maintain, at his expense, [a] suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants" (40 CFR 136, October 16, 1973) and shall be determined at the control manhole or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
6.1.5 A portion of all industrial waste from an industry may be excluded from the sanitary sewer system. 
6.1.6 A surcharge may be imposed on the rate charged by industry for the treatment of industrial waste. The surcharge shall be based on the volume, strength and character of the industrial waste treated as compared to the volume, strength and character of the normal domestic sewage experienced in the Township. 
6.1.7 Special assessments or contracts may be executed with industries which shall be coordinated with this Ordinance for the derivation of the rate to be used for the receiving of industrial waste, where such industrial wastes are of unusual strength or volume and the treatment facility is capable of handling such industrial waste. 
6.1.8 Where the nature of an industry or commercial enterprise applying for or receiving sanitary sewer service is such that the sewage or process wastes generated by it may pose a hazard to health or environment or to the functioning of the system's treatment plant, the Township may require submission to it of the following information and materials: 
(a)	A written statement setting forth the nature of the enterprise, the source and amount of water used, the amount of water to be discharged, with its present or expected bacterial, physical, chemical, radioactive, or other pertinent characteristics of the wastes. 
(b)	A plan map of the building, works, or complex, with each outfall to the surface waters, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, natural outlet or ground waters noted, described, and any natural outlet identified. 
(c)	Reports of sample tests of the characteristics of the wastes made on a time schedule, at locations and according to methods approved by the Township. 
(d)	The names of any persons, together with a statement of their qualifications, who have specific supervision and control over waste treatment facilities, process facilities, and other facilities affecting wastes. 
(e)	Reports on raw materials entering the process or support systems, intermediate materials, final products, and waste by-products as those factors may affect waste control. 
(f)	Maintain records and file reports on the final disposal of specific liquids, solids, sludges, oils, radioactive materials, solvents, or other wastes. 
(g)	Written notification to the Township of any plans to alter an industrial or commercial process generating industrial or commercial wastes, such alteration to be subject to the approval of the Township. 
6.1.9 Upon a finding by the Township, based on all available information, that industrial or commercial wastes that are being discharged, or that are planned to be discharged, by an industry or commercial enterprise, may pose a potential danger to the public health, the environment or the proper functioning of the treatment plant receiving the flow, the owner thereof, upon written notice by the Township, shall construct a permanent monitoring structure at the point of discharge of the wastes to the sanitary sewer, storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(a)	The design of the structure shall be approved by the Township before installation.
(b)	The structure shall be constructed by the industry or commercial enterprise at its expense. 
(c)	The monitoring station shall be maintained in good operating condition by the industry or commercial enterprise at its expense. Any break in the operation of the station will require a written report stating the reason for the stoppage and a schedule of repair. 
(d)	Adequate access shall be maintained to the monitoring structure at all times to enable the Township to collect samples and flow records. 
6.1.10 Charges for using the public sewage works shall be paid by owners of property to which public sanitary sewer service is available at the times and in accordance with schedules of such charges provided by the Township in a separate ordinance or resolution. 
6.1.11 The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes: 
(a)	Containing a five-day B.O.D. greater than 300 mg/l or containing more than 350 mg/l of suspended solids, or 
(b)	Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in Section 2 [111.603] hereof, or 
(c)	Having any average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily flow of the Township, 
shall be subject to review and approval of the Township. 
The Township, after review, shall either: 
(a)	Reject the wastes.
(b)	Require pre-treatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewer.
(c)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(d)	Require special payment (a surcharge) to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes as provided in Section 8 [111.601(6.1.6)] of this Article. 
6.1.12 Grease, oil and sand interceptors (traps) shall be provided at the expense of the property owner when liquid wastes contain grease in excessive amounts, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for single-family and multi-family dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Township and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, water-tight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted into place shall be gas-tight and water-tight. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors (traps) shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
6.1.13 If the Township permits pre-treatment or equalization of flows, preliminary or pre-treatment shall be provided, at no expense to the Township, as may be necessary to reduce the B.O.D. to 300 mg/l and suspended solids to 350 mg/l or to reduce objectionable characteristics of said effluent to within the maximum limits provided for in Section 6.3 [111.603] hereof, or to control the quantity and rates of discharges of such water or wastes. On direction of the Township, an entity may be required to remove, exclude, or require pre-treatment of any industrial waste, in whole or in part, for any reasons deemed to be in the Township's interest. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation at no expense to the Township. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary or pre-treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval to the Township and no construction of such facility shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. The Township may elect to treat industrial waste discharges in excess of normal domestic concentrations on a basis prescribed by written agreement and for an established surcharge to cover the added cost. All such preliminary treatment or pre-treatment shall be in accordance with federal and state laws and regulations and such pre-treatment criteria as are promulgated by the Township. All expenses of Township services necessary to review such preliminary treatment facilities plans and specifications shall be borne by the owner. 
6.1.14 When required by the Township, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install at their cost, a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes, as outlined in Article II, Section 4. [111.601(6.1.4)] 
6.1.15 All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Ordinance shall be determined in accordance with E.P.A. Regulations, 40 C.F.R. 136, published October 16, 1973 in the Federal Register and the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to public health, safety and welfare. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is sufficient or whether grab sample or samples should be taken. 
6.1.16 No provision contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Township and any industrial or commercial firm whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Township for treatment, subject to special payment (surcharge) therefor by the industrial or commercial firm if the sewage treatment facility is capable of removing the waste to meet water quality requirements.  
111.602 - Discharge of storm, ground and unpolluted water. 
Sec. 6.2. 
A.	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water into any sanitary sewer. 
B.	Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the state agency having jurisdiction thereof. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the state agency having jurisdiction to a storm sewer or natural outlet.  
111.603 - Prohibited discharges. 
Sec. 6.3. 
A.	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees F.
B.	Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter, by weight, of fat, oil or grease. 
C.	Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive, liquid, solid or gas. 
D.	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
E.	Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, metal shavings, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, woods, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
F.	Industrial wastes of such concentration of metallic or other compounds which exceed guidelines of the appropriate state and federal agencies and as set forth in the sewage treatment plant NPDES permit. 
(1)	Heavy metal discharges shall not exceed the following limits:
(a)	Cadmium 0.005 mg/l.
(b)	Chromium (total) 0.620 mg/l.
(c)	Copper 0.140 mg/l.
(d)	Cyanide (amenable) 0.11 mg/l.
(e)	Lead 0.635 mg/l.
(f)	Nickel 0.210 mg/l.
(g)	Zinc 1.125 mg/l.
G.	Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration which may exceed limits established by applicable state and federal regulations, shall not be allowed. 
H.	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES permit or the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
I.	Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, or to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the treatment plant, heavy metals, and/or materials designated by EPA as being toxic or poisonous. 
J.	Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
K.	Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
L.	Any industrial waste that may cause a deviation from the NPDES permit requirements, pre-treatment standards, and all other state and federal regulations. 
M.	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the Waste Water System. 
(Ord. No. 1989-7, 5-10-89) 
ARTICLE VII  
111.700 - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS 
 
111.701 - [Right of entry.] 
Sec. 1. The duly authorized employees of the Township, after showing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties in the Township for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing of sewage flows in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The employees of the Township shall have no authority to inquire into any proprietary processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other process, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sanitary sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.  
111.702 - [Safety.] 
Sec. 2. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section 1 [111.701] above, the duly authorized employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner thereof and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to such employees, except as such may be caused by the negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe working conditions.  
ARTICLE VIII  
111.800 - PENALTIES 
 
111.801 - [Notice.] 
Sec. 1. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance, except the provisions of Sections 3 [111.803] and 4 [111.804] of this Article VIII, shall be served by the Township with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.  
111.802 - [Continuing violations.] 
Sec. 2. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Section 1 [111.801] of this Article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.  
111.803 - [Willful damage, tampering, etc.] 
Sec. 3. Any person who shall willfully, maliciously or wantonly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, remove or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, pipe, valve, pumping station, monitoring station or other equipment or installation that is a part of the public sanitary sewer system in the Township, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County jail not to exceed 90 days, or by fine not exceeding $500.00, or by both such imprisonment and fine.  
111.804 - [Deception.] 
Sec. 4. Any person who shall intentionally make a false statement, representation or certification in an application for a permit or in any report or statement of information required under this Ordinance, or who with intent to deceive shall render inaccurate a monitoring device required to be maintained under this Ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County jail not to exceed 90 days, or by fine not exceeding $500.00, or by both such imprisonment and fine.  
ARTICLE IX  
111.900 - CIVIL REMEDIES 
 
111.901 - [Unlawful discharge.] 
Sec. 1. Any person who, in violation of Section 1 [111.601] of Article VI of this Ordinance, shall discharge into the public sanitary sewer in the Township, any storm or other uncontaminated or unpolluted waters as specified in said Section, shall be liable for the cost of sewage treatment of the volume of such waters estimated to have been unlawfully discharged into the sanitary sewer. The annual charge for treatment of storm waters, ground water, roof run-off and sub-surface drainage shall be based on the drainage area and rainfall records and the actual cost of sewage treatment.  
111.902 - [Recovery of damages.] 
Sec. 2. The Township shall have the right to recover the full value of any losses, costs or damage resulting from any violation of this Ordinance in a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction.  
111.903 - [Civil action.] 
Sec. 3. In addition to all other penalties and remedies for the violation of any provision of this Ordinance, the Township may commence an action in the Circuit Court for Isabella County for mandatory injunction to restrain the violation.  
ARTICLE X  
111.1000 - CONDITIONS OF SERVICE 
 
111.1001 - [Discontinuance, cancellation of service.] 
Sec. 10. 
10.1 Applications may be canceled and/or sewer service discontinued by the Township for any violation of any rule, regulation, or condition of service, and especially for any of the following reasons: 
10.1.1 Misrepresentation in the application as to the property or fixtures to be serviced by the sanitary sewer system. 
10.1.2 Non-payment of bills. 
10.1.3 Improper or imperfect service pipes and fixtures or failure to keep same in suitable state of repair. 
10.2 All notices relating to the conduct of the business of the Township will be mailed to the customer at the address listed on the application unless a change of address has been filed in writing at the business office of the Township, and the Township shall not otherwise be responsible for delivery of any notice, nor will the customer be excused from any performance required in said notice. 
10.3 The Township shall, in no event, be held responsible for claim made against it by reason of the breaking of any mains for service pipes, or by reason of any other interruption of the service caused by the breaking of machinery or stoppage for necessary repairs, and no person shall be entitled to damages nor have any portion of a payment refunded for any interruption. 
10.4 The premises receiving sanitary sewer service shall at all reasonable hours be subject to inspection by duly authorized personnel of the Township.  
ARTICLE XI  
111.1100 - VALIDITY 
 
111.1101 - [Severability.] 
Sec. 11.1. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance.  
ARTICLE XII  
111.1200 - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
111.1201 - [Conflicting provisions.] 
Sec. 12.1. All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed.  
111.1202 - [Publication.] 
Sec. 12.2. This Ordinance shall be published in full in the Morning Sun, a newspaper of general circulation in the Township qualified under state law to publish legal notices, within 30 days after its adoption, and the same shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Township and such recording authenticated by the signatures of the Supervisor and the Township Clerk.  
111.1203 - [Effective date.] 
Sec. 12.3. This Ordinance shall become effective 30 days after publication.  
112.000 - WATER SERVICE, USE AND RATE ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1987-9 Adopted: December 9, 1987 
An Ordinance to provide for the operation and maintenance of all water supply facilities of Union Township on a public utility basis under the provisions of Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended; to establish charges and rates for water service in the Township of Union, to establish water service and use regulations; to prohibit water cross connections; and to provide penalties for violation thereof. 
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION ORDAINS: 
ARTICLE I  
112.100 - DEFINITIONS 
 
112.101 - Words and terms defined. 
Sec. 1. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Ordinance shall be as follows: 
(a)	Building lead means that portion of a water line from property line to the location of the meter. 
(b)	Cross connection means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which water of questionable quality, waste, or other contaminants can enter the public water supply system. 
(c)	Curb box means a riser from the service lead, located at the property line, to enable water service to be turned on or off. 
(d)	Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
(e)	Service lead means that portion of a water line running from the water main to the property line, including the corporation stop, curb stop and curb box. 
(f)	Township means the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
(g)	Township Water System, hereinafter referred to as System, means the governmentally owned and operated water supply system in the Township of Union, consisting of pipes, structures and facilities by means of which potable water is obtained and distributed to the public. 
(h)	Charges. The term "charges for water services" or "charges" shall be deemed to mean the amount charged to each premises in the Township connected to the System for the purpose of receiving a supply of water. 
(Ord. No. 1993-12, 11-10-93) 
ARTICLE II  
112.200 - GENERAL LIMITATIONS ON USE OF THE TOWNSHIP WATER SYSTEM 
 
112.201 - [Compliance with article.] 
Sec. 1. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tap or connect to any water main, service lead, curb box, or other appurtenance of the Township Water System; or to open or close any valves or hydrants thereof; or to molest or interfere with any valve, valve box cover, water meter, detector check valve, or other part thereof, except as provided in this Ordinance.  
112.202 - [Approval required for modifications, additions, etc., generally.] 
Sec. 2. No modification of or addition to the Township Water System, and no extension of any water main thereof, shall be made without the prior approval of the Township. All such modifications, additions and extensions shall conform to requirements and standards of the Township, the Michigan Department of Health and the State Plumbing Code.  
112.203 - [Extensions within property limits.] 
Sec. 3. No extension shall be made to a building lead for the purpose of supplying water to a point beyond the limits of the property for which the building lead was installed as set forth in the original application for water service, except as provided in this Ordinance.  
112.204 - [Waste of water.] 
Sec. 4. No owner or occupant of any premises supplied with water from the Township Water System shall permit the unnecessary waste of such water or shall use or permit the use thereof to provide a water supply for any other person, firm or corporation.  
ARTICLE III  
112.300 - REQUIRED PERMITS 
 
112.301 - [Permit required.] 
Sec. 1. Water service shall not be provided from the Township Water System, and no work shall be commenced on the installation of any building lead and the connection thereof to the Township Water System, until a permit therefor has been issued by the Township. No alterations, additions or repairs shall be made to existing building leads, connections and appurtenances until a permit therefor has been issued by the Township.  
112.302 - [Application by owner or agent.] 
Sec. 2. Application for permits shall be made to the Township by the property owner, or by a master plumber acting as an authorized agent of the property owner, on a form provided by the Township. The work will be performed in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the applicable rules, regulations and specifications of the Michigan Department of Health and the State Plumbing Code.  
112.303 - [Application contents.] 
Sec. 3. A permit application shall contain: 
(a)	The name and address of the owner;
(b)	The name and business address of the master plumber, if applicable;
(c)	The location and tax number of the property to be served;
(d)	The use of the building or buildings erected or to be erected thereon;
(e)	The size of the service connection and meter desired; and
(f)	Such other information as the Township may deem necessary. 
112.304 - [Accuracy of application.] 
Sec. 4. A property owner applying for a permit shall be responsible for the accuracy and completeness of all information required to be furnished by the application form. All expense incurred by the Township by reason of the failure of the owner to provide full and correct information shall be charged to and paid for by the owner. An incomplete application may be returned to the applicant.  
112.305 - [Home owner's permit.] 
Sec. 5. Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance to the contrary, a permit may be issued to a home owner who desires personally to install his own building lead, connections, alterations, or repairs without the services of a master plumber, if the home owner: 
(a)	Made application therefor in accordance with the requirements of this Article, excepting only the requirements for name, address, signature and agreement of a master plumber; 
(b)	Furnishes evidence satisfactory to the Township that he has knowledge of the requirements of this Ordinance and is qualified to do the work; 
(c)	Certifies that the work will be performed by himself and no one else; and
(d)	Agrees that the work will be performed in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the State Plumbing Code. 
Permits issued to home owners under this Section shall be stamped or labeled "Home Owner's Permit."  
112.306 - [Fee payment prior to permit issuance.] 
Sec. 6. All fees and charges as provided for in Article X [112.1000] of this Ordinance shall be paid before a permit is issued.  
112.307 - [Term of permit.] 
Sec. 7. A permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Upon application approved by the Township a permit may be renewed for an additional one-year period. The installation shall be completed during the period the permit is valid.  
112.308 - [Denial of permit.] 
Sec. 8. If a permit is denied, written notice of the reasons for the denial shall be given to the applicant.  
112.309 - [Inspection of work.] 
Sec. 9. All work performed in pursuance of a permit issued under this Ordinance shall be subject to inspection by the Township, which may order any part of the work discontinued and/or changed to comply with the permit, Township specifications, this Ordinance and applicable requirements of the Michigan Department of Health and the State Plumbing Code.  
112.310 - [Registration of master plumbers.] 
Sec. 10. Only master plumbers who are registered with the Township may sign applications for permits and take charge of the work for which the permits are applied for. The registration with the Township shall be done annually during the month of April or at the time an application for a permit is submitted to the Township. In registering with the Township, a master plumber shall present his State license and Board of Health registration. A master plumber shall in no event permit his name to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of making application for a permit or the performance of any work pursuant thereto. The Township may refuse to issue a permit on an application signed by a master plumber who has failed to correct violations of this Ordinance occurring with respect to any work for which he is responsible.  
ARTICLE IV  
112.400 - SERVICE LEADS 
 
112.401 - [Maintenance by Township.] 
Sec. 1. All service leads are a part of the Township Water System and will be installed and maintained by the Township. Installation will consist of tapping the main, inserting a corporation stop with proper couplings, laying a service pipe and providing a curb stop and curb box at the property line.  
112.402 - [Prohibited installation.] 
Sec. 2. A service lead will not be installed where the terminal point of a building lead at the property line has been so located by the owner that the line between it and the water main is obstructed by a driveway approach, tree or other obstacle.  
112.403 - [Disconnection.] 
Sec. 3. The Township may disconnect from the main any unused service leads. In the event water service should be desired at the same location at a later date, a permit for such service and connection to the Township Water System will be required.  
ARTICLE V  
112.500 - BUILDING LEADS 
 
112.501 - [Maintenance by property owner.] 
Sec. 1. All building leads from the Township Water System shall be owned, installed and maintained by the respective property owners.  
112.502 - [Installation.] 
Sec. 2. The installation of building leads and of modifications thereof and repairs thereto shall be in [the] charge of a master plumber who shall be responsible for the work, excepting only work authorized to be performed under a home owner's permit.  
112.503 - [Material standards.] 
Sec. 3. All building lead material shall meet the following standards: 
(a)	Building leads shall be a minimum size of one inch diameter.
(b)	Building leads shall be of the following materials:
Material	Working Pressure Rating
Polyethylene	160 psi
Polybutylene	160 psi
 
(c)	Polyethylene pipe materials shall conform to the latest versions of the AWWA-C901, ASTM D-1248, ASTM D-2239 and ASTM D-2737 standards. 
(d)	Polybutylene pipe materials shall conform to the latest revisions of the AWWA-C901, ASTM D-1248, ASTM D-2239 and ASTM D-2737 standards.  
112.504 - [Depth.] 
Sec. 4. The minimum depth of cover for building leads shall be five feet below the surface of the ground or the established street grade, whichever is lower.  
112.505 - [Placement.] 
Sec. 5. Building leads laid in the same trench with a sewer shall be at least three feet distant from the sewer horizontally, and if the sewer is laid at a greater depth than the building lead, the building lead shall be shelved into the bank to a solid bottom. A building lead shall not be laid on fill.  
112.506 - [Installation in driveway approach prohibited.] 
Sec. 6. A building lead shall not be installed in a driveway approach.  
112.507 - [Distance from other utility lines.] 
Sec. 7. The line of a building lead shall be at least five feet distant from underground gas, telephone, electricity and other utility lines.  
112.508 - [Placement in buildings.] 
Sec. 8. A building lead in the interior of a building shall not be placed on an outside wall or in any other position where damage by freezing could occur.  
112.509 - [Separate leads for each building; exceptions.] 
Sec. 9. A separate building lead shall be required for each building and any appurtenant outbuildings requesting water service on a parcel of land, except in the case of properties devoted to commercial and industrial uses where more than one building is located on a single parcel of land held in undivided ownership. In such cases, the several buildings so located may be served by one building lead, provided that: 
(a)	The lead is of sufficient size to meet all requirements for water, and
(b)	The manifold pipe attached to the building lead through which water is supplied to the several buildings shall be located off the public right-of-way. 
Where two or more such buildings are served by one building lead and ownership of the property on which they are located is subsequently divided, individual leads to the separate buildings shall then be installed.  
112.510 - [Permission required to cross highways, streets and alleys.] 
Sec. 10. Building leads shall not cross highways, streets or alleys without permission of the Township and any required permits from the County Road Commission and the Township.  
112.511 - [When meter and check valve required.] 
Sec. 11. Where properties are supplied by more than one building lead from different service leads or mains and connected inside the property, all building leads so connected must be provided with a meter and check valve properly maintained to prevent cross feeds, with waste-stop on bottom of pipe, each side of check valve, so as to drain pipes and meters.  
112.512 - [Outlets between meter and main prohibited.] 
Sec. 12. A plugged tee, or any other accessible outlet, shall in no event be installed between the meter and the main.  
112.513 - [Disconnection.] 
Sec. 13. All unused or abandoned building leads entering a property shall be disconnected at the curb box by the owner.  
112.514 - [Inspection.] 
Sec. 14. Underground piping and connections shall not be covered up or put into operation until the work has been inspected and approved by the Township. It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the permit to arrange for such inspection with the Township at least 24 hours before the inspection is to be made. Any part of the work that is found to be defective or unsafe will be rejected and shall be changed to comply with the requirement of the permit and this Ordinance before the same shall be put into use.  
ARTICLE VI  
112.600 - USE OF HYDRANTS 
 
112.601 - [Permit required.] 
Sec. 1. It shall be unlawful, except for the purposes of extinguishing fire by a regularly organized governmental Fire Department, to open any fire hydrant on the Township Water System, or to tamper with the same, or to use the water therefrom without having first procured a permit from the Township. No person shall in any manner obstruct the use of any fire hydrant in the Township, through placing or allowing to be placed any material or thing in front of it. Any such obstruction may be removed forthwith by the Township at the risk, cost and expense of the owner or claimant.  
112.602 - [Grant of permit.] 
Sec. 2. Permits for water service from a hydrant shall be granted by the Township only from specific hydrants at specific times and for specific purposes.  
112.603 - [Security deposit.] 
Sec. 3. Before a permit is issued for water service from a fire hydrant, the applicant therefor shall deposit with the Township an amount equal to: 
(a)	The estimated cost of the water to be used, plus
(b)	An additional amount as a security deposit against possible equipment damage determined as provided for in Article X [112.1000 et seq.] of this Ordinance. The applicant's deposit shall be held until all charges for water service have been fully paid and all equipment returned in good condition. The Township shall have the right to use any portion of a security deposit to repair or replace any equipment damaged by reason of the consumer's use thereof.  
112.604 - [Valve and meter required.] 
Sec. 4. Before there shall be any use of water from a fire hydrant, the discharge part shall be fitted with a valve and meter under the direction of the Township.  
112.605 - [Charges for damage.] 
Sec. 5. Damage to a fire hydrant resulting from its opening or closing with an improper wrench will be repaired and charged to the party causing damage.  
112.606 - [Duration of permit.] 
Sec. 6. Permits for use of fire hydrants during the period from April 15th to October 15th may be for periods of time as may be requested and specified. From October 15th to April 15th, permits will be issued on a day to day basis and the hydrant shall be pumped after each use, or at the end of the day, whichever may be necessary, depending on weather and need to prevent freezing.  
112.607 - [When master meter required; unmetered hydrants to be sealed.] 
Sec. 7. For the purpose of metering water taken from hydrants on private property, the Township may require that a master meter be installed prior to any service connection off the building lead. All unmetered hydrants on private property shall be sealed.  
ARTICLE VII  
112.700 - CROSS CONNECTIONS 
 
112.701 - [Private water systems.] 
Sec. 7.01. It shall be unlawful for any person to make or maintain any cross connection between the Township Water System and a private water supply or other water supply system. No person shall install or maintain a private well in the Township on property served by the Township Water System without first receiving a permit. Such permit shall be issued only if the Township determines that there is no possibility of introducing contaminated water, water of questionable quality, waste, or other contaminants into the Township Water System. 
(Ord. No. 1993-12, 11-10-93) 
112.702 - [State rules adopted by reference.] 
Sec. 7.02. The Township adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Public Health, being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Codes and a subsequent amendment thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1993-12, 11-10-93) 
112.703 - [Inspections.] 
Sec. 7.03. It shall be the duty of the Township Water Department, or its designee, to make inspections of all property served by the Township Water Supply System where a cross connection with the Township Water Supply System is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by Union Township and as approved by the Michigan Department of Public Health. 
(Ord. No. 1993-12, 11-10-93) 
112.704 - [Right of access.] 
Sec. 7.04. The representative of the Township Water Department shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any properties served by a connection to the Township Water System for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access when requested shall be deemed evidence of the presence of a cross connection. 
(Ord. No. 1993-12, 11-10-93) 
112.705 - [Disconnection for violations.] 
Sec. 7.05. The Union Township Water Department is authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this Ordinance exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the Township Water System. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1993-12, 11-10-93) 
112.706 - [Protection of water supply.] 
Sec. 7.06. That [sic] the potable water supply made available on the property served by the Township Water System shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by the Ordinance and by the State and Local Plumbing Codes. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as "WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING." 
(Ord. No. 1993-12, 11-10-93) 
112.707 - [Ordinance supplemental to other plumbing codes.] 
Sec. 7.07. This Ordinance shall not supersede the State Plumbing Code and/or Local Plumbing Ordinance, but is supplementary thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1993-12, 11-10-93) 
ARTICLE VIII  
112.800 - METERING OF WATER 
 
112.801 - [Meters required.] 
Sec. 1. All connections with the Township Water System, with the exception of fire hydrants and fire protection sprinkler systems, shall be prepared for the use of water through a meter. No water shall be supplied to a property unless it is measured by a water meter approved, supplied or installed by the Township. The Township will not be required to approve meters of a larger size than it determines to be necessary.  
112.802 - [Fire protection sprinkling systems.] 
Sec. 2. Water from a fire protection sprinkling system shall only be used in case of fire. A control valve for all fire protection sprinkler systems shall be located at the main, or as determined by the Township. A detector check meter shall be installed on all fire protection sprinkler systems.  
112.803 - [Placement of meters.] 
Sec. 3. All meters shall be set in clean, dry, sanitary places which are easily accessible. They shall not be placed in closets or other places that are kept locked or are difficult to get to. Where practical, a meter shall be installed within the building served, but where this is impractical, installation may be in a meter pit subject to the following provisions: 
(a)	All meter pits shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications furnished by the Township. Cover openings shall be directly over the meters. Devices designed to take the place of meter pits may be used if approved by the Township. The master plumber in charge of an installation shall be responsible for the condition of all meter pits. 
(b)	All meter pits on public or private property shall be constructed in locations free from hazards to pedestrian traffic. Meter pits shall not be located in or near doorways. In the event a building is altered and a door installed so that a previously installed meter pit is located in or near the doorway, the pit shall be relocated. 
(c)	The cost of construction of meter pits shall be borne by the property owner. 
112.804 - [Installation of meters.] 
Sec. 4. Meters three-quarters inch and one inch [in size] shall be installed by the Township after the property owner has provided a place at his own expense for setting the same. A template will be provided by the Township for the installation. Installation of meters in excess of one inch shall be in charge of the master plumber having responsibility for the work, except in the case of an installation made under a home owner's permit. All meters will be provided by the Township at a cost in accordance with Article X [112.1000 et seq.] of this Ordinance.  
112.805 - [Testing tees.] 
Sec. 5. All meters 1½ inch and larger, which do not have a test plug, shall have a tee between the meter and the outlet valve, to be used for testing the meter without its removal. The size of the side opening of this tee shall be 1½ inches for 1½-inch building leads, two inches for all building leads up to four inches and three inches for larger building leads, according to plans which will be supplied on request by the Township. The side opening of each tee shall be plugged.  
112.806 - [Gate valves.] 
Sec. 6. Gate valves shall be installed on the influent and effluent side of all meters. Gate valves shall be located so as to be readily accessible.  
112.807 - [Clearance distance.] 
Sec. 7. The clearance distance from a wall or other object to the center of a building lead at the meter shall not be less than as shown below: 
Meter Size	Clearance
5/8?, ¾?, 1?	5?
1½?	12?
2?	14?
 
Larger sizes shall be installed in accordance with specification furnished by the Township.  
112.808 - [Meters inside buildings.] 
Sec. 8. All meters located inside the building shall be provided with outside remote reading devices which shall be so located as to be readily accessible either on the front of the building or as near thereto on a side of the building as may be practicable. Where the location of a meter in a building is such that an uncovered cable cannot safely be run from it to the outside remote reading device, a metal conduit shall be installed to hold the cable. The metal conduit shall be one-half inch in size for three-quarters-inch to 1½-inch meters and shall be three-quarters inch in size for two-inch and larger meters and for compound meters. Specifications for the cable required will be furnished by the Township. Installation of metal conduits shall be the responsibility of the property owner.  
112.809 - [Charge to property owner.] 
Sec. 9. Unless otherwise approved in writing, all water meters and remote reading devices will be supplied through the Township. The cost thereof shall be charged to the property owner.  
112.810 - [Maintenance by Township.] 
Sec. 10. All meters shall be a part of the Township Water System and shall be maintained by the Township which shall make such periodic tests and repairs [as] it may determine to be necessary to assure correct registration. A property owner will be charged only for those repairs made necessary by damage caused by willful act or neglect such as failure to protect the meter from freezing temperatures or permitting a water heater to become overheated to the extent that the water is forced back through the line to the meter.  
112.811 - [Meter accuracy; refunds.] 
Sec. 11. The accuracy of a meter on any premises will be tested by the Township upon written request of the property owner accompanied by a fee in the amount as provided for in Article X [112.1000] of this Ordinance. If on such test the meter shall be found to register over four percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor and the fee will be refunded to the owner and the water bill may be adjusted in such a manner as may be fair and just. If on such test the meter shall be found to register less than four percent more water than actually passes through it, the fee will not be refunded.  
112.812 - [Tampering; unlawful by-pass.] 
Sec. 12. It shall be unlawful of any person to interfere with, or remove, a meter from any building lead connection. No person shall break, remove or tamper with any seal which is placed on any meter or by-pass valve by the Township. No person shall install or use any device which allows water to be used which does not pass through the meter.  
112.813 - [Property owner's responsibility.] 
Sec. 13. The owner of the property is responsible for the safe-keeping of meters installed on his premises, and shall, if a meter is lost or stolen from the premises, be charged with the actual cost of replacing the missing equipment.  
ARTICLE IX  
112.900 - SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
 
112.901 - [Installation.] 
Sec. 1. All fire protection sprinkler systems shall be installed according to Fire Underwriters Standard for Fire Systems.  
112.902 - [Detector check meters required.] 
Sec. 2. Detector check meters will be required on all fire protection sprinkler systems.  
112.903 - [Domestic waste service approval.] 
Sec. 3. Domestic waste service may be approved off of a building lead to a fire protection sprinkler system prior to a check valve provided in accordance with the Fire Underwriters' Standards.  
112.904 - [Tap in charge.] 
Sec. 4. There will be a tap in charge for hook up of all fire sprinkler systems. The tap in charge includes the tapping and installation of a service lead for the purpose of fire protection. The fee for this service will be charged on a time and material basis for all service lead sizes. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 4-28-93; Ord. No. 1995-2, 3-22-95; Ord. No. 1998-6, 3-25-98) 
ARTICLE X  
112.1000 - FEES AND CHARGES 
 
112.1001. - [Services and fees described.] 
Sec. 1. Permit and other fees, charges for services and equipment, security deposits, and rates for water shall be in the following amounts specified, or as from time to time hereafter [they shall] be amended, or as specified and provided for by resolution of the Township Board. 
A.	Hook-up fee. All premises within the Township shall pay a hook-up fee at the time of connection to the system in accordance with the following: 
One-inch service; $500.00. 
Fee for a service lead larger than one inch diameter will be charged on a time-and-material basis. 
The hook-up fee includes the tapping and installation of service lead in accordance in Section [Article] IV of this Ordinance [112.400] and the installation of a meter in accordance with Section [Article] VIII of this Ordinance [112.800]. In the event that the premises is already provided with a service lead, constructed in accordance with Section IV [112.400], the premises shall only be charged for the meter cost and installation portion of the hook-up fee. 
In a case where a premises is part of a residential subdivision for which a private individual has installed, at no cost to the Township, water lines, saddles, valves, and house leads in accordance with Township specifications and inspected and approved by Township personnel, the water hook-up fee shall be reduced to $150.00 for a five-eighths-inch meter and $200.00 for a one-inch meter. Any lateral fee required by this Ordinance will still be payable. 
B.	System benefit fee. System benefit fee shall mean the fee levied to pay for system facilities such as water supply wells, water treatment facilities, storage tanks, booster pump stations, and transmission lines which generally benefit all of the users of the system. 
There shall be paid a system benefit fee of $850.00 per single-family unit on behalf of each premises which after the effective date of this Ordinance connects to the water system. 
Parcels in the following special assessment districts shall not pay a system benefit fee on the first residential equivalent, however shall pay a system benefit fee on each residential equivalent thereafter: 
1.	East Water District 86-1-W.
2.	West Water District SAD #1987-1.
3.	Yates Drive Water District SAD #1987-5.
4.	Corporate Park District SAD #1988-7.
5.	Northside Water District SAD #1988-9.
6.	Southside Water District SAD #1988-10.
7.	High Street Water District SAD #1988-12.
The system benefit fee for other than a single-family residence shall be an amount as determined by multiplying the $850.00 system benefit fee by the factor provided for in Table I set forth in Section 7 of Article X of the Charter Township of Union Ordinance Number 1990-1 [112.1007] up to a maximum of ten single-family residential equivalents. The minimum fee for any premises shall not be less than the fee specified for a single-family residence. 
The system benefit fee shall be paid at the time of application for a permit to connect to the system except premises which are in existence prior to construction of the water line being tapped by the premises, which premises may pay the system benefit fee in five equal annual installments. All unpaid installments shall bear interest payable annually on each installment due date at eight percent per annum commencing from the date of application for a hook-up permit, with the first payment due September 1 following the date of application and subsequent installments due each September 1 thereafter until all installments are paid. Any installment not paid by the due date will be considered delinquent. The delinquent system benefit fees shall be transferred to the Township tax roll and shall constitute a lien upon the respective parcels of land. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created for general township taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. 
The system benefit fee may be payable over a period of ten years in ten equal annual installments for those users which have 25 or more residential equivalents. If such user elects to make annual installments, all unpaid installments shall bear interest payable annually on each installment due at eight percent per annum commencing from the date of application for a hook-up permit, with the first payment due September 1 following the date of application and subsequent installments due each September 1 thereafter until all installments are paid. Any installment not paid by the due date will be considered delinquent. The delinquent sewer benefit fees shall be transferred to the Township tax roll and shall constitute a lien upon the respective parcels of land. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created for general township taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. 
Subsequent changes in the character or use or type of occupancy of any premises, including destruction, removal, or abandonment of any or all improvements thereon, shall not abate the obligation to continue the payment of the system benefit fee if based on time payment as herein set forth applicable to said premises in the amount and for the period herein provided. If subsequent changes place said premises in a higher ratio-factor category set forth in Section 7 of Article X of the Charter Township of Union Ordinance Number 1990-1 [112.1007], the Township Board may, in its discretion, increase the number of units assigned to said premises and thereupon any additional charges occasioned by such increase shall be payable, in cash, at the time a construction permit or other permit is issued by the Township for such changes, or at the time such changes occur if no permit is issued or required. 
C.	Lateral fee. A lateral fee shall be charged in the amount specified for making a direct private service line connection or main extension from a main subject to a lateral fee as listed below. This charge is in addition to the other fees specified in this Article X [112.1000]. The lateral fee shall be based on the front footage of the premises or property served. In the case of a platted lot, it would be the entire lot frontage. If the premises occupied more than one lot, the lateral fee would be for the frontage of the lots occupied. If the premises are located on part of an unplatted parcel, the lateral fee would be based on the frontage occupied by the premises or the minimum lot widths required by the Zoning Ordinance, whichever is greater, except in an AG zone where 165 feet would be used as a minimum lot width. Should large unplatted parcels be assessed a lateral fee for only a portion of the parcel's frontage, the remaining unassessed portion shall be assessed a lateral fee should water service subsequently be rendered to that portion of the parcel unassessed. 
At the time of application for a hook-up, a lateral fee measured by the front footage abutting the line being tapped shall be charged and payable at the time the permit is applied for except premises which are in existence prior to construction of the water line which are in existence prior to construction of the water line which premises may pay the lateral fee in five equal annual installments. All unpaid installments shall bear interest payable annually on each installment due date at eight percent per annum commencing from the date of application for a hook-up permit with the first payment due September 1 following the date of application and subsequent installments due each September 1 thereafter until all installments are paid. Any installment not paid by the due date will be considered delinquent. The delinquent lateral charge shall be transferred to the Township's tax roll and shall constitute a lien upon the respective parcels of the land. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the line created for general Township taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. 
The following water mains shall be subject to a lateral fee in the amount specified: 
1.	A 12-inch water main running along Isabella Road from the Township's well and treatment site north along Isabella Road to High Street. 
Eighty feet of property or less: $1,440.00; provided, however, any property with abutting frontage which exceeds 80 feet shall pay an additional lateral fee of $18.00 per foot of abutting property in excess of 80 feet. 
2.	A 12-inch water main along Meridian Road north from the Township's well site to Pickard Road, thence along Pickard Road from Meridian Road east to the west line of Parcel No. 17-20-003-00 (approximately one-quarter of Lincoln Road) and the water main running north along Lincoln Road from Pickard Road approximately one-quarter mile to the south line of Parcel No. 9-300-006-01. 
Eighty feet of property or less: $1,600.00; provided, however, any property which abuts the frontage which exceeds 80 feet shall pay an additional lateral fee of $20.00 per foot of abutting property in excess of 80 feet. 
3.	A 12-inch water main running from Isabella Road west along Bluegrass Road to the east line of Parcel No. 26-300-002-00, thence south to the US-27 access road not including land in the South Side Water Special Assessment District No. 1988-10. Also, [on] a 12-inch water main along Deerfield Road from Mission Road west to Crawford Road, the lateral fee would only apply to the north side of Deerfield Road. 
Eighty feet of property or less: $2,450.00; provided, however, any property with abutting frontage which exceeds 80 feet shall pay an additional lateral fee of $30.00 per foot of abutting property in excess of 80 feet. 
4.	A 12-inch water main running along Bamber Road from the north line of O'Connor Subdivision north to River Road and thence east on River Road to the railroad on the north side of River Road and the west line of Parcel No. 10-200-005-00 on the south side of River Road; and 
East side of Mission Road from River Road to the north side of Parcel 14-02-30-007-00; and 
West side of Mission Road from Parcel 14-87-00-001-00 to the intersection of Craig Hill Road and Mission Road. 
Eighty feet of property or less: $1,920.00; provided, however, any property with abutting frontage which exceeds 80 feet shall pay an additional lateral fee of $24.00 per foot of abutting property in excess of 80 feet. 
5.	An eight-inch water main that serves Lots 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and the south 75 feet of Lot 6 and the south 82 feet of Lot 7, all in Block 1 of Ward's View Subdivision according to the plat recorded in Liber 3 of Plats, Page 159, Isabella County, and all premises on the south side of Ward Street between Elizabeth Street and Florence Street; and 
The north side of Pickard Road from the US-27 interchange access road east to the terminus of the water main which is just beyond Enterprise Drive; and 
Water main which serves the area within Blocks 1 and 2 of Neil's Subdivision according to the plat recorded in Liber 3 of Plats, Page 151, Isabella County records; and 
The water main along National Drive which is not included in special Assessment District No. 86-1-W including that part of Lots 5 and 6 lying south of US-27 freeway and Lots 7, 8, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 and 34 of Airport Acres Subdivision according to the plats recorded in Liber 3 of Plats, Page 285, Isabella County records; and 
An eight-inch water line from Pickard Road north on a private easement paralleling Packard Road to Corporate Way; thence west on Corporate Way to Park Place Street, thence north on Park Place 210 feet. 
Eighty feet of abutting property or less: $1,440.00; provided, however, any property with abutting property which exceeds 80 feet shall pay an additional lateral fee of $18.00 per foot of abutting property in excess of 80 feet. 
6.	Twelve-inch and eight-inch water mains located within the boundaries of the WDDA.
Eighty feet of property or less: $1,920.00; provided, however, any property with abutting frontage which exceeds 80 feet shall pay an additional lateral fee of $24.00 per foot of abutting property in excess of 80 feet. The foregoing lateral fee shall be paid by all properties connecting to the water mains within the WDDA boundaries which are not properties lying within the WDDA water SAD. 
7.	A 12-inch water main beginning at the west side of the intersection of Mission Road and East River Road; thence east and northeasterly along East River Road from said intersection to the US-27 Expressway. 
Eighty feet of abutting property or less: $1,920.00; provided, however, any property with abutting frontage which exceeds 80 feet shall pay an additional lateral fee of $24.00 per foot of abutting property in excess of 80 feet. 
8.	A lateral fee shall not be charged for making a direct private service line connection or main extension if the line being connected or the main being extended has been paid for by the property owner or their predecessor in interest if the private service line or main being connected is dedicated over to the Charter Township of Union for maintenance and control to be a part of the Township Water System. 
D.	Consumption charge. Costs for water consumption will be in accordance with the following: 
1.	Effective January, 1, 1999, there will be a minimum charge of $12.00 per month, per residential equivalent, which includes the first 5,000 gallons, per residential equivalent, of consumption per month. Additional usage above 5,000 gallons, per residential equivalent, shall be charged at the rate of $1.00 per 1,000 gallons. All single-family residences will be assigned one equivalent. Residential equivalents for all other users shall be determined by water usage. Those accounts without history shall have their residential equivalents determined by references to Table 1 set forth in Section 7 of Article X of the Charter Township of Union Ordinance No. 1990-1 until usage is calculated after six months' usage. That usage will be determined by reading the water meter. The reading will then be divided by six, averaging the monthly usage and dividing that figure by 5,000 gallons to arrive at the residential equivalents. All residential equivalents for all users other than single-family residences shall be re-evaluated on an annual basis by reading the water meter. The reading will then be divided by 12 averaging the monthly usage and dividing the figure by 5,000 gallons to arrive at the residential equivalent for the next 12-month period. 
2.	Effective January 1, 1993, water consumption will be charged at the rate of $0.84 per 1,000 gallons over 5,000 gallons per month. 
E.	Meter charge. Fee for three-quarters-inch meter and remote reader is included in the hook-up fee set forth in paragraph A. above. All larger meters will be provided on a cost plus ten percent basis; costs to include all materials and labor. 
F.	Turn-on and turn-off charges: 
1.	The following charges for a turn-on or turn-off of water for meter readings ordered by a customer are established: 
Turn-off during regular working hours .....$15.00 
Turn-on during regular working hours .....15.00 
Initial reading (without turn-off or on) .....15.00 
Final reading (without turn-off or on) .....15.00 
No turn-on or turn-off, or initial or final readings will be made after regular working hours, except under unusual conditions. The fee for such service will be .....30.00 
2.	Turn-on and turn-off of delinquent account:
During regular hours .....$15.00 
After hours .....30.00 
G.	Fire hydrant use and permit:
Fire hydrant permit from April 15th to October 15th: 
Use of each hydrant with 15,000 gallons of water .....$ 50.00 
Fire hydrant permit from October 16th to April 14th: 
Use of each hydrant with 15,000 gallons of water .....50.00 
Additional per day use charge .....10.00 
Deposit for use of hydrant equipment: 
¾-inch meter and hydrant wrench .....125.00 
Two-inch meter and hydrant wrench .....300.00 
Any damage to equipment or hydrant will be deducted from the deposit. 
All hydrant use permits will be limited to 30 days. Water consumption in excess of the 15,000 gallons specified in the permit will be charged for at the normal rate. 
H.	Testing meters: 
1.	¾-inch and one-inch meter .....$25.00 
2.	Larger meters, time plus 15 percent.
(Ord. No. 1988-4, 3-30-88; Ord. No. 1988-5, 4-13-88; Ord. No. 1988-7, 9-14-88; Ord. No. 1988-10, 12-14-88; Ord. No. 1989-4, 3-8-89; Ord. No. 1990-1, 1-18-90; Ord. No. 1990-7, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 1991-9, 7-10-91; Ord. No. 1991-15, 10-9-91; Ord. No. 1992-8, 11-11-92; Ord. No. 1993-7, 7-1-93; Ord. No. 1994-4, 8-24-94; Ord. No. 1994-7, 12-28-94; Ord. No. 1995-8, 11-29-95; Ord. No. 1997-4, 1-29-97; Ord. No. 1998-19, 12-9-98; Ord. No. 2001-08, 12-12-01)  
112.1001.1 - [Bulk water to fill swimming pools.] 
Sec. 1.1. Permit requirements. Prior to obtaining the bulk water to fill a swimming pool a bulk water permit must be obtained from the Union Township Utility Department and a bulk water permit agreement must be signed. These permits may be obtained between April 15th and October 15th at the Union Township Hall. Permits for the filling of swimming pools will only be given to licensed milk haulers who shall use only milk trailers which have not been used to haul hazardous materials or other substances which may cause contamination of the Township well. 
Sec. 1.2. Fees, costs, and deposits. There shall be a $300.00 deposit for the use of the two-inch meter and Township water equipment. Any damage to the equipment or meter will be deducted from the refundable deposit. The use of the meter and 15,000 gallons of water per pool shall be $50.00. Water consumption in excess of this 15,000 gallons shall be charged at $1.50 per 1,000 gallons. Drop tickets shall be left at the meter site with a before and after meter reading. The meter will be read by the Utility Maintenance Supervisor daily. Water charged will be billed to the permit holder or deducted from the deposit when the permit expires. 
Sec. 1.3. Liability and damage. The permit holder shall be responsible for any and all damage or liability of any kind that arises from the use of the Township's water, meter, and water equipment. The permit holder shall hold the Township harmless from any damage or liability. 
(Ord. No. 1991-7, 5-22-91) 
112.1002 - [Billing.] 
Sec. 2. Billing will be rendered quarterly on January 1st, April 1st, July 1st, and October 1st. Bills are payable without penalty within 35 days of the mailing date. Payments received after such period shall bear a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the bill. 
(Ord. No. 1990-1, 1-18-90) 
112.1003 - [Special services.] 
Sec. 3. For miscellaneous or special services for which a special rate shall be established, such rates shall be fixed by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 1990-1, 1-18-90) 
112.1004 - [Delinquent charges constitute lien.] 
Sec. 4. The charges for services which are hereunder and under the provisions of Section 21, Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, are made a lien on all premises served thereby, and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six months, the Township official or officials in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually, on September 1st of each year, to the tax-assessing officer of the Township the facts of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be by him entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general Township taxes against such premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced. In addition to the foregoing, the Township shall have the right to shut off water service to any premises for which charges for water service are more than 30 days delinquent, and such service shall not be reestablished until all delinquent charges and penalties and a turn-on charge, to be specified by the Township Board, have been paid. Further, such charges and penalties may be recovered by the Township by court action. 
(Ord. No. 1990-1, 1-18-90; Ord. No. 1998-7, 3-25-98) 
112.1005 - [Free service.] 
Sec. 5. No free service shall be furnished by said System to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
(Ord. No. 1990-1, 1-18-90) 
112.1006 - [Connection with System required.] 
Sec. 6. All premises within the Township which seek a building permit for new construction or development shall hook into the Township water system and shall not drill wells for the supply of water, provided water service is available to the property. Available shall mean that a water main or transmission line which [sic] is within 200 feet of single-family residential construction and within 1,000 feet of a subdivision development, commercial multi-user construction, or other multi-user construction or development. 
(Ord. No. 1990-1, 1-18-90) 
112.1007 - [Schedule of residential equivalents.] 
Sec. 7.  
Table 1. - Schedule of Residential Equivalents 
Use	Single-Family Residential Equivalent
1. Apartments	1.0 per unit
2. Auto dealers	0.30 per service stall
3. Banks	0.50 per 1,000 sq. ft.
4. Barber shops	1.0 per shop, plus 0.10 per chair
5. Bar	0.025 per seat
6. Beauty shops 	1.0 per shop, plus 0.10 per chair
7. Car wash 	12.0 per lane, attendant-operated
	1.0 per stall, coin-operated
8. Churches	1.0 plus 0.10 per 1,000 sq. ft.
9. Cleaners	1.5 per 1,000 sq. ft., plus 2.0 per press
10. Clothing or shoe stores, men's and women's	0.50 per 1,000 sq. ft.
11. Clinics, medical or dental	1.0 per doctor
12. Convalescent or nursing home	0.22 per bed
13. Drapery shop or fabric retail store	0.50 per 1,000 sq. ft.
14. Drug store	0.75 per 1,000 sq. ft.
15. Efficiency apartments 	0.50 per unit
16. Factories, exclusive of industrial water 	0.50 per 1,000 sq. ft., plus industrial process water
17. Fraternal organizations 	1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
18. Gift shop	1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
19. Grocery store 	1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft.
20. Meat markets or produce markets 	2.5 per 1,000 sq. ft.
21. Hotels or motels	0.25 per unit, plus restaurant, bar and meeting facilities at respective unit factors
22. Laundry, self-service	0.50 per washer
23. Mobile home park	1.0 per trailer space
24. Mobile home park with privately owned and maintained distribution system	0.7111 per trailer space
25. Office building	0.50 per 1,000 sq. ft.
26. Restaurants, food and beverage	0.0775 per seat
27. Restaurants, food only	0.0525 per seat
28. Schools	0.67 per classroom
29. Service stations	0.140 per pump
30. Snack bars, drive-in restaurants 	0.10 per seat and/or stall
31. Stores - Other than Listed 	1.0 per 6.6 full-time employees
32. Theaters - Drive in 	0.008 per car space
33. Warehouse 	0.10 per 1,000 sq. ft.
34. Single-Family Residence	1.0 per residence
35. Two-Family Residence	1.0 per residence
36. Motel Units with Complete Kitchen Facilities	0.50 per unit
 
Note: Minimum equivalent per customer shall not be less than 1.0. 
For any use not specifically stated above, the residential equivalent shall be based on a similar use with water usage as indicated above. 
(Ord. No. 1990-1, 1-18-90; Ord. No. 1990-2, 3-14-90) 
ARTICLE XA  
112.1000A - CONNECTION TO TOWNSHIP WATER SYSTEM 
 
112.1001.1A - Findings. 
Sec. 1.1. A public water System is essential to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Township. Mandatory hook-ups to the Township Water System are necessary to ensure the orderly development and growth of the Township and of the Township's Water System so that the Water System can adequately service existing uses and new development. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 7-12-95) 
112.1001.2A - Disconnection from System. 
Sec. 1.2. No owner or occupant of any premises supplied with water from the Township Water System shall be allowed to disconnect therefrom and construct a new private water system or construct a private well. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 7-12-95) 
112.1001.3A - Mandatory hook-up. 
Sec. 1.3. Any owner or occupant of premises located within the Charter Township of Union, who is currently served by a private well shall be allowed to continue to utilize that private well. The owner or occupant shall be allowed to make repairs to the existing private well, and shall be allowed to drill a new well unless the Township Water Supply System is located in a right-of-way, easement, highway or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts upon property passing not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure to be served by water at the time that drilling a new well becomes necessary. If, at the time of drilling a new well [it] becomes necessary to maintain the water supply to the premises, the Township Water Supply System is located in a right-of-way, easement, highway or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts upon property passing not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure to be served by water, then the owner or occupant shall be required to connect to the Township Water System. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit continued use of or drilling of a new well exclusively for nonhuman consumption, agricultural uses, or for residential uses such as lawn sprinkling. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 7-12-95) 
ARTICLE XI  
112.1100 - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS 
 
112.1101 - [Right to enter, require or make repairs; identification.] 
Sec. 1. Duly authorized employees of the Township shall have power and authority at all reasonable hours to enter upon any premises where water service is established for the purpose of testing, changing, or reading water meters, or for making general inspections of usage, wastage, etc., and making an examination of all pipes and fixtures connected with the said water works. They shall have power and authority to require any pipes and fixtures to be repaired, removed, replaced or changed where the same are defective or not in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, and they may make such alterations and repairs or do such other acts with relation thereto as they shall deem necessary. Employees engaged in such work shall be furnished with and shall prominently display appropriate evidence of identification.  
112.1102 - [Observance of safety rules.] 
Sec. 2. While performing any necessary work on private properties referred to in Section 1 [112.1101] above, the duly authorized employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner thereof and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to such employees, except as such may be caused by the negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe working conditions.  
112.1103 - [Inspection.] 
Sec. 3. All work performed in making additions, connections, repairs, extensions or alterations of the Township Water System or of any water lines and appurtenances connected or to be connected thereto shall be subject to inspection by the Township which may order any part of such work discontinued or changed to comply with this Ordinance.  
ARTICLE XII  
112.1200 - INTERRUPTIONS OF WATER SUPPLY 
 
112.1201 - Authority. 
Sec. 1. The Township may interrupt the supply of water in any area served by the Township Water System for purposes of maintenance work, the making of repairs or modifications of the System, or to correct any conditions that may pose a hazard to the public health or to the proper functioning of the System.  
112.1202 - [Notice.] 
Sec. 2. Wherever possible the Township will give advance notice to water users of interruptions in water service or curtailments of the supply of water.  
112.1203 - [Liability.] 
Sec. 3. The Township does not assume any liability for loss or damage occasioned by interruptions in water service or curtailments in the supply of water.  
ARTICLE XIII  
112.1300 - REMEDIES AND PENALTIES 
 
112.1301 - [Notice of violation.] 
Sec. 1. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance, except the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 [112.1303 and 112.1304] of this Article XIII, shall be served by the Township with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.  
112.1302 - [Continuing violations.] 
Sec. 2. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Section 1 [112.1301] of this Article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.  
112.1303 - [Penalty for damaging, tampering with system.] 
Sec. 3. Any person who shall willfully, maliciously or wantonly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, remove or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, pipe, valve, pumping station, or other equipment or installation that is a part of the Township Water System shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County jail not to exceed 90 days, or by fine not exceeding $500.00, or by both such imprisonment and fine.  
112.1304 - [Penalty for misrepresentation.] 
Sec. 4. Any person who shall intentionally make a false statement, representation or certification in an application for a permit or in any report or statement of information required under this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the County jail not to exceed 90 days, or by fine not exceeding $500.00, or by both such imprisonment and fine.  
112.1305 - [Shut-off of water supply after notice.] 
Sec. 5. The Township may shut off the supply of Township water to a property if: 
(a)	It finds that any water lines, connections or appurtenances on the property are defective and fail to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance; and 
(b)	The owner, after written notice as provided for in Section 1 [112.1301] of this Article, fails within the time limited in the notice to correct the defects and make the changes or repairs required for compliance with this Ordinance.  
112.1306 - [Immediate water supply shut-off.] 
Sec. 6. The Township shall, without prior notice, shut off the supply of Township water to a property if it finds that conditions existing with respect to any water lines, connections or appurtenances on a property are such as to pose an immediate hazard to the public health or damage to the Township Water System.  
ARTICLE XIV  
112.1400 - VALIDITY 
 
112.1401 - [Repealer.] 
Sec. 1. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
112.1402 - [Severability.] 
Sec. 2. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this Ordinance which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.  
ARTICLE XV  
112.1500 - EFFECTIVE DATE 
 
112.1501 - [Adoption date.] 
Sec. 1. This Ordinance was passed by the Township Board of The Township of Union on December 9, 1987.  
112.1502 - [Effective date.] 
Sec. 2. This Ordinance shall take effect on February 12, 1988.  
113.000 - UTILITY LINE ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1992-12 Adopted: November 11, 1992 
An Ordinance to regulate the use of above ground utility lines in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
 
113.001 - Title. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Underground Utility Line Ordinance."  
113.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate and control the location of utility lines within an area of Union Township known as the East Downtown Development District along the Pickard Road right-of-way extending from the city limits of Mt. Pleasant east to Summerton Road, in order to promote the public safety, health, and general welfare.  
113.003 - Authority. 
Sec. III. This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by MCLA 41.181 and 41.184, as amended, which authorizes township boards to adopt ordinances to secure the public health, safety, and general welfare.  
113.004 - Underground utility lines.  
113.004.1 - [Definition.] 
Sec. IV. 
Sec. 1. Poles, overhead wires and associated structures shall mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located above-ground and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.  
113.004.2 - Unlawful acts. 
Sec. 2. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, company, utility, or other such entity, to erect, construct, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the area known as the East Downtown Development District along the Pickard Road right-of-way extending from the city limits of Mt. Pleasant east to Summerton Road after the effective date of this Ordinance.  
113.004.3 - Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances. 
Sec. 3. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Ordinance, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer in order to provide emergency service. The Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer may grant special permission, on such terms as are appropriate, in cases of emergency or unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures.  
113.004.4 - Other exceptions. 
Sec. 4. This Ordinance shall not apply to the following types of facilities: 
(a)	Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer. 
(b)	Poles or lamps used exclusively for street lighting.
(c)	Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing through a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited. 
(d)	Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages not in excess of 34,500 volts. 
(e)	Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or extending from the building to another building without crossing any public street. 
(f)	Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services. 
(g)	Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
(h)	Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(i)	Overhead wires originating from outside the district which connect to buildings on the perimeter of such district, provided such overhead wires shall not cross any street within the district. 
(j)	This Ordinance shall also not apply to the following currently existing structures within Union Township in the East Downtown Development District along the Pickard Road right-of-way extending from the city limits of Mt. Pleasant east to Summerton Road: 
One single-phase crossing. 
Two open wye crossing three-phase. 
Four closed wye crossing three-phase. 
Seven secondary crossings. 
One 46,000 volt sub. transmission crossing. 
Six span guy crossings. 
One center suspension streetlight. 
16 center suspension streetlight. 
16 poles in M-20 right-of-way. 
One center suspension support. 
The overhang of one 46,000-volt wire on the north side of M-20 between Isabella Road and Belmont Drive. 
The overhang of one three-phase distribution line starting at Summerton Road and running west on either side of M-20 to Pickard Street.  
113.004.5 - [Exceptions.] 
Sec. 5. Should a public utility determine that they must build additional lines overhead and should that utility determine that they cannot require that cost to be borne by the utility's customers, then the Township Board shall have the option, upon request of the utility, [to make an exception] from the prohibitions of this Ordinance or to pay for the additional cost associated with placement of the line underground.  
113.005 - Enforcement and penalties for failure to comply with this Ordinance. 
Sec. V. Any person who shall violate any of the terms of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both, plus costs of prosecution. Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall prevent the Township Board, public official, or private citizen from taking lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this Ordinance.  
113.006 - Severability. 
Sec. VI. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
113.007 - Effective date; [repealer]. 
Sec. VII. This Ordinance will take effect 30 days after publication. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
114.00 - PRETREATMENT ORDINANCE Ordinance 2006-09 Adopted October 11, 2006 
 
114.001 - General provisions. 
Sec. 1. 
1.1 Purpose and policy. This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant for the Charter Township of Union to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this ordinance are: 
A.	To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant that will interfere with its operation; 
B.	To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant that will pass through the Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant; 
C.	To protect both Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
D.	To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant; 
E.	To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant; and 
F.	To enable the Charter Township of Union to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant is subject. 
This ordinance shall apply to all users of the Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant. The ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
1.2 Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may be delegated by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent to other Township personnel. 
1.3 Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this ordinance, shall have the designated meanings: 
• BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
• CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
• COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand 
• EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
• gpd - gallons per day 
• mg/l - milligrams per liter 
• NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
• WWTP - Publicly Owned Waste Water Treatment Plant 
• RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
• SIC - Standard Industrial Classification 
• TSS - Total Suspended Solids 
• U.S.C. - United States Code 
1.4 Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
A.	Act or the act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 6 1251 CI seq. 
B.	Approval authority. State of Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
C.	Authorized representative of the user. Charter Township of Union Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent or their designee. 
D.	Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
E.	Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 6 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
F.	Charter Township of Union. The Township Board of Trustees, and their duly appointed representative(s). 
G.	Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
H.	Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
I.	Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
J.	Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the WWTP from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
K.	Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
L.	Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the WWTP its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the Charter Township of Union NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and sanctuaries Act. 
M.	Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis waste. 
N.	New source. 
(1)	Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(a)	The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(b)	The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(c)	The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)	Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of Section (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)	Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(a)	Begun, or causal to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction
(i)	any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(ii)	significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(b)	Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
O.	Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
P.	Pass through. A discharge which exits the WWTP into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Charter Township of Union's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Q.	Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities. 
R.	pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
S.	Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
T.	Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the WWTP or collection system. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
U.	Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
V.	Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
W.	Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 2.1 of this ordinance. 
X.	Publicly owned waste water treatment plant or WWTP. A Waste Water Treatment Plant, as defined by Section 2.12 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned by the Charter Township of Union. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Y.	Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Z.	Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
AA.	Significant industrial user. 
1.	A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
2.	A user that:
a.	Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the WWTP (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.	Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the WWTP treatment plant; or 
c.	Is designated as such by the Charter Township of Union on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WWTP's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
3.	Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection 2. has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WWTP's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Charter Township of Union may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
BB.	Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 2.1 of this ordinance. 
CC.	Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
DD.	Stormwater. Any flow during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
EE.	Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent. The person designated by the Charter Township of Union to supervise the operation of the WWTP, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this ordinance, or a duly authorized representative. 
FF.	Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
GG.	User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
HH.	Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the WWTP. 
II.	Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the WWTP which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.  
114.002 - General sewer use requirements. 
Sec. 2. 
2.1 Prohibited discharge standards. 
A.	General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the WWTP any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the WWTP whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other National, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
B.	Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the WWTP the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)	Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the WWTP, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)	Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or higher than 9.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the WWTP or equipment; 
(3)	Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the WWTP resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than ½ inches in any dimension; 
(4)	Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the WWTP; 
(5)	Wastewater having a temperature not less than 32°F or greater than 150°F, or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C); 
(6)	Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)	Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the WWTP in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)	Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent in accordance with Section 3.4 of this ordinance; 
(9)	Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)	Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the Charter Township of Union's NPDES permit; 
(11)	Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations; 
(12)	Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent; 
(13)	Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
(14)	Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)	Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)	Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the WWTP; 
(17)	Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100mg/l; or 
(18)	Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the WWTP, or at any point in the WWTP, of more than fifty percent (50%) or any single reading over seventy five percent (75%) of the Lower Explosive Limit of the meter. 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the WWTP. 
2.2 National categorical pretreatment standards. 
A.	Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
B.	When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not pretreated by the same standard, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
C.	A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
D.	A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
2.3 State pretreatment standards. State pretreatment standards located in the Michigan Administrative Code (Part 23 Rules), Rules 323.2301 through Rules 323.2317 and the State approved Michigan Industrial Pretreatment Program are hereby incorporated. 
2.4 Local limits. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following: 
4.8 - mg/l arsenic 
1.055 - mg/l cadmium 
6.460 - mg/l chromium 
5.069 - mg/l copper 
2.112 - mg/l cyanide 
6.456 - mg/l lead 
0.112 - mg/l mercury 
87.754 - mg/l nickel 
1.750 - mg/l selenium 
0.053 - mg/l silver 
30.382 - mg/l zinc 
671.98 - mg/l molybdenum 
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the WWTP. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. 
2.5 Charter Township of Union's Right of Revision. The Charter Township of Union reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the WWTP. 
2.6 Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The Charter Township of Union WWTP Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.  
114.003 - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
Sec. 3. 
3.1 Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Section 2.1 of this ordinance within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the Charter Township of Union under the provisions of this ordinance. 
3.2 Additional pretreatment measures. 
A.	Whenever deemed necessary, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the WWTP and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
B.	The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require any person discharging into the WWTP to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
C.	Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
D.	Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
3.3 Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two (2) years, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
A.	Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
B.	Description of stored chemicals;
C.	Procedures for immediately notifying the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section 6.6 of this ordinance; and 
D.	Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
3.4 Hauled wastewater. 
A.	Septic tank waste may be introduced into the WWTP only at locations designated by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent, and at such times as are established by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent. Such waste shall not violate Section 2 of this ordinance or any other requirements established by the Charter Township of Union. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of septic tank waste. 
B.	The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this ordinance. 
C.	Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
D.	Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.  
114.004 - Wastewater discharge permit application. 
Sec. 4. 
4.1 Wastewater analysis. When requested by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within (3) days of the request. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
4.2 Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
A.	No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the WWTP without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to Section 4.3 of this ordinance may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
B.	The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance. 
C.	Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections 10 through 12 of this ordinance. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State, and local law. 
4.3 Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the WWTP prior to the effective date of this ordinance and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within thirty (30) days after said date, apply to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the WWTP to continue after ninety (90) days of the effective date of this ordinance except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent. 
4.4 Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the WWTP must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance, must be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
4.5 Wastewater discharge permit application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
A.	All information required by Section 6.1(B) of this ordinance;
B.	Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the WWTP; 
C.	Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
D.	Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
E.	Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
F.	Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
G.	Time and duration of discharges; and
H.	Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
4.6 Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the System, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
4.7 Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent will evaluate the date furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.  
114.005 - Wastewater discharge permit issuance process. 
Sec. 5. 
5.1 Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three (3) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than three (3) years, at the discretion of the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
5.2 Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the WWTP. 
A.	Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1)	A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed three (3) years; 
(2)	A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the Charter Township of Union in accordance with Section 5.5 of this ordinance, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)	Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
(4)	Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law; and 
(5)	A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law. 
B.	Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)	Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)	Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Waste Water Treatment Plant; 
(3)	Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
(4)	Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the WWTP; 
(5)	The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the WWTP; 
(6)	Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(7)	A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
(8)	Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent to ensure compliance with this ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations. 5.3 Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals 
5.3 Wastewater discharge permit appeals. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within ten (10) days of notice of its issuance. 
A.	Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
B.	In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
C.	The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
D.	If the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
E.	Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Circuit Court, for Isabella County within seven days. 
5.4 Wastewater discharge permit modification. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
A.	To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
B.	To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
C.	A change in the WWTP that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
D.	Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the Charter Township of Union's WWTP, Charter Township of Union personnel, or the receiving waters; 
E.	Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
F.	Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
G.	Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
H.	To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
I.	To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator.
5.5 Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent and the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
A.	States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
B.	Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
C.	Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
5.6 Wastewater discharge permit revocation. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
A.	Failure to notify the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
B.	Failure to provide prior notification to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to Section 6.5 of this ordinance; 
C.	Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
D.	Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
E.	Tampering with monitoring equipment;
F.	Refusing to allow the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records; 
G.	Failure to meet effluent limitations;
H.	Failure to pay fines;
I.	Failure to pay sewer charges;
J.	Failure to meet compliance schedules;
K.	Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
L.	Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
M.	Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
5.7 Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance, a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
5.8 Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
A.	If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the WWTP, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
B.	Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph A, above, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)	A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the WWTP by the contributing municipality; 
(2)	An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the WWTP; and 
(3)	Such other information as the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may deem necessary. 
C.	An intermunicipal agreement, as required by paragraph A, above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)	A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this ordinance and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in Section 2.4 of this ordinance. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the Charter Township of Union's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)	A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)	A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent; 
(4)	A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)	Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the WWTP; 
(6)	Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge;
(7)	A provision ensuring the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent; and 
(8)	A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement.  
114.006 - Reporting requirements. 
Sec. 6. 
6.1 Baseline monitoring reports 
A.	Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 4036(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the WWTP shall submit to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent a report which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent a report which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
B.	Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(1)	Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)	Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)	Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the WWTP from the regulated processes. 
(4)	Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the WWTP from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)	Measurement of Pollutants.
(a)	The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
(b)	The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 6.10 of this ordinance. 
(c)	Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 6.11 of this ordinance. 
(6)	Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)	Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section 6.2 of this ordinance. 
(8)	Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 4.6 of this ordinance. 
6.2 Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section 6.1(B)(7) of this ordinance: 
A.	The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but arc not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
B.	No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
C.	The user shall submit a progress report to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
D.	In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent. 
6.3 Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the WWTP, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent a report containing the information described in Section 6.1(B)(4—6) of this ordinance. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403&c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 4.6 of this ordinance. 
6.4 Periodic compliance reports. 
A.	All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 4.6 of this ordinance. 
B.	All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operating, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
C.	If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in Section 6.11 of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
6.5 Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. 
A.	The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 4.5 of this ordinance. 
B.	The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 4.7 of this ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 5.4 of this ordinance in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
C.	For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
6.6 Reports of potential problems. 
A.	In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the WWTP, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
B.	Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WWTP, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this ordinance. 
C.	A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph A, above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
6.7 Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent as the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require. 
6.8 Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
6.09 Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
6.10 Sample collection. 
A.	Except as indicated in Section B, below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
B.	Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
6.11 Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
6.12 Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this ordinance and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the Charter Township of Union, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent.  
114.007 - Compliance monitoring. 
Sec. 7. 
7.1 Right of entry: inspection and sampling. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
A.	Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
B.	The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
C.	The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy. 
D.	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
E.	Unreasonable delays in allowing the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this ordinance. 
7.2 Search warrants. If the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the Charter Township of Union designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Circuit Court of Isabella County, Michigan.  
114.008 - Confidential information. 
Sec. 8. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.  
114.009 - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
Sec. 9. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the WWTP is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
A.	Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six- (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
B.	Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six- (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
C.	Any other discharge violation that the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of WWTP personnel or the general public; 
D.	Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
E.	Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
F.	Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
G.	Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H.	Any other violation(s) which the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.  
114.010 - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
Sec. 10. 
10.1 Notification of violation. When the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may serve upon that user a written Notice of Violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a Notice of Violation. 
10.2 Consent orders. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may enter into Consent Orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 10.4 and 10.5 of this ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable. 
10.3 Show cause hearing. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
10.4 Compliance orders. When the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
10.5 Cease and desist orders. When the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations arc likely to recur, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
A.	Immediately comply with all requirements; and
B.	Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
10.6 Administrative fines. 
A.	When the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may fine such user in an amount not to exceed five thousand ($5,000) dollars. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
B.	Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of $500.00 plus cost and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of seven percent (7%) per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
C.	Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for (the Superintendent) to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten (10) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
D.	Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
10.7 Emergency suspensions. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the WWTP, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
A.	Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the WWTP, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 10.8 of this ordinance are initiated against the user. 
B.	A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections 10.3 or 10.8 of this ordinance. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
10.8 Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in Section 5.6 of this ordinance, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
A.	Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
B.	Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
C.	Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
D.	Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
E.	Violation of the pretreatment standards in Section 2 of this ordinance.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 10.3 of this ordinance why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.  
114.011 - Judicial, enforcement remedies. 
11.1 Injunctive relief. When the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may petition the Circuit Court of Isabella County, Michigan through the Township's Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
11.2 Civil penalties. 
A.	A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the Township for a maximum civil penalty of five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
B.	The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the Township. 
C.	In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
D.	Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
11.3 Criminal prosecution. 
A.	A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 93 days, or both. 
B.	A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the WWTP which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least five hundred ($500.00) dollars, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 93 days, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under State law. 
C.	A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than five thousand ($500.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 93 days, or both. 
D.	In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than five thousand ($500.00) dollars per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 93 days, or both. 
11.4 Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this ordinance are not exclusive. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Charter Township of Union's enforcement response plan. However, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.  
114.012 - Supplemental enforcement action. 
Sec. 12. 
12.1 Performance bonds. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the Charter Township of Union, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
12.2 Liability insurance. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the WWTP caused by its discharge. 
12.3 Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
12.4 Public nuisance. A violation of any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the Charter Township of Union Ordinance 1999-02 Civil Infraction Ordinance governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the Charter Township of Union for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.  
114.013 - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
Sec. 13. 
13.1 Upset. 
A.	For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
B.	An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (C), below, are met. 
C.	A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)	An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(2)	The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)	The user has submitted the following information to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset [if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days: 
(a)	A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(b)	The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(c)	Steps being taken and/or planned to rake, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
D.	In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
E.	Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
F.	Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
13.2 Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section 2.1(A) of this ordinance or the specific prohibitions in Sections 2.1(B)(3) through (18) of this ordinance if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
A.	A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
B.	No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the Charter Township of Union was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
13.3 Bypass. 
A.	For the purposes of this section,
(1)	"Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)	"Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
B.	A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
C.	(1)	If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)	A user shall submit oral notice to the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
D.	(1)	Bypass is prohibited, and The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(a)	Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(b)	There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(c)	The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (C) of this section.
(2)	The Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent may approve anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the Waste Water Treatment Plant Superintendent determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (D)(1) of this section.  
114.014 - Wastewater treatment rates. 
Sec. 14. The Charter Township may adopt Wastewater Treatment Rates for the treatment of wastewater which contains pollutants that are over the local limits specified by this Ordinance. These will be adopted by the Township Board of Trustees as necessary.  
114.015 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
Sec. 15. 
15.1 Pretreatment charges and fees. The Charter Township of Union may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Charter Township of Union's Pretreatment Program which may include: 
A.	Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
B.	Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
C.	Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
D.	Fees for filing appeals; and
D.	Other fees as the Charter Township of Union may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this ordinance and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the Charter Township of Union. 
Section 15.2 Severability. The various sections and provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section of this Ordinance be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section or provision of this Ordinance other than the Section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
114.016 - Effective date. 
Sec. 16. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately following its passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law.  
125.000 - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE Ord. No. 2014-05 Adopted December 18, 2014 
An Ordinance to adopt the 2012 edition of the International Fire Code, to regulate and safeguard life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises within the Township; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, HEREBY ORDAINS:
 
125.001 - Adoption of International Fire Code. 
Sec. 1. A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Township Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix Chapters A—G, as published by the International Code Council ("Fire Code"), is hereby adopted as the fire code of the Township regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as is fully set out in this Ordinance, as modified by the provisions of Section 2 of this Ordinance.  
125.002 - Modifications of Fire Code. 
Sec. 2. 
(a)	The following sections of the Fire Code are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: Charter Township of Union, Michigan. 
Section 109.3. Insert: [Municipal Civil Infraction; fines not to exceed $500.00, plus the costs and expenses of prosecution and enforcement.] 
Section 111.4. Insert: [$500.00, plus the costs and expenses of prosecution and enforcement.] 
(b)	The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the Fire Code are hereby established as follows: 
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 {geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): Entire Township. 
Section 5706.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): Entire Township. 
Section 5806.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited): Entire Township. 
Section 6104.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas): Entire Township. 
(c)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in the Fire Code, each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance. 
(d)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in the Fire Code, the Township shall have the right to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restricting order or other appropriate remedy to enforce or compel compliance with this Ordinance.  
125.003 - Severability. 
Sec. 3. Should any section, clause or provision of this Ordinance be declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any other part thereof than the parts so declared to be invalid.  
125.004 - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
Sec. 4. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith, including but not limited to Ordinance 2008-04, are hereby repealed.  
125.005 - Effective date. 
Sec. 5. This ordinance shall take effect 30 days after its adoption.  
126.000 - GRASS CLIPPING AND LEAF BURNING ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1992-5 Adopted: July 22, 1992 
 
126.001 - Title. 
Sec. 1.0. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Union Township Grass Clipping and Leaf Burning Ordinance."  
126.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. 2.0. Pursuant to the authority granted at MCL 299.418(b) the Charter Township of Union hereby ordains as follows: 
It shall be lawful within the Charter Township of Union for residents to engage in the open burning of grass clippings or leaves or both.  
126.003 - Severability. 
Sec. 3.0. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
126.004 - Effective date. 
Sec. 4.0. This Ordinance will take effect 30 days after publication.  
126.005 - Repealer. 
[Sec. 5.0.] All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
127.000 - NOXIOUS WEEDS ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1998-5 Adopted: March 25, 1998 
An Ordinance requiring that property owners ensure that grass and weeds are maintained to a height of less than 12 inches, and providing the Township the authority to effect such maintenance, at the expense of the property owner. 
The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, hereby ordains:
 
127.001 - Scope. 
Sec. I. 
A.	No owner, or his/her agent, of any property within the Charter Township of Union shall permit the growing or placement of weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths or other obnoxious plant matter in excess of 12 inches in height. 
B.	The Zoning Administrator is authorized to publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the township by March 31 of each year that any weeds, grass or deleterious unhealthful growths or other noxious plant matter shall be maintained by the property owner or her/his agent to be less than 12 inches in height at any time after May 1 of the current year. 
C.	Any weeds, grass or deleterious unhealthful growths or other obnoxious plant matter that are higher than 12 inches in height after May 1 may be cut by a representative of the township. The township may cause a property to be mowed as many times as is necessary in order to meet the standards of the ordinance.  
127.002 - Remuneration. 
Sec. II. 
A.	When the township has effected the removal of such obnoxious growth, or has paid for its removal, the property owner shall be invoiced for the actual cost of such removal. Invoices shall be mailed within 10 days of the completion of removal and shall be due and payable one calendar month from the date of the invoice. If the amount due, or any portion thereof, is unpaid after the due date, the unpaid balance plus accrued interest at the rate of 1% per month from the date of the completion of the work, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to the owner by the township. The charge shall be due and payable by the owner at the time of payment of the tax bill. 
B.	Where the full amount due the township is not paid by such owner within 60 days after the cutting, destroying and/or removal of such weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or other noxious plant matter, as set forth in Sections I.C and II.A above, then, and in that case, the township Zoning Administrator shall cause to be recorded in the Treasurer's office of the township a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work and the date, place or property on which said work was done, and the recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property, and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection until final payment has been made. The costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes, and, further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of 1% per month in the event it is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which said charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been properly and satisfactorily done, and shall be full notice that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and is due and collectible as provided by law.  
127.003 - Exceptions. 
Sec. III. The following conditions shall cause a parcel, or a portion thereof, to be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance. The Union Township Zoning Administrator's determination of these conditions shall be final. 
1.	Parcels of land that are three acres or more and are vacant.
2.	Landscaping features may contain tall or ornamental grasses.
3.	Nursery and landscaping business may grow ornamental grasses.
4.	On parcels of land which are zoned "Agricultural" by the Union Township Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this section shall apply to an area that is within 60 feet of a dwelling, and shall also extend to the road right of way. If said dwelling is on a corner lot, the area to be maintained shall extend to the right-of-way for both roads.  
127.004 - Title. 
Sec. IV. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Union Ordinance Number 1998-5, Noxious Weeds Ordinance.  
127.005 - Severability. 
Sec. V. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
127.006 - Effective date. 
Sec. VI. This Ordinance will take effect immediately after publication.  
128.000 - HAZARDOUS SPILLS EXPENSE RECOVERY Ord. No. 2003-04 Adopted: April 23, 2003 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION HEREBY ORDAINS:
 
128.001 - Intent. 
Sec. I. Surface waters, groundwater, soils, vegetation, and atmosphere inside the Township are susceptible to damage from the handling, storage, use, processing and disposal of hazardous material and the expense incurred by the taxpayer as a result of the Township or its Designee having to respond in an emergency to protect life, property and the environment when there has been a release of hazardous materials, should be recovered from the person responsible for the emergency.  
128.002 - Definitions. 
Sec. II. As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
A.	CFR shall mean the Code of Federal Regulations. 
B.	Compressed gas shall mean any material regulated as a compressed gas by the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR ss 173.300. 
C.	Designee shall mean the Northwestern Regional Hazardous Materials Response Team or such other public or private agency authorized in writing by the Township to respond to hazardous materials incidents within the Township. 
D.	Emergency action shall mean all of the activities conducted in order to prevent or mitigate injury to human health or to the environment inside the Township from a release or threatened release of any material into or upon the environment. 
E.	Explosive shall mean any material regulated as a class A or class B explosive by the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR ss 173.53 and ss 173.88. 
F.	Flammable liquid shall mean any material regulated as flammable liquid by the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR ss 173.115. 
G.	Flammable solid shall mean any material regulated as flammable solid by the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR ss 173.150. 
H.	Hazardous material shall mean any of the following: 
1)	Any material listed in the list of toxic pollutants found in 40 CFR ss 401.15, as amended. 
2)	Any material designated as hazardous material by applicable state law.
3)	Any compressed gas, explosive, flammable liquid, flammable solid, oxidizer, poison or radioactive material. 
I.	Oxidizer shall mean any material regulated as an oxidizer by the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR ss 173.151. 
J.	Person shall include any individual, corporation, association, partnership, firm, trustee, or legal representative. 
K.	Poison shall mean any liquid or gas that is life threatening when mixed with air in small amounts, and shall also include all those materials regulated as poison class A by the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR ss 173.326. 
L.	Radioactive material shall mean any material required by the United States Department of Transportation to have type A packaging or other special protection or closed transport vehicles, under regulations found in 49 CFR ss 173.425. 
M.	Release shall mean any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injection, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into or upon the environmental, which causes danger or harm to the public health or to the environment, including, but not limited to, the release of any material classified as hazardous material by any Federal legislation or regulation, by any State legislation or regulation, or by any Township ordinance. 
N.	Threatened release shall mean any imminent or impending event potentially causing but not resulting in a release, but causing the Township to undertake an emergency action.  
128.003 - Notice and response. 
Sec. III. 
A.	Any person who has damaged the surface waters, groundwater, soils or atmosphere by the handling or storage of hazardous materials, or who have violated any local, state or federal environmental laws with respect to hazardous materials, are required to immediately notify the Township. 
B.	The requirements of this Ordinance shall not be construed to forbid or forgive any person from using all diligence necessary to control a hazardous material release prior or subsequent to the notification of the Township, especially if such efforts may result in the containment of the release or the abatement of extreme hazard to the employees or the general public. Delays in reporting releases due to in-house notification or off-site owners or supervisors shall result in penalties. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to exempt or release any person from any other notification or reporting required by any state or federal agency. 
C.	The Township, the Township's Designee, the Rural Division Fire Chief, the Battalion Commander (local Fire Chief) or the Designee of either is authorized to direct an emergency action and the clean up and abatement of any release, or threatened release within the Township.  
128.004 - Liability for costs. 
Sec. IV. 
A.	Any person causing a release or threatened release which results in an emergency action shall be liable to the Township for the recoverable costs resulting from the emergency action. 
B.	The following described persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the Township for the payment of all costs incurred by the Township as a result of such clean up or abatement activity: 
1)	Any person whose negligent or willful act or omission proximately caused such release, discharge, or deposit; 
2)	The person who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous material or the material at the time of such release, discharge, or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause; and 
3)	The person who owned or had custody or control of the container which held such hazardous material at the time of or immediately prior to such release, discharge or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause.  
128.005 - Recovery of costs. 
Sec. V. 
A.	The Township or its Designee shall keep an itemized record of recoverable costs resulting from an emergency action. 
B.	The Township or its Designee shall submit a written itemized claim to the responsible person for the total costs incurred by the Township or its Designee for the emergency action and a written notice that unless the amounts are paid in full within 30 days after the date of the mailing of the claim and notice, a civil action will be commenced seeking recovery for the stated amount plus any amount occasioned by such suit. 
C.	For the purposes of this Ordinance, costs of the Township or its Designee shall mean all direct and indirect costs and shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1)	Actual labor cost of personnel, including workers compensation benefits and fringe benefits; 
2)	Administrative overhead;
3)	Costs of equipment operation;
4)	Costs of materials;
5)	Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the emergency action;
6)	Medical expenses incurred as a result of response activities;
7)	Costs of any contract labor;
8)	Costs to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup or abatement by others; and
9)	Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the emergency action, including actions for recoverable expenses pursuant to this Ordinance. 
D.	The authority to recover costs under this Ordinance shall not include actual fire suppression services, which are normally or usually provided by the Fire Department.  
128.006 - Civil suit. 
Sec. VI. The Township or Designee may bring a civil action for payment of the recoverable expenses against any and all persons liable under this Ordinance. All costs of such suit, including actual attorney fees, shall also be a recoverable cost within the same civil action.  
128.007 - Conflict with state or federal law. 
Sec. VII. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to conflict with state or federal laws requiring persons causing or responsible for release or threatened releases from engaging in remediation activities or paying the cost thereof, or both.  
128.008 - Nonexclusive remedy. 
Sec. VIII. The remedies provided by this Ordinance shall be in addition to any other remedies available in equity or at law and such penalties as provided by law or ordinance.  
128.009 - Title. 
Sec. IX. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Union Ordinance Number 2003-04.  
128.010 - Severability. 
Sec. X. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
128.011 - Effective date. 
Sec. XI. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately after publication.  
129.000 - SIDEWALK AND PATHWAY ORDINANCE Ordinance No. 2009-03 Adopted: December 30, 2009 
An Ordinance enacted pursuant to Michigan Public Act 246 of 1931 and Public Act 246 of 1945, as amended, to specify standards for design, maintenance, and use of sidewalks or pathways located in public road rights-of-way; establish requirements for obtaining permits to construct sidewalks or pathways; designate sidewalk and pathway maintenance responsibilities; and, establish enforcement procedures and penalties for violation of the Ordinance. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, HEREBY ORDAINS:
 
129.001 - Title. 
Sec. 1. This Ordinance is hereby designated as and shall be referred to as the Charter Township of Union Sidewalk and Pathway Ordinance. Within the following text it may be referred to as this Ordinance.  
129.002 - Purpose and scope of application. 
Sec. 2. 
(2.01)	Purpose. The purposes of this Ordinance are to protect and promote public health, safety, and welfare by specifying standards for design, maintenance, and use of sidewalks and pathways located in public road rights-of-way; establishing requirements for obtaining permits to construct sidewalks or pathways; designating sidewalks or pathways maintenance responsibilities; and, establishing enforcement procedures and penalties for violation of the Ordinance. These regulations are the minimum standards deemed necessary to provide suitable and safe off-road accommodations for pedestrians. 
(2.02)	Scope of application. The requirements in this Ordinance shall apply to sidewalks and pathways constructed within a public right-of-way.  
129.003 - Definitions. 
Sec. 3. 
Building Official: The officer or other authority designated by the Township Board to administer and enforce the Building Code. 
Detectable Warning Surfaces: Corrosion resistant grey iron in pavement that is installed to signal visually-impaired pedestrians where a sidewalk or pathway intersects a road. 
Pathway: An off-road shared use, non-motorized path, usually asphalt, separate from the public road (though sometimes in the public right-of-way). All cyclists regardless of age are encouraged to use pathways. 
Planning Commission: The Planning Commissioners of the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
Sidewalk: A paved path, usually concrete, located in a road right-of-way but away from the actual road surface, and designed, constructed, and designated for pedestrian travel. While Michigan law (MCL 257.660c and 257.660d) allows for travel on sidewalks or pathways by bicycle, provided they yield to pedestrians and do not impede traffic by pedestrians, adult cyclists are encouraged to use roadways or pathways as safer options. 
Township: The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
Township Board: The Supervisor, Clerk, Treasurer, and Trustees of the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan.  
129.004 - Standards. 
Sec. 4. 
(4.01)	Use of sidewalks or pathways. 
1.	Pedestrian use. Sidewalks or pathways, as defined herein, are for pedestrian use, and are not intended for use by motorized vehicles, such as but not limited to, motorcycles, mopeds, or off-road utility vehicles. Travel by non-motorized bicycles is permitted. Bicycles shall yield to pedestrians. 
2.	Unlawful damage. It shall be unlawful to damage or deface a sidewalk or pathway by any means. 
(4.02)	Construction standards. Sidewalks or pathways shall comply with the standards set forth herein and any supplemental engineering standards that may be adopted by the Township Board, and with Isabella County Road Commission (ICRC) standards (at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, ICRC enforces Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) sidewalk specifications on roads under the Road Commission's jurisdiction). In the event of a conflict between standards, the agency with roadway jurisdiction shall prevail if the sidewalk or pathway is located in a public road right-of-way. In the event of conflict between different standards, the more stringent standard shall apply. 
1.	Minimum width: Sidewalks: Four (4) feet; Pathways: Eight (8) feet. 
2.	Location: 
a.	Sidewalks shall be located one (1) foot off the property line in the road right-of-way, except where the planned right-of-way is greater than the width of the existing right-of-way, in which case the sidewalk shall be located one (1) foot inside the planned right-of-way. 
b.	Sidewalks shall be aligned horizontally and vertically with existing sidewalks on adjacent properties. 
c.	Pathways may be constructed in lieu of sidewalks or in locations that do not parallel roadways. 
d.	The Planning Commission may modify these width and location requirements upon finding that another location would be more appropriate because of the location of utilities, existing landscaping or trees, the location of connecting sidewalks or pathways on adjacent parcels, or other site considerations. 
3.	Paving. Sidewalks shall be concrete with a depth of at least four (4) inches, except that sidewalks across a driveway or other vehicle crossing shall be reinforced and have a depth of at least six (6) inches. Concrete shall be placed over 6" compacted sand. Pathways shall be 3" hot mix asphalt over 6" 22A gravel (minimum grade). A minimum of 6" top soil shall be removed under concrete or asphalt. Other types of paving may be permitted, subject to Planning Commission approval. Paving shall be placed on appropriate compacted fill to provide a proper base and to prevent the pavement from uneven settling, heaving, and/or cracking. 
4.	Barrier-free design. Sidewalks or pathways shall comply with all state and federal barrier-free requirements. Accordingly, ramps shall be provided at curbs and other locations involving a grade change. 
5.	Grading and drainage. Proposed sidewalks or pathways shall be designed to maintain the existing direction and flow of storm water and to avoid damming or flooding. 
6.	Detectable warning surfaces. Detectable warning surfaces shall be installed wherever a sidewalk or pathway approaches an intersection with a road, and shall be constructed in accordance with the Michigan Department of Transportation Special Provision for Sidewalk Ramp, ADA, Modified, 06-09-06, and revised 07-13-06. 
7.	Existing sidewalks or pathways. Unless required by other statutes, existing sidewalks or pathways shall not be required to conform to subsections 4 and 6 of Section 4.02. When an existing sidewalk or pathway section requires replacement, those portions being replaced shall conform to the standards of this Ordinance. 
(4.03)	Maintenance standards. 
1.	Maintenance responsibility. It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain public sidewalks or pathways on or adjoining said property in accordance with Section 4.03. Failure to comply with any provision in Section 4.03 shall be considered a breach of this duty. Any damages resulting from such a breach shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. 
A legally established homeowners association or condominium association may assume the responsibility for maintenance of public sidewalks or pathways within a subdivision or condominium under its jurisdiction. The terms under which such an association assumes such responsibility, including the method of funding sidewalk or pathway maintenance, shall be specified in the recorded subdivision covenants, conditions and restrictions or condominium association master deed and bylaws, as applicable. A Special Assessment District shall be established in the name of the association if the association at any time fails to meet the maintenance standards. 
2.	Repairs or restoration. A sidewalk or pathway that becomes cracked or damaged to the extent that the sidewalk or pathway becomes potentially unsafe for use shall be repaired or restored in compliance with the construction standards specified herein. The following standards shall deem a sidewalk or pathway in need of repair or restoration: 
a.	If the sidewalk has displacement of more than three-quarters (¾) of an inch between any two (2) sections (flags) of sidewalk at the connection joint. 
b.	If the sidewalk or pathway has more than two (2) cracks of one-quarter (¼) inch in width or more in any two (2) linear feet. 
c.	If the sidewalk or pathway has a crack more than three-quarters (¾) inch in width.
d.	If any section of sidewalk is tilted in excess of one (1) inch per foot from edge to edge in a transverse direction. 
e.	If, in any flag of sidewalk, more than fifty percent (50%) of the surface has scaled off to a depth of one-quarter (¼) inch or greater. 
f.	If the concrete or asphalt has settled, allowing water to pond to depth of one (1") inch or more. 
3.	Obstructions. Sidewalks or pathways shall be kept free of all obstructions, including but not necessarily limited to, obstructions from structures, vehicles, equipment, debris, and vegetation. This restriction shall not apply to temporary obstructions due to maintenance or construction work on or adjacent to the sidewalk or pathway, in which case appropriate barriers and signage shall be erected to maintain public safety. 
4.	Snow and ice removal. Sidewalks or pathways shall be kept free and clear of ice and snow. Snow shall not be piled in a manner that might obstruct the vision of drivers or that blocks or impairs travel on a sidewalk, pathway or road. 
a.	Snow that has accumulated in or during the nighttime shall be removed by 6:00 p.m. of the following day; 
b.	Snow falling or drifting during the day shall be removed before 12:00 noon of the following day; 
c.	In the event of unusual circumstances, including holiday observances, prolonged periods of snow or ice storms, or other unforeseeable conditions, the building official or code enforcement officer may extend the time to remove ice or snow.  
129.005 - Sidewalks and pathways plan. 
Sec. 5. 
(5.01)	Duties of sidewalks and pathways prioritization committee. The Planning Commission shall designate a committee to plan and prioritize new construction of sidewalks and pathways. The Sidewalks and Pathways Prioritization Committee will meet as needed to review the plan and make recommendations to the Township Board. 
(5.02)	Composition of sidewalks and pathways prioritization committee. The committee shall consist of: 
A representative of the Township Board. 
A representative of the Planning Commission. 
Two residents of the Charter Township of Union. 
One member At-Large. 
The Zoning Administrator (ex officio, non-voting) 
The terms of each member shall be 2 years. The Township Board member, one township resident, and the At-Large member shall serve initial 2-year terms. The Planning Commission member and second township resident shall serve initial 1-year terms followed by subsequent 2-year terms.  
129.006 - Enforcement. 
Sec. 6. 
(6.01)	Duties of the building official. The Building Official shall have primary authority to enforce this Ordinance, as outlined in this Section. 
1.	Permits. 
a.	A permit is required from the Township prior to the construction, removal, or repair of a sidewalk or pathway. A permit may be obtained by submitting a completed application form, along with plans and specifications, and the required fee, to the Township Building Department. The Building Official shall be responsible for evaluating the application to determine compliance with Ordinance standards (and to determine compliance with the approved site plan, where applicable) and issuing the permit. A separate permit shall not be required if the proposed sidewalk or pathway is part of a larger development that requires a building permit. A copy of the permit shall be kept at hand at the construction site. 
b.	The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any permits required by the Isabella County Road Commission related to sidewalk or pathway construction within a County road right-of-way. 
2.	Inspection. During construction, the Building Official shall be responsible for inspection. In fulfilling this responsibility, the Building Official shall follow the inspection guidelines set forth in the adopted building code. 
3.	Violations. The Building Official shall be responsible for investigating violations of this Ordinance. Whenever the Building Official determines that a violation exists, the Building Official shall pursue compliance following the enforcement procedures set forth in the adopted building code. If the owner of property where a sidewalk or pathway has fallen into a state of disrepair such that it is unsafe for use fails to complete repairs within thirty (30) days after notification, then the Township may cause necessary repairs and charge the property owner for the costs of repair. If such costs are not paid by the property owner the costs shall become a lien against the property. 
(6.02)	Site plan review. If a proposed sidewalk or pathway is part of larger development that requires site plan review, then the sidewalk or pathway shall be shown on the site plan, which plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the site plan review procedures set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. 
(6.03)	Authority of the Township Board to require sidewalk or pathway construction or maintenance. In accordance with Michigan Public Act 246 of 1931 and Act 246 of 1945, as amended, the Township Board may order the construction, repair, or maintenance of, or may construct, repair, or maintain sidewalks or pathways in a designated area within the Township because of the health, safety, or welfare of the residents. The Township Board shall hold a public meeting relative to the ordering of the sidewalk or pathway construction, repair, or maintenance and shall notify property owners involved of the time and place of the hearing. If the Township Board determines that the construction, repair or maintenance of sidewalks or pathways is necessary, it may construct, repair, or maintain the sidewalks or pathways and assess the costs to the property involved, payable over no longer than a ten-year period, or permit the owners of the property involved to have the sidewalks or pathways constructed, repaired, or maintained according to Township specifications at their own expenses. The Township Board may also propose a cost-sharing mechanism either from general revenues or a Township-wide sidewalk and pathway construction fund. In situations where a proposed sidewalk or pathway does not currently have connecting sidewalks or pathways on the adjacent properties on either side, the Township Board may require a property owner to post a cash deposit in lieu of construction, in an amount equivalent to the cost of construction, which would be held in deposit until the adjacent properties develop and install sidewalks or pathways.  
129.007 - Penalties, severability, conflicting provisions, effective date. 
Sec. 7. 
(7.01)	Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance is responsible for a civil infraction, and shall be liable for a fine of not more than $100 and the costs of prosecution for the first violation. Upon a finding of responsibility for a subsequent violation, such person shall be liable for a fine of not more than $500 and the costs of prosecution. In addition, the Township may exercise those rights identified in Section 5.03 of this Ordinance or seek such injunctive or other relief as may be appropriate to abate a continuing violation, the Township's costs thereof to be borne by the responsible party. 
(7.02)	Severability. Should any portion of this Ordinance be found invalid for any reason, such a finding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of the remaining portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(7.03)	Conflicting provisions repealed. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect. 
(7.04)	Effective date. This Ordinance was adopted by the Township Board of the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan on the 30th day of December, 2009, and shall take effect on the 10th day of January, 2010, thirty (30) days following publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the Charter Township of Union, in accordance with Michigan statutes.  
130.000 - UNION FIREWORKS ORDINANCE Ord. No. 2012-05 Adopted: Aug. 22, 2012 
An Ordinance enacted to regulate the time, place and manner for the use of Consumer Fire Works, Display Fireworks, and Articles Pyrotechnic. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, HEREBY ORDAINS:
 
130.001 - Name. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Union Township Fireworks Ordinance.  
130.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. In the interest of maintaining public health, safety and the general welfare and the comfort and repose of Union Township residents, Union Township hereby provides for the regulation and use of fireworks in Union Township, as provided in PA 256 of 2011, as may be amended, (MCL 28.451, et seq.) and repeals all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith.  
130.003 - Definitions. 
Sec. III. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.	Articles pyrotechnic: Pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in the chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101. 
2.	Alcoholic liquor: That term as defined in section 1d of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1d, as amended. 
3.	APA: American Pyrotechnics Association. 
4.	Consumer fireworks: Fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3 or 3.5 Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
5.	Controlled substance: That term as defined in section 8b of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.8b, as amended. 
6.	Display fireworks: Large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172 and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
7.	Firework or fireworks: Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effects. 
8.	Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8 and 3.5. 
9.	Minor: Individual who is less than 18 years old. 
10.	National holiday: A national holiday is defined in 5 USC 6103 and includes: New Year's Day (January); Martin Luther King Jr. Day (third Monday in January); Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February); Memorial Day (last Monday in May); Independence Day (July 4); Labor Day (first Monday in September); Columbus Day (second Monday in October); Veterans Day (November 11); Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November); Christmas Day (December 25). 
11.	NFPA: National Fire Protection Association. 
12.	Novelties: As defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4 and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
a.	Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cup. 
b.	Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in the above paragraph are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
c.	Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in diameter.
13.	Person: Individual, agent, association, charitable organization, company, limited liability company, corporation, labor organization, legal representative, partnership, unincorporated organization, or any other legal or commercial entity. 
14.	Site plan: A graphic representation of the location proposed, streets, parking areas, fencing and gates, and other details to evaluate the safety of the display location, drawn to scale with dimensions. 
15.	Special effects: A combination of chemical elements or chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effect as in [an] integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical or opera production or live entertainment.  
130.004 - Novelties. 
Sec. IV. This Ordinance does not apply to and does not regulate the use of Novelties in Union Township.  
130.005 - Consumer fireworks. 
Sec. V. 
1.	Ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks. A person may ignite, discharge or sue consumer fireworks within the Charter Township of Union on the day proceeding, the day of or the day after a National holiday, but not between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. The ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks within the Township are prohibited on all other days of the year. 
2.	Possession of consumer fireworks by a minor. A minor shall not possess, ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks. 
3.	Prohibited conduct. 
a.	A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks, articles pyrotechnics or display fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission to use those fireworks on those premises. 
b.	A person shall not use consumer fireworks, articles pyrotechnics, display fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination thereof. 
c.	A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks, articles pyrotechnics, display fireworks or low-impact fireworks during the pendency of "red flag" warnings as designated by the National Weather Service, Grand Rapids, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § I, 9-14-14) 
130.006 - Articles pyrotechnic and display fireworks. 
Sec. VI. 
1.	The Township Board may permit articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effect fireworks in Union Township, pursuant to the provisions of MCL 28.451, et seq. and this Ordinance. 
2.	Any person wishing to conduct an articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or special effects display shall, at least 45 days prior to any display, submit an application on a form furnished by the township along with a Site Plan, pay the required fee and shall secure permission from the Township Board prior to any such fireworks display. 
3.	Three copies of a site plan of the area where the articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or special effects display is to be conducted shall be submitted with the application. One copy shall be forwarded to the Mt Pleasant Fire Chief for review and comment to the Township Board, one copy to be retained on file by the township and a copy with a statement of approval or denial, and any conditions for approval and the signature of Township Clerk, to be returned to the applicant. The site plan shall set forth all structures in the area and within the discharge site fallout area. The site plan shall furthermore set forth the distance separating any fireworks and any spectator viewing areas. All site plans shall be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator and/or his designated alternate for approval, including any recommended conditions, prior to coming before the Township Board for its approval. 
4.	A copy of any required state or federal permit for the fireworks display shall be submitted with the application. 
5.	Proof of insurance conforming the requirements of this Ordinance and PA 256 of 2011 shall be submitted with the application. 
6.	The application shall include information as to the competency and qualifications of the fireworks display operators, as required by NFPA 1123. 
7.	The Township Board shall approve an application for an articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or special effects display if it finds that all of the following standards are reasonably satisfied: 
a.	The application and accompanying documentation is complete and conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
b.	The operator of the fireworks display is competent and qualified to conduct the fireworks display, per NFPA 1123. 
c.	The Fire Chief or his/her designated alternate has approved the application and site plan. 
d.	The fireworks display will not have an adverse effect upon public safety.
e.	The time, duration, and location of the fireworks or special effects display will not, due to noise, traffic congestion, spectators, or other factors, unreasonably disturb the peace of persons residing within the vicinity. 
f.	The Township Board, in approving an application hereunder, shall have the authority to impose such conditions as it determines in its sole reasonable discretion are necessary to assure that the fireworks display will satisfy the above standards. 
8.	Requirements and restrictions. 
a.	The person conducting the fireworks display shall follow NFPA 1123 for fireworks display and/or the Township requirements set forth herein, whichever are more restrictive. 
b.	A minimum safe area of 250 feet radius, plus an additional 70 feet radius for each inch by which the fireworks shell exceeds 3 inches in diameter shall be required. The Township Board shall have the authority to grant a variance from this requirement where it determines in its sole reasonable discretion that, given 1) the nature of the subject site, 2) the nature of the surrounding area and/or 3) the nature of the proposed fireworks display, that a variance will not have a material adverse impact on public safety. In no event, however, shall the applicant fail to comply with the minimum requirements of NFPA 1123. 
c.	The applicant shall maintain personal injury liability insurance/property damage liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 for each event. The Township shall be named as an additional insured on the insurance policy. 
d.	The applicant shall be responsible for all shells being fired. In the event one or more of the shells does not explode, the applicant shall secure the area until the unexploded shell(s) is found and properly disposed of. 
e.	The consumption of alcohol or any controlled substance immediately prior to and/or during the fireworks display by any person involved in conducting the display is prohibited. 
f.	A fireworks display conducted hereunder shall conform with all specifications set forth in the approved application and site plan, as well as with any conditions imposed by the Township Board in granting such approval. 
g.	The applicant shall cause the site of the fireworks display to be cleaned up within 24 hours after the fireworks display has ended. 
h.	A permit is not transferable and shall not be granted to a minor. 
130.007 - Sanctions. 
Sec. VII. 
1.	If a law enforcement officer or the Township Ordinance Enforcement official determines that a violation of any section of this Ordinance has occurred, the officer may issue a municipal civil infraction citation and seize the consumer fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or low-impact fireworks as evidence of the violation. 
2.	A violation of any section of this Ordinance shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction with fines not to exceed $500, plus the costs and expenses of prosecution and enforcement. 
3.	Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for violating this Ordinance, the Township may dispose of or destroy any consumer fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or low-impact fireworks that were retained as evidence in that prosecution. 
4.	In addition to any other penalty, a person that is found responsible for a violation of this Ordinance shall be required to reimburse the Township for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying consumer fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or low-impact fireworks that were confiscated for a violation of this Ordinance. 
5.	In addition, the Township shall have the right to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restraining order or other appropriate remedy to enforce or compel compliance with this Ordinance. 
6.	Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance.  
130.008 - Severability. 
Sec. VIII. Should any section, clause or provision of this Ordinance be declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any other part thereof other than the parts so declared to be invalid.  
130.009 - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
Sec. IX. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
130.010 - Effective date. 
Sec. X. This Ordinance shall take effect 30 days after publication following its adoption.  
131.000 - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE Ord. No. 2014-06 Adopted: December 18, 2014 
An Ordinance to adopt the 2012 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, to regulate and govern the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures by providing: the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures in the Township; and for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, HEREBY OBTAINS:
 
131.001 - Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code. 
Sec. 1. A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Township Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council ("Property Maintenance Code"), is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Township to regulate and govern the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures by providing: the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; for the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures in the Township; and for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Ordinance, as modified by the provisions of Section 2 of this Ordinance.  
131.002 - Modifications of Property Maintenance Code. 
Sec. 2. 
(a)	The following sections of the Property Maintenance Code are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: Charter Township of Union, Michigan 
Section 103.5. Insert: Building Official 
Section 112.4. Insert: [Municipal Civil Infraction; fines not to exceed $500.00, plus the costs and expenses of prosecution and enforcement.] 
Section 302.4. Insert: 12 inches 
Section 304.14. Insert: January 1st—December 31st 
Section 602.3. Insert: October—May 
Section 602.4. Insert: October—May 
(c)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in the Property Maintenace Code, each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance. 
(d)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in the Property Maintenance Code, the Township shall have the right to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restricting order or other appropriate remedy to enforce or compel compliance with this Ordinance.  
131.003 - Severability. 
Sec. 3. Should any section, clause or provision of this Ordinance be declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any other part thereof than the parts so declared to be invalid.  
131.004 - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
Sec. 4. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed.  
131.005 - Effective date. 
Sec. 5. This ordinance shall take effect 30 days after its adoption.  
140.000 - HOUSE TRAILER ORDINANCE Ord. of June 6, 1967 
An Act to provide for the payment, collection and disposition of yearly taxes on occupied Trailer Coaches located outside of licensed trailer parks; and to provide for permits and sanitary regulations of trailers harbored outside of licensed trailer parks; [and] to promote the health and welfare of all citizens of Union Township. 
 
140.001 - Definitions. 
[Sec. 1.] As referred to in this Ordinance, any mobile home house trailer or trailer means any vehicle or structure so designed and constructed that it will permit the occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade, and so designed that it may be mounted on wheels and moved from place to place on the streets and highways by it's own or other motive power. 
A lot shall mean any plot of land on which said trailer is located. This applies only to locations other than in licensed trailer parks. The lot required for each trailer shall be at least 100 by 150 feet in size.  
140.002 - Setback; report required. 
[Sec. 2.] The trailer must be set back at least 58 feet from the center of the highway and no nearer than ten feet to the other three lot lines. The owner or occupant must declare the number, names and ages of the occupants of said trailer, also the make and length of the trailer coach and legal description of the proposed parking site.  
140.003 - Water. 
[Sec. 3.] Each trailer shall have water available from a source tested and approved by a public health authority.  
140.004 - Sanitation. 
[Sec. 4.] No waste products, liquid or solid, may be discharged or thrown upon the surface of the ground. Each trailer coach shall have sanitation and waste disposal systems as approved by the Michigan Department of Health. Private sewer systems must be installed according to the recommendations of the manual of Septic Tank Practice of the U.S. Department of Health. A sanitation permit must first be obtained before a trailer permit is issued. The application must carry the signature of the occupant and of the property owner accepting the responsibility under the permit and a health officer that waste disposal facilities and sanitation are in compliance with all applicable statutes and local regulations.  
140.005 - Fee; permit issuance, posting. 
[Sec. 5.] A fee for temporary occupancy of not more than six months shall be $3.00. The fee for all occupied trailers shall be $5.00 per year with the renewal date to be one year from date of original issuance and each year thereafter. Upon payment of this fee to the Township Clerk, a permit will be issued. This permit must be posted in a place in clear view from the highway.  
140.006 - Permit nontransferable. 
[Sec. 6.] If the trailer is moved to a different location, or the ownership transferred, a new permit must be required. Any regulations in effect at the time the new permit is issued shall apply.  
140.007 - Enforcement official designated; rights of entry. 
[Sec. 7.] 
[A.]	The Building Inspector shall be the Enforcement Officer of all provisions of this Ordinance as prescribed or such provisions as may hereafter be enacted. 
[B.]	The Enforcement Officer is empowered to and has the right to enter upon any premises on which house trailers or coaches are located to inspect the same at any reasonable time. 
[C.]	The Enforcement Officer is empowered to issue orders granting, denying, renewing and revoking such permits and filing complaints and prosecuting of the violators of the provisions of this Ordinance.  
140.008 - Violation; penalty. 
[Sec. 8.] Any persons found guilty of violating any provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00 or confinement in the County Jail for a period of not more than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the Court. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.  
140.009 - Effective date. 
[Sec. 9.] This Ordinance shall take effect 30 days from and after the first publication of the Ordinance.  
141.000 - UNION TOWNSHIP CODE ADOPTION ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1986-2 Adopted: January 8, 1986 
An Ordinance to adopt the following 1985 Code Edition[s] of the International Conference of Building Officials, being: 
A.	Uniform Sign Code
B.	Reserved [1] 
C.	Uniform Housing Code
D.	Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation (1983 Edition)
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Please see § 143.003 and Part 144, wherein the 1991 edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is adopted. 
141.001 - Title. 
Sec. 1. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as "The Union Township Code Adoption Ordinance."  
141.002 - Code adopted; copies available. 
Sec. 2. The Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, does hereby adopt the following 1985 code editions of the International Conference of Building Officials, being: 
A.	Uniform Sign Code;
B.	Reserved;* 
C.	Uniform Housing Code;
D.	Guidelines for Manufactured Housing Installation;
and all Supplements thereto, as promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, and by this reference are made a part of this Ordinance with the force and effect as though set out herein in full. Copies of said codes and supplements shall be kept on file in the offices of the Union Township Building Official and the Union Township Clerk for public inspection.  
141.003 - Administration and enforcement. 
Sec. 3. The administration and enforcement of this Ordinance shall be and are hereby vested in the Building Official of Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan.  
141.004 - Penalty. 
Sec. 4. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or Codes adopted by this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or Codes adopted by this Ordinance is committed.  
141.005 - Repeal. 
Sec. 5. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby expressly repealed.  
142.000 - MOVING BUILDINGS Ord. No. 1989-5 Adopted: March 8, 1989 
At a regular meeting held March 8, 1989, the Township Board of the Township of Union adopted the following Ordinance pertaining to buildings or structures moved into or within the Township of Union. Copies of the Ordinance are available at the office of the Township Clerk, 2010 South Lincoln Road, Mt. Pleasant, Michigan, between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
An Ordinance to amend Section VIII of the Union Township Zoning Ordinance (1981).
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, HEREBY ORDAINS THAT THE UNION TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE IS HEREBY AMENDED TO ADD THE FOLLOWING SUBSECTION TO SECTION VIII: 
 
142.001 - [Compliance with zoning and building ordinances.] 
8.29. Moved buildings and temporary buildings. Buildings or structures moved into or within Union Township shall comply with all provisions of this Ordinance and with all provisions of the Union Township Building Ordinance, Section 104, concerning moved buildings, temporary buildings, and new buildings or structures.  
142.002 - [Effective date.] 
This Ordinance shall take effect 30 days after publication in the Morning Sun.  
143.000 - UNIFORM BUILDING CODE Ord. No. 1998-14 Adopted: August 26, 1998 
An Ordinance of the Charter Township of Union, County of Isabella, State of Michigan, adopting the 1997 edition of the Uniform Building Code and to provide for certain amendments thereto, pursuant to Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended by Public Act 371 of 1980; this Ordinance and such Uniform Building Code providing minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, quality of materials, location, area, and maintenance of all buildings or structures within Union Township and certain equipment specifically regulated by such Code; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; providing for penalties for the violation thereof; and repealing all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. 
The Charter Township of Union hereby ordains:
 
143.001 - Title. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Charter Township of Union Building Code, Ordinance No. 1998-12."  
143.002 - Code adopted; copies available. 
Sec. II. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 8 of the State Construction Code (being Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, MCL 125.1501, et al, MSA 5.2949(1), et al) the Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials and all changes thereto accepted by the International Conference of Building Officials through the date of this Ordinance are hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance as if fully set forth herein, except as said Uniform Building Code is herein amended. Said Code is hereafter referred to as the "Uniform Building Code" or "Code" and copies shall be kept on file in the office of the Union Township Building Official and the Union Township Clerk for public inspection.  
143.003 - References and [in] code. 
Sec. III. References in the Uniform Building Code to "State" shall mean the State of Michigan; reference to "municipality" shall mean the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan; and reference to "local ordinances" shall mean this Ordinance and such other ordinances of Union Township as are applicable thereto.  
143.004 - Amendments to code. 
Sec. IV. The following chapters, sections and subsections of the Uniform Building Code are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional chapters, sections and subsections are added as indicated. The following chapter and section numbers refer to like numbers of the chapters and sections of the Uniform Building Code. 
Section 105 of the Uniform Building Code is hereby deleted and the following inserted in its place: 
Section 105. Building Board of Appeals. 
Section 105.1. In order the [to] determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Building Board of Appeals, consisting of three members who are qualified by experience and trained to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. The building official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary of the Board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Township Board and shall hold office at its pleasure. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the building official with a duplicate copy to the appellant and may recommend to the Township Board such new ordinances as is consistent therewith. 
Section 105.2. Limitations of Authority. The Building Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the Board be empowered to waive requirements of this code. 
Section 105 is amended to add subsection (a) immediately following Section 105 as follows: 
Section 105.1. Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Section 107.1 of the Uniform Building Code is hereby deleted and the following inserted in its place: 
Section 107.1. General. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this Section or shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Union Township Board. 
Section 107.3 of the Uniform Building Code is hereby deleted and the following inserted in its place: 
Section 107.3. Plan-Review Fees. The building official shall require plans and specifications comply with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code. In this instance a plan checking deposit equal to one-half the building permit fee shall be paid. The Township shall be reimbursed for all unusual plan review costs in addition to the building permit fee prior to issuance of a building permit. In the event no permit is issued, the deposit shall be forfeited. 
Adopt appendix, chapter four (4), division one (1) - barriers for swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
Section 203 of the Uniform Building Code [is amended by deleting] and inserting the following language in its place:] 
Sec. 203. Unsafe buildings or structures. All buildings or structures regulated by this Code which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Any use of buildings or structures constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is for the purpose of this section, an unsafe use. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building and which are in deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in this Code are hereby designated as unsafe building appendages. 
All such unsafe buildings, structures or appendages are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, and all changes thereto accepted by the International Conference of Building Officials through the date of this Ordinance are adopted and made a part of this Ordinance as if fully set forth herein. As an alternative, the Building Official, or other employee or official of this jurisdiction as designated by the governing body, may institute any other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. Copies of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall be kept on file in the office of the Union Township Building Official and the Union Township Clerk for public inspection.  
143.005 - Addition to Code. 
Sec. V. The following section, although not a part of the Uniform Building Code, shall be added as a section 5 of the Charter Township of Union Building Code Ordinance. 
Section 5.1. One & Two Family Dwellings. Buildings regulated by appendix III (Section 332) shall be designed and constructed to comply with the requirements of the Council of American Building Officials One and Two Family Dwelling Code, 1995 edition, chapters 1 through 9 and appendices A and D, (as it applies to detached one- and two-family dwellings), promulgated jointly by the International Conference of Building Officials, the Building Officials and Code Administrators International and the Southern Building Code Congress International. 
Section 5.2. Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. All buildings shall be regulated under the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition. 
Section 5.3. Floodplan [Floodplain] Management. 
A.	Definitions: For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply: 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
Flood or Flooding means a general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
(3)	The collapse of [or] subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents or water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
B.	Floodplain map: The map entitled "Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County," shall be the official map for determination and regulations pursuant to this Ordinance. 
C.	Incorporation of floodproofing regulations: The Sections of the nationally recognized construction code entitled "Army Corps of Engineers' Flood Proofing Regulations" specifically cited in this Ordinance shall be incorporated by reference as additions to the Code and regulations administered by the building inspector to be applied and enforced as set forth in this Ordinance. 
D.	Floodplain regulations: 
(a)	The building inspector shall ensure that all necessary permits have been issued, including a floodplaining permit, approvals, or letter of no authority from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources under authority of Act 245, P.A. 1929, as amended by Act 167, P.A. 1968. 
(b)	Where an area of special flood hazard has been identified by the map referenced in Section 3, but no elevation data is available, the building inspector shall require new or substantially improved structures in the identified area to meet the standards of one of the Sections 401.2, 401.3, 401.4, 401.5, 612.2.1 [616.2.1], 612.2.2, or 612.2.3, of the Army Corps Regulations, as applicable. 
(c)	Where an area of special flood hazard has been identified by the map referenced in subparagraph B. and elevation data is available, the building inspector shall require: 
(1)	New and substantially improved residential structures to meet the standards of one of the Sections 612.2.1 [616.2.1], 612.2.2 [616.2.2], or 612.2.3 of the Army Corps Regulations, as applicable; and 
(2)	New and substantially improved nonresidential structures to meet the standards of either Section 612.2.1, 612.2.2, 612.2.3, 401.2, or 401.3 of the Army Corps Regulations. 
(d)	The building inspector shall maintain a record for structures in the special flood hazard area identified by the map referenced in subparagraph B. indicating the elevation of lowest floor, including basement, or as an alternative in nonresidential structures, the elevation to which the structure has been floodproofed. 
(e)	The building inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize flood data available from federal, state, or other sources pending receipt of data from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The most recent flood elevation data received from the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall take precedence over data from other sources.  
143.006 - Repeal clause. 
Sec. VI. The following sections of the Uniform Building Code, 1994 [1997] edition, are hereby deleted in their entirety.  
143.007 - Repeal of former ordinance. 
Sec. VII. That Ordinance Number 1997-1 of Union Township entitled the "Union Township Building Code" and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
143.008 - Severability. 
Sec. VIII. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The Union Township Board hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.  
143.009 - Effective date. 
Sec. IX. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately after publication.  
144.000 - UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS Ord. No. 1992-3 Adopted: June 10, 1992 
An Ordinance of the Charter Township of Union, County of Isabella, State of Michigan, to amend Union Township Ordinance Number 1991-14, for the purpose of adopting the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 1991 Edition. The purpose of this Ordinance is to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the alteration, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, of all buildings or structures within the Charter Township of Union; providing for the enforcement of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, providing for Notice and Orders of the Building Official in regard to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, providing for appeals of said Notices and Orders, providing for enforcement of the orders of the Building Official, and providing for recovery of the cost of repair or demolition of dangerous buildings or structures. 
The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, pursuant to the authority vested in it by Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended, ordains that the Charter Township of Union Ordinance adopting the Uniform Building Code, 1991 Edition, being Ordinance Number 1991-14 [Part 143 ], is amended by deleting Section 203 of the Uniform Building Code and inserting the following language in its place: 
 
144.001 - Amendments to code. 
Sec. 1. Unsafe buildings or structures. 
Sec. 203. All buildings or structures regulated by this Code which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Any use of buildings or structures constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the purpose of this section, an unsafe use. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building and which are in deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in this Code are hereby designated as unsafe building appendages. 
All such unsafe buildings, structures or appendages are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1991 edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, and all changes thereto accepted by the International Conference of Building Officials through the date of this Ordinance are adopted and made a part of this Ordinance as if fully set forth herein. As an alternative, the Building Official, or other employee or official of this jurisdiction as designated by the governing body, may institute any other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. Copies of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall be kept on file in the office of the Union Township Building Official and the Union Township Clerk for public inspection.  
144.002 - Severability; [publication]. 
Sec. 2. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The Union Township Board hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
The Township Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this Ordinance to be published within 30 days at least one time in the Morning Sun.  
144.003 - Effective date. 
Sec. 3. This Ordinance shall take effect 90 days after publication.  
145.000 - AD VALOREM PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION Ord. No. 1997-5 Adopted: February 26, 1997 
An Ordinance of Charter Township of Union to grant ad valorem property tax exemption as provided by the State Housing Development Authority Act. (Act 346 of 1966). 
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN: 
SECTION I  
145.100 - TAX EXEMPTION 
 
145.101 - Tax exemption. 
Sec. 1.1. As provided by the State Housing Development Authority Act (Act 346 of 1966), the Housing Project located on property described as: 
The North 389 feet of the following parcel: Southwest one-quarter (SW ¼) of the Northwest one-quarter (NW ¼), except the North one-half (N ½) of the North one-half (N ½) of the said Southwest one-quarter (SW ¼) of the Northwest one-quarter (NW ¼), all in Section 35, T14N, R4W, Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan. 
is exempt from all ad valorem property taxes imposed by the state or by any political subdivision, public body or taxing district for 15 years, beginning with the 1999 tax year if the project owner submits an affidavit, by November 1, 1998, to the township assessing officer certified by M.S.H.D.A. showing that the project is eligible for the exemption or submits such an affidavit by November 1 of the year preceding the first year in which the exemption is to be claimed.  
SECTION II  
145.200 - PAYMENT IN LIEU OF TAXES 
 
145.201 - Payment in lieu of taxes. 
Sec. 2.1. The owner of the housing project exempt from taxation under the State Housing Development Authority Act (Act 346 of 1966) shall pay to the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, in lieu of taxation, an annual service charge for public services of ten percent of the annual shelter rents obtained from the housing project that is exempt from taxation or the tax on the property on which the project is located for the tax year before the date when construction of the property was commenced whichever is greater.  
SECTION III  
145.300 - PARTIAL EXEMPTIONS 
 
145.301 - Partial exemptions. 
Sec. 3.1. The tax exemption shall only apply to that part of the housing project that is tax exempt under the State Housing Development Authority Act and is occupied by persons or families eligible to move into that project as defined by said Act.  
SECTION IV  
145.400 - REPEAL 
 
145.401 - Repeal. 
Sec. 4.1. This Ordinance or any part thereof may be repealed or amended by said Township at any time and said repeal or amendment shall become effective on the date designated in the repealing or amending Ordinance.  
SECTION V  
145.500 - AUTHORITY 
 
145.501 - Authority. 
Sec. 5.1. The provision and authority granted by the State Housing Development Authority Act to the "municipality" shall be incorporated herein.  
SECTION VI  
145.600 - PERMITS 
 
145.601 - Permits. 
Sec. 6.1. This Ordinance is conditioned upon the issuance of a construction permit for the project before December 31, 1998, and if no permit is issued on or before said date, this Ordinance shall be of no further effect.  
SECTION VII  
145.700 - EFFECTIVE DATE 
 
145.701 - Effective date. 
Sec. 7.1. This Ordinance shall take effect 30 days after its publication.  
146.000 - NORTHWINDS APARTMENTS LDHA TAX EXEMPTION ORDINANCE Ord. No. 2012-09 Adopted: Nov. 14, 2012 
Charter Township of Union Tax Exemption Ordinance as provided by the State Housing Development Act. 
An Ordinance to provide for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a multiple family dwelling project for persons of low to moderate income to be financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1996, as amended. 
The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, Ordains:
 
146.001 - Title. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Northwinds Apartments LDHA tax Exemption Ordinance."  
146.002 - Preamble. 
Sec. II. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA Section 125.1401 et seq., MSA Section 16.114(1) et seq.). The Township is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to moderate income is a public necessity, and as the Township will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this Ordinance for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this Ordinance are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption. 
The Township acknowledges that Northwinds Apartments Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership (the "Sponsor") has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC), to erect, own, and operate a housing development identified as Huntington Place on certain property located at 3166, 3176, 3220 and 3230 E. Deerfield Road, in the Township to serve persons of low to moderate income, and that the Sponsor has offered to pay to the Township on account of this Housing Development in annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes.  
146.003 - Definitions. 
Sec. III. All terms shall be defined as set forth in the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended, except as follows: 
(A)	Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
(B)	Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of a housing development representing rent for occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
(C)	Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
(D)	Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for person of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the Authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to person of low income. 
(E)	Elderly means a single person who is fifty-five (55) years of age or older or a household in which at least one (1) member is fifty-five (55) years of age and all other members are fifty (50) years of age or older. 
(F)	Sponsor means persons or entities which have applied to the Authority for an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program to finance a Housing Development. 
(G)	Utilities mean fuel, water, sanitary sewer and electrical service which are paid by the Housing Development.  
146.004 - Class of housing developments. 
Sec. IV. It is determined that the class of Housing Developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of taxes shall be housing developments for elderly persons and persons and families of low to moderate income, which are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that Northwinds Apartments is of this class.  
146.005 - Establishment of annual service charge. 
Sec. V. The Housing Development identified as Northwinds Developments to which the tax exemption shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the year the project is placed in service as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy from the appropriate public officials. The Township acknowledging that the Sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of the Housing Development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this Ordinance and the qualification of the Housing Development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this Ordinance, and in consideration of the Sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program, to construct, own and operate the Housing Development agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the Annual Shelter Rents actually collected.  
146.006 - Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. 
Sec. VI. Notwithstanding Section V [146.005], the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for part of the Housing Development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the Housing Development if the Housing Development were not tax exempt. 
The term "low-income person or families" as used herein shall be the same meaning as found in Section 15(a)(7) of the Act.  
146.007 - Payment of service charge. 
Sec. VIII. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the Ordinance shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes except that the estimated annual payment shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year. The sponsor shall submit a statement from its independent auditor verifying the amounts used to compute the payment are correct as reported. The statement and supporting documents which may be from the sponsor's federal tax return shall be due by February 28 following the tax year. Any adjustment in payment (from the estimated payment) shall be made on that date. Any claim for overpayment will be adjusted in the next December 31 payment due.  
146.008 - Duration. 
Sec. IX. This Ordinance shall remain in effect until December 31, 2028, so long as the Housing Development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.  
146.009 - Repeal and amendment. 
Sec. X. The Township of Union may repeal and/or amend this ordinance subject to the provisions of the Act.  
146.010 - Termination. 
Sec. XI. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, should the sponsor fail to pay the final adjusted service charge in lieu of taxes granted hereunder or fail to provide the verification of the calculations used to make the payment, the Township of Union shall file a certificate of nonpayment upon the Sponsor of the Housing Development and the Authority by certified mail, with the Register of Deeds of Isabella County. Following the expiration of sixty (60) days after service upon the Sponsor and the Authority of a certificate of nonpayment, if payment and supporting documentation has not been made within the intervening sixty (60) days, the service charge in lieu of taxes granted by this ordinance shall automatically be terminated, retroactive to January 1 of that year.  
146.011 - Severability. 
Sec. XII. The various sections and provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section or provision of this Ordinance other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
146.012 - Acknowledgment. 
Sec. XIII. The Township hereby acknowledges receipt of documentation from the authority indicating that the authority's participation with the Housing Development is limited solely to the allocation of tax credits under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program.  
146.013 - Effective date. 
Sec. XIV. This Ordinance shall become effective on January 1, 2013, or as otherwise provided in the Charter. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are repealed to the extent of such conflict. Made and passed by the Township Board of the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan on this 14th day of November, 2012.  
147.000 - SECTION 42 TAX EXEMPTION ORDINANCE Ord. No. 2000-01 Adopted: March 8, 2000 
An Ordinance to provide for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple family dwelling project for persons of low income to be assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, as amended. 
The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, hereby ordains:
 
147.001 - Name. 
Sec. I This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Charter Township of Union Ordinance No. 2000-01, Section 42 Tax Exemption Ordinance for the Sterling Group."  
147.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the Michigan State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA Section 125.1401, et seq., MSA Section 116.114(l), et seq.). The Township of Union ("Township") is authorized by this Act to establish or change a service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the Township will be benefitted and improved by such housing, is a valid public purpose; further; that the continuance of the provisions of this Ordinance for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this Ordinance are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of the proposed housing development ("Development"), which is to be constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption ordinance. 
The Township acknowledges that the Sponsor of the Development has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit ("LIHTC") provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to erect, own and operate a housing development on certain property located in the Township to serve persons of low and moderate income and that the Sponsor has offered to pay the Township on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes.  
147.003 - Definitions. 
Sec. III All terms shall be defined as set forth in the Act, except as follows: 
A.	Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
B.	Annual shelter rent for rent-restricted units means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all low income occupants, as provided for herein in section 3.F. [147.003 F.], from the Development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of the portion of said charges attributable to gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants by the Sponsor. 
C.	Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
D.	Development means the proposed multiple-family Housing Development located in the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, on land more particularly described on Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof, to be known as Arbors at Eagle Crest Apartments. 
E.	Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, communal and educational facilities as the Authority has determined improves the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
F.	Low-income persons or families means those persons and families whose income is sixty (60) percent or less of area median income as adjusted for family size and who are determined to be eligible to move into the Development under the provisions of Section 42, with all units to be rent restricted. 
G.	Section 42 means Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
H.	Sponsor means Arbors at Eagle Crest Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership. 
I.	Township means the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
J.	Township resident means anyone currently residing in the Township or anyone currently working or notified that they are hired to work in the Township. 
K.	Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the Sponsor.  
147.004 - Class of housing developments. 
Sec. IV It is determined that the class of Housing Developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be Section 42 Housing Developments which have received an LIHTC allocation from the Authority pursuant to Section 42. Based on representations and warranties of the Sponsor, it is determined that the Development is a Housing Development eligible for tax exemption provided by Section 15(a) of the Act.  
147.005 - Establishment of annual service charge. 
Sec. V The Development and the property on which it will be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes commencing with the first January 1st following (i) the commencement of construction or (ii) compliance by the Sponsor with all requirements imposed on the "owner" by subsection (l) of Section 15(a) of the Act, whichever is later. The Township, acknowledging that the Sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of the Development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this Ordinance and the qualification of the Development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this Ordinance, and in consideration of the Sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan and a LIHTC allocation from the Authority, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. This does not include utilities (water/sewer). 
For 2000 and 2001 the annual service charge shall be the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition. Thereafter, the annual service charge shall consist of the sum of ten (10) percent of the collections from the total Annual Shelter Rent during the period from January 1 through December 31 of each year. Notwithstanding the provisions of the immediately preceding sentences, for all years during which this section is operative, the annual service charge shall be no less than the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Section 5 [147.005], the annual service charge shall be not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per year, beginning in the year 2002 and continuing thereafter.  
147.006 - Contractual effect of Ordinance. 
Sec. VI Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a) of the Act to the contrary between the Township and the Sponsor with the Authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this Ordinance.  
147.007 - Payment of service charge. 
Sec. VII The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the Ordinance shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the Township except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year. The Township shall compute the real estate taxes and invoice the Sponsor no later than December 31 for the total service charge due December 31.  
147.008 - Preference to Township residents. 
Sec. VIII To the extent permissible under federal, state or local fair housing laws, the Sponsor shall give preference for occupancy of the Development to qualified applicants who are Township residents.  
147.009 - Benefits. 
Sec. IX The benefits of the tax exemption granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be allocated by the Sponsor exclusively to the Low Income Persons or Families of the Development in the form of reduced rent. The Sponsor shall, at the request of the Township, submit to the Township such evidence and documentation as may be reasonably necessary to verify Sponsor's compliance with this requirement.  
147.010 - Duration. 
Sec. X. Commencing with the tax year 2001 and ending with the tax year 2021 this Ordinance shall remain in effect and shall not terminate from the effective date hereof, provided that the Development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section 42 and that construction of Development commences on or before December 31, 2001.  
147.011 - Audits; inspection of records. 
Sec. XI Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the Sponsor shall provide to the Township such accounting records, audits and financial reports as the Township shall reasonably require to verify the computation of the annual service charge as provided by this Ordinance. Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the books and records of the Sponsor pertaining to the Development shall be available for review and audit by the Township at all reasonable times.  
147.012 - Lien. 
Sec. XII Annual service charges payable pursuant to this Ordinance shall be a lien on the Development, and, if delinquent, shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as general property taxes.  
147.013 - Severability. 
Sec. XIII The various sections and provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section of this Ordinance be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section or provision of this Ordinance other than the Section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
148.000 - SECTION 42 TAX EXEMPTION—ARBORS AT EAGLE CREST APARTMENTS, SECOND PHASE Ord. No. 2003-09 Adopted: July 9, 2003 
An Ordinance to provide for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple family dwelling project for persons of low income to be assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, as amended. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, HEREBY ORDAINS:
 
148.001 - Name. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Union Ordinance [No. 2003-09.]  
148.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the Michigan State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA Section 125.1401 et seq., MSA Section 116.114(1) et seq.) The Charter Township of Union ("Township") is authorized by this Act to establish or change a service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to moderate income is a public necessity, and as the Township will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this Ordinance for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this Ordinance are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of the proposed housing development ("Development"), which is to be constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption ordinance. 
The Township acknowledges that the Sponsor has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit ("LIHTC") provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to erect, own and operate a housing development on certain property located in the Township to serve persons of low and moderate income and that the Sponsor has offered to pay the Township on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes.  
148.003 - Definitions. 
Sec. III. All terms shall be defined as set forth in the Act, except as follows: 
A.	Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
B.	Annual Shelter Rent for Rent Restricted Units means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all low income occupants of the Development, as provided for herein Section 3.F, from the Development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of the portion of said charges attributable to gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants by the Sponsor. 
C.	Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
D.	Development means the proposed multiple family Housing Development located in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, on land more particularly described on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and made a part hereof, constituting the second phase of the Arbors at Eagle Crest Apartments. 
E.	Housing Development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the Authority has determined improves the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
F.	Low Income Persons or Families means those persons and families whose income is 60% or less of area median income as adjusted for family size and who are determined to be eligible to move into the Development under the provisions of Section 42, with all units to be rent restricted. 
G.	Section 42 means Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
H.	Sponsor means Arbors at Eagle Crest II Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership. 
I.	Township means the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
J.	Township Resident means anyone currently residing in the Township or anyone currently working or notified that they are hired to work in the Township. 
K.	Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the Sponsor.  
148.004 - Class of housing developments. 
Sec. IV. It is determined that the class of Housing Developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be Section 42 Housing Developments which have received an LIHTC allocation from the Authority pursuant to Section 42. Based on representations and warranties of the Sponsor, it is determined that the Development is a Housing Development eligible for tax exemption provided by Section 15(a) of the Act.  
148.005 - Establishment of annual service charge. 
Sec. V. The Development and the property on which it will be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after (i) the year the Development is placed in service as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy from the appropriate public officials or (ii) compliance by the Sponsor with all requirements imposed on the "owner" by subsection (1) of Section 15(a) of the Act, whichever is later. The Township, acknowledging that the Sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of the Development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this Ordinance and the qualification of the Development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this Ordinance, and in consideration of the Sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of LIHTC allocation from the Authority, to construct, own and operate the Development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. 
For 2003 and 2004 the annual service charge shall be the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition. Thereafter, the annual service charge shall consist of the sum of 10% of the collections from the total Annual Shelter Rent during the period from January 1 through December 31 of each year. Notwithstanding the provisions of the immediately preceding sentences, for all years during which this section is operative, the annual service charge shall be no less than the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition.  
148.006 - Contractual effect of Ordinance. 
Sec. VI. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15a of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the Township and the Sponsor with the Authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this Ordinance.  
148.007 - Payment to Township residents. 
Sec. VII. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the Ordinance shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes except that the estimated annual payment shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year. The Sponsor shall submit a statement from its independent auditor verifying the amounts used to compute the payments are correct as reported. The statement and supporting documents (which may be from the Sponsor's Federal tax return) shall be due by February 28 following the subject tax year. Any adjustment in payment (from the estimated payment) shall be made on or before said date. Any claim for overpayment shall be made by appropriate adjustment in the estimated annual payment next due.  
148.008 - Preference to Township residents. 
Sec. VIII. To the extent permissible under federal, state or local fair housing laws, the Sponsor shall give preference for occupancy of the Development to qualified applicants who are Township residents.  
148.009 - Benefits. 
Sec. IX. The benefits of the tax exemption granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be allocated by the Sponsor exclusively to the Low Income Persons or Families of the Development in the form of reduced rent. The Sponsor shall, at the request of the Township, submit to the Township such evidence and documentation as may be reasonably necessary to verify Sponsor's compliance with this requirement.  
148.010 - Duration. 
Sec. X. Commencing with the tax year 2005 and ending with the tax year 2030, this Ordinance shall remain in effect and shall not terminate from the effective date hereof, provided that the Development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section 42 and that construction of the Development commences on or before December 31, 2006. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, 4-27-05) 
148.011 - Audits; inspections of records. 
Sec. XI. Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the Sponsor shall provide to the Township such accounting records, audits and financial reports as the Township shall reasonably require to verify the computation of the annual service charge as provided by this Ordinance. Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the books and records of the Sponsor pertaining to the Development shall be available for review and audit by the Township at all reasonable times.  
148.012 - Lien. 
Sec. XII. Annual service charges payable pursuant to this Ordinance shall be a lien on the Development, and, if delinquent, shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as general property taxes.  
148.013 - Severability. 
Sec. XIII. The various sections and provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section of this Ordinance be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section or provisions of this Ordinance other than the Section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
148.014 - Effective date. 
Sec. XIV. This Ordinance shall be effective 30 days after publication in a local newspaper of general circulation.  
149.000 - SECTION 42 TAX EXEMPTION—SPRINGBROOK TOWNHOMES Ord. No. 2004-03 Adopted: April 14, 2004 
An Ordinance to provide for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a multiple family dwelling project for persons of low income to be assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966(1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA Section 125.1404 et seq., MSA Section 116.114 (1) et seq., the "Act". 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, HEREBY ORDAINS:
 
149.001 - Name. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Union Ordinance [No. 2004-03.]  
149.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCLA Section 125.1401 et seq., MSA Section 116.114(1) et seq., the "Act") The Charter Township of Union ("Township") is authorized by this Act to establish or change a service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to moderate income is a public necessity, and as the Township will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this Ordinance for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this Ordinance are essential to the determination of the economic feasibility of the proposed housing development ("Development"), which is to be constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption ordinance. 
The Township acknowledges that the Sponsor has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit ("LIHTC") provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to erect, own, and operate a housing development on certain property located in the Township to serve persons of low to moderate income and that the Sponsor has offered to pay the Township on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes.  
149.003 - Definitions. 
Sec. III. All terms shall be defined as set forth in the Act, except as follows: 
A.	Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
B.	Annual Shelter Rent for Rent Restricted Units means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all low income occupants of the Development, as provided for herein Section III [149.003] F., from the Development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of the portion of said charges attributable to gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants by the Sponsor. 
C.	Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
D.	Development means the proposed multiple family Housing Development located in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, on land more particularly described on Exhibit "A" [149.050] attached hereto and made a part hereof, to be known as Springbrook Townhomes. 
E.	Housing Development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the Authority has determined improves the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
F.	Low Income Persons or Families means those persons and families whose income is 60% or less or area median income as adjusted for family size and who are determined to be eligible to move into the Development under the provisions of Section 42, with all units to be rent restricted. 
G.	Section 42 means Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
H.	Sponsor means Springbrook Townhomes Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership. 
I.	Township means the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
J.	Township Resident means anyone currently residing in the Township or anyone currently working or notified that they are hired to work in the Township. 
K.	Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the Sponsor.  
149.004 - Class of housing developments. 
Sec. IV. It is determined that the class of Housing Developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of taxes shall be Section 42 Housing Developments which have received an LIHTC allocation from the Authority pursuant to Section 42. Based on representations and warranties of the Sponsor, it is determined that the Development is a Housing Development eligible for tax exemption provided by Section 15(a) of the Act.  
149.005 - Establishment of annual service charge. 
Sec. V. The Development and the property on which it will be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after (i) the year the Development is placed in service as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy from the appropriate public officials or (ii) compliance by the Sponsor with all requirements imposed on the "owner" by subsection (1) of Section 15(a) of the Act, whichever is later. The Township, acknowledging that the Sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of the Development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this Ordinance and the qualification of the Development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this Ordinance, and in consideration of the Sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of LIHTC allocation from the Authority, to construct, own and operate the Development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. 
For 2004 and 2005 the annual service charge shall be the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition. Thereafter, the annual service charge shall consist of the sum of 10% of the collections from the total Annual Shelter Rent for Rent Restricted Units during the period from January 1 through December 31 of each year. Notwithstanding the provisions of the immediately preceding sentences, for all years during which this section is operative, the annual service charge shall be no less than the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition.  
149.006 - Contractual effect of Ordinance. 
Sec. VI. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15a of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the Township and the Sponsor with the Authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this Ordinance.  
149.007 - Payment to Township residents. 
Sec. VII.  
The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the Ordinance shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes except that the estimated annual payment shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year. The Sponsor shall submit a statement from its independent auditor verifying the amounts used to compute the payments are correct as reported. The statement and supporting documents (which may be from the Sponsor's Federal tax return) shall be due by February 28 following the subject tax year. Any adjustment in payment (from the estimated payment) shall be made on or before that date. Any claim for overpayment shall be made by appropriate adjustment in the estimated annual payment next due.  
149.008 - Preference to Township residents. 
Sec. VIII. To the extent permissible under federal, state or local fair housing laws, the Sponsor shall give preference for occupancy of the Development to qualified applicants who are Township residents.  
149.009 - Benefits. 
Sec. IX. The benefits of tax exemption granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be allocated by the Sponsor exclusively to the Low Income Persons or Families of the Development in the form of reduced rent. The Sponsor shall, at the request of the Township, submit to the Township such evidence and documentation as may be reasonably necessary to verify Sponsor's compliance with this requirement.  
149.010 - Duration. 
Sec. X. Commencing with the tax year 2005 and ending with the tax year 2040, this Ordinance shall remain in effect and shall not terminate from the effective date hereof, provided that the Development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section 42 and that construction of the Development commences within one year of the Certification Date hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, 12-29-04) 
149.011 - Audits; inspections of records. 
Sec. XI. Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the Sponsor shall provide the Township such accounting records, audits and financial reports as the Township shall reasonably require to verify the computation of the annual service charge as provided by this Ordinance. Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the books and records of the Sponsor pertaining to the Development shall be available for review and audit by the Township at all reasonable times.  
149.012 - Lien. 
Sec. XII. Annual service charges payable pursuant to this Ordinance shall be a lien on the Development and, if delinquent, shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as general property taxes.  
149.013 - Severability. 
Sec. XIII. The various sections and provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section or provisions of this Ordinance other than the Section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
149.014 - Effective date. 
Sec. XIV. This Ordinance shall be effective thirty (30) days after publication in a local newspaper of general circulation.  
EXHIBIT A  
149.050 - PROPERTY DESCRIPTION 
Land in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, described as: 
A PARCEL OF LAND IN THE SOUTHEAST ¼ OF SECTION 26, T.14 N.- R.4 W., UNION TOWNSHIP, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: TO FIX THE POINT OF BEGINNING, COMMENCE AT THE EAST ¼ CORNER OF SAID SECTION 26; THENCE S.01°-00'-17?E., ON THE EAST LINE OF SAID SECTION, 660.00 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING OF THIS DESCRIPTION; THENCE CONTINUING S.01°-00'-17?E., ON SAID EAST SECTION LINE, 852.21 FEET; THENCE S.89°-16'-30?W., ON THE SOUTH LINE OF THE NORTH 80 ACRES OF THE EAST 140 ACRES OF SAID SOUTHEAST ¼, 576.11 FEET; THENCE N.01°-00'-17?W., PARALLEL WITH SAID EAST SECTION LINE, 852.21 FEET; THENCE N.89°-16'-30?E., PARALLEL WITH THE EAST AND WEST ¼ LINE OF SAID SECTION, 576.11 FEET BACK TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING, CONTAINING 11.27 ACRES OF LAND AND SUBJECT TO HIGHWAY USE OF THE EAST 33.00 FEET THEREOF AND ALSO SUBJECT TO AND TOGETHER WITH ANY OTHER EASEMENTS AND/OR RESTRICTIONS OF RECORD. 
Part of parcel number 37-14-026-40-001-05  
150.000 - SECTION 42 TAX EXEMPTION—SPRINGBROOK TOWNHOMES, PHASE II Ord. No. 2005-02 Adopted February 23, 2005 
An Ordinance to provide for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a multiple family dwelling project for persons of low income to be assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1996 (1996 as amended, MCLA Section 125.1404 et seq., MSA Section 116.114(1) et seq., the "Act". 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, HEREBY ORDAINS: 
 
150.001 - Name. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known and sited as the Charter Township of Union Ordinance.  
150.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1996 (1996 PA 346, as amended, MCLA Section 125.1401 et seq., MSA Section 116.114(1) et seq., the "Act") The Charter Township of Union ("Township") is authorized by this Act to establish or change a service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to moderate income is a public necessity, and as the Township will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this Ordinance for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this Ordinance are essential to the determination of the economic feasibility of the proposed housing development ("Development"), which is to be constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption ordinance. 
The Township acknowledges that the Sponsor has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit ("LIHTC") provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to erect, own, and operate a housing development on certain property located in the Township to serve persons of low to moderate income and that the Sponsor has offered to pay the Township on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes.  
150.003 - Definitions. 
Sec. III. All terms shall be defined as set forth in the Act, except as follows: 
A.	Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
B.	Annual Shelter Rent for Rent Restricted Units means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all low income occupants of the Development, as provided for herein Section III F., from the Development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of the portion of said charges attributable to gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants by the Sponsor. 
C.	Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
D.	Development means the proposed multiple family Housing Development located in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, on land more particularly described on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and made a part hereof, to be known as Springbrook Townhomes Phase II. 
E.	Housing Development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the Authority has determined improves the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
F.	Low Income Persons or Families means those persons and families whose income is 60% or less or area median income as adjusted for family size and who are determined to be eligible to move into the Development under the provisions of Section 42, with all units to be rent restricted. 
G.	Section 42 means Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
H.	Sponsor means Springbrook Townhomes Phase II Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership. 
I.	Township means the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
J.	Township Resident means anyone currently residing in the Township or anyone currently working or notified that they are hired to work in the Township. 
K.	Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the Sponsor.  
150.004 - Class of Housing Developments. 
Sec. IV. It is determined that each class of Housing Development to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of taxes shall be Section 42 Housing Developments which have received and LIHTC allocation from the Authority pursuant to Section 42. Based on representations and warranties of the Sponsor, it is determined that the Development is a Housing Development eligible for tax exemption provided by Section 15(a) of the Act.  
150.005 - Establishment of Annual Service Charge. 
Sec. V. The Development and the property on which it will be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after (i) the year the Development is placed in service as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy from the appropriate public officials or (ii) compliance by the Sponsor with all requirements imposed on the "owner" by subsection (1) of Section 15(a) of the Act, whichever is later. The Township, acknowledging that the Sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of the Development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this Ordinance and the qualification of the Development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this Ordinance, and in construct, own and operate the Development, agrees to accept payment of annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. 
For 2005 and 2006 the annual service charge shall be the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition. Thereafter, the annual service charge shall consist of the sum of 10% of the collections from the total Annual Shelter Rent for Rent Restricted Units during the period from January 1 through December 31 of each year. Notwithstanding the provisions of the immediately preceding sentences, for all years during which this section is operative, the annual service charge shall be no less than the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition.  
150.006 - Contractual Effect of Ordinance. 
Sec. VI. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15a of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the Township and the Sponsor with the Authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this ordinance.  
150.007 - Payment to Township Residents. 
Sec. VII. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the Ordinance shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes except that the estimated annual payment shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year. The Sponsor shall submit a statement from its independent auditor verifying the amounts used to compute the payments are correct as reported. The statement and supporting documents (which may be from the Sponsor's Federal tax return) shall be due by February 28 following the subject tax year. Any adjustment in payment (from the estimated payment) shall be made on or before that date. Any claim for overpayment shall be made by appropriate adjustment in the estimated annual payment next due.  
150.008 - Preference to Township Residents. 
Sec. VIII. To the extent permissible under federal, state or local fair housing laws, the Sponsor shall give preference for occupancy of the Development to qualified applicants who are Township Residents.  
150.009 - Benefits. 
Sec. IX. The benefits of tax exemption granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be allocated by the Sponsor exclusively to the Low Income Persons or Families of the Development in the form of reduced rent. The Sponsor shall, at the request of the Township, submit to the Township such evidence and documentation as may be reasonably necessary to verify Sponsor's compliance with this requirement.  
150.010 - Duration. 
Sec. X. Commencing with the tax year 2006 and ending with the tax year 2040, this Ordinance shall remain in effect and shall not terminate from the effective date hereof, provided that the Development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section 42 and that construction of the Development commences on or before December 31, 2005.  
150.011 - Audits; Inspections of Records. 
Sec. XI. Subject to any limitation imposed by law, the Sponsor shall provide the Township such accounting records, audits and financial reports as the Township shall reasonably require to verify the computation of the annual service charge as provided by this Ordinance. Subject to any limitation imposed by law, the books and records of the Sponsor pertaining to the Development shall be available for review and audit by the Township at all reasonable times.  
150.012 - Lien. 
Sec. XII. Annual service charges payable pursuant to this Ordinance shall be a lien on the Development and, if delinquent, shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as general property taxes.  
150.013 - Severability. 
Sec. XIII. The various sections and provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section or provisions of this Ordinance other than the Section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
150.014 - Effective Date. 
Sec. XIV. This Ordinance shall be effective thirty (30) days after publication in a local newspaper of general circulation.  
151.000 - SECTION 42, TAX EXEMPTION—CRANBROOK SENIOR VILLAGE Ordinance 2006-02 Adopted February 8, 2006 
An Ordinance to provide for a service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed senior dwelling project for persons of low income to be assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Ac of 1996 (1996 PA 346, as amended, MCLA Section 125.1404 et seq., MSA Section 116.114(1) et seq., the "Act". 
The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, hereby ordains: 
 
151.001 - Name. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Union Ordinance 2006-2.  
151.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1996 (1996 PA 346, as amended, MCLA Section 125.1401 et seq., MSA Section 116.114(1) et seq., the "Act") The Charter Township of Union ("Township") is authorized by this Act to establish or change a service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to moderate income is a public necessity, and as the Township will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this Ordinance for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this Ordinance are essential to the determination of the economic feasibility of the proposed housing development ("Development"), which is to be constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption ordinance. 
The Township acknowledges that the Sponsor has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit ("LIHTC") provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to erect, own, and operate a housing development on certain property located in the Township to serve persons of low to moderate income and that the Sponsor has offered to pay the Township on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes.  
151.003 - Definitions. 
Sec. III. All terms shall be defined as set forth in the Act, except as follows: 
A.	Act means the State Housing Authority Development Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
B.	Annual shelter rent for rent restricted units. means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all low income occupants of the Development, as provided for herein Section III F., for the Development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of the portion of said charges attributable to gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants by the Sponsor. 
C.	Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
D.	Development means the proposed multiple family Housing Development located in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, on land more particularly described on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and made a part hereof, to be known as Cranbrook Senior Village. 
E.	Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the Authority has determined improves the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
F.	Low income persons or families means those persons and families whose income is 60% or less or area median income as adjusted for family size and who are determined to be eligible to move into the Development under the provisions of Section 42, with all units to be rent restricted. 
G.	Section 42 means Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
H.	Sponsor means Cranbrook Senior Village Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership. 
I.	Township means the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
J.	Township resident means anyone currently residing in the Township or anyone currently working or notified that they are hired to work in the Township. 
K.	Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service, and/or electrical service which are paid by the Sponsor.  
151.004 - Class of housing development. 
Sec. IV. It is determined that he class of Housing Developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of taxes shall be Section 42 Housing Developments which have received an LIHTC allocation from the Authority pursuant to Section 42. Based on representations and warranties of the Sponsor, it is determined that he Development is a Housing Development eligible for tax exemption provided by Section 15(a) of the Act.  
151.005 - Establishment of annual service charge. 
Sec. V. The Development and the property on which it will be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after (i) the year the Development is placed in service as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy from the appropriate public officials (ii) compliance by the Sponsor with all requirements imposed on the "owner" by subsection (1) of Section 15(a) of the Act, whichever is later. The Township, acknowledging that the Sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of eh Development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this Ordinance and the qualification of the Development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this Ordinance, and in consideration of the Sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of LIHTC allocation from the Authority, to construct, own and operate the Development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. 
For 2006 and 2007 the annual service charge shall be the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition. Thereafter, the annual service charge shall consist of the sum of 9 (nine) % of the collections from the total Annual Shelter Rent for Rent Restricted Units during the period from January 1 through December 31 of each year. Notwithstanding the provisions of the immediately preceding sentences, for all years during which this section is operative, the annual service charge shall be no less than the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition.  
151.006 - Contractual effect of ordinance. 
Sec. VI. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15a of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the Township and the Sponsor with the Authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this Ordinance.  
151.007 - Payment to Township. 
Sec. VII. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the Ordinance shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes except that the estimated annual payment shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year. The Sponsor shall submit a statement from its independent auditor verifying the amounts used to compute the payments are correct as reported. The statement and supporting documents (which may be from the Sponsor's Federal tax return) shall be due by February 28 following the subject year. Any adjustment in payment (from the estimated payment) shall be made on or before that date. Any claim for overpayment shall be made by appropriate adjustment in the estimated annual payment next due.  
151.008 - Preference to township residents. 
Sec. VIII. To the extent permissible under the federal, state, or local fair housing laws, the Sponsor shall give preference for occupancy of the Development to qualified applicants who are Township Residents.  
151.009 - Benefits. 
Sec. IX. The benefits of tax exemption granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be allocated by the Sponsor exclusively to the Low Income Persons or Families of the Development in the form of reduced rent. The Sponsor shall, at the request of the Township, submit to the Township such evidence and documentation as may be reasonably necessary to verify Sponsor's compliance with this requirement.  
151.010 - Duration. 
Sec. X. Commencing with the year 2008 and ending with the tax year 2043, this Ordinance shall remain in effect and shall not terminate from the effective date hereof, provided that he Development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section 42 and that construction of the Development commences on or before December 31, 2006.  
151.011 - Audits; inspections of record. 
Sec. XI. Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the Sponsor shall provide the Township such accounting records, audits and financial reports as the Township shall reasonably require to verify the computation of the annual service charge as provided by this Ordinance. Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the books and records of the Sponsor pertaining to the Development shall be available for review and audit by the Township at all reasonable times.  
151.012 - Lien. 
Sec. XII. Annual service charges payable pursuant to the Ordinance shall be a lien on the Development and, if delinquent, shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as general property taxes.  
151.013 - Severability. 
Sec. XIII. The various sections and provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section or provisions of this Ordinance other than the Section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
151.014 - Effective date. 
Sec. XIV. This Ordinance shall be effective thirty (30) days after publication in a local newspaper of general circulation.  
152.001 - Name. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Union Ordinance 2007-03.  
152.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge of in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1996 (1996 PA 346, as amended, MCLA, Section 125-1401 et seq., the "Act") The Charter Township of Union ("Township") is authorized by this Act to establish or change a service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to moderate income is a public necessity, and as the Township will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of the Ordinance for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in the Ordinance are essential to the determination of the economic feasibility of the proposed housing development ("Development"), which is to be constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption ordinance. 
The Township acknowledges that the Sponsor has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit ("LIHTC") provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to erect, own, and operate a housing development on certain property located in the Township to serve persons of low to moderate income and that the Sponsor has offered to pay the Township on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes.  
152.003 - Definitions. 
Sec. III. All terms shall be defined as set forth in the Act, except as follows: 
A.	Act means the State Housing Authority Development Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
B.	Annual Shelter Rent for Rent Restricted Units means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all low income occupants of the Development, as provided for herein Section III F., for the Development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of the portion of said charges attributable to gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants by the Sponsor. 
C.	Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
D.	Development means the proposed multiple families Housing Development located in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, on land more particularly descried on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and made a part hereof to be known as Cranbrook Senior Village. 
E.	Housing Development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the Authority has determined improves the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
F.	Low Income Persons or Families means those persons and families whose income is 60% or less or area median income as adjusted for family size and who are determined to be eligible to move into the Development under the provisions of Section 42, with all units to be rent restricted. 
G.	Section 42 means Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
H.	Sponsor means Cranbrook Senior Village Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership. 
I.	Township means the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
J.	Township Resident means anyone currently residing in the Township or anyone currently working or notified that they are hired to work in the Township. 
K.	Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service, and/or electrical service which are paid by the Sponsor.  
152.004 - Class of housing development. 
Sec. IV. It is determined that the class of Housing Developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of taxes shall be Section 42 Housing Developments which have received an LIHTC allocation from the Authority pursuant to Section 42. Based on representations and warranties of the Sponsor, it is determined that the Development is a Housing Development eligible for tax exemption provided by Section 15(a) of the Act.  
152.005 - Establishment of annual service charge. 
Sec. V. The Development and the property on which it will be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after (i) the year the Development is placed in service as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy from the appropriate public officials (ii) compliance by the Sponsor with all requirements imposed on the "owner" by subsection (1) of Section 15(a) of the Act, whichever is later. The Township, acknowledging that the Sponsor and the Authority have established the economic feasibility of the Development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this Ordinance and the qualification of the Development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this Ordinance, and in consideration of the Sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of LIHTC allocation from the Authority, to construct own and operate the Development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. 
For 2006 and 2007 the annual service charge shall be the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition. Thereafter, the annual service charge shall consist of the sum of 9 (nine) % of the collections from the total Annual Shelter Rent for Rent Restricted Units during the period from January 1 through December 31 of each year. Notwithstanding the provisions of the immediately preceding sentences, for all years during which this section is operative, the annual service charge shall be no less than the total real estate taxes which would otherwise be assessed against the lands and premises on which the Development is to be built if they remained in an unimproved condition.  
152.006 - Contractual effect of ordinance. 
Sec. VI. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a) of the Act to the contrary, a contract between the Township and the Sponsor with the Authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this Ordinance.  
152.007 - Payment to Township. 
Sec. VII. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the Ordinance shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes except that the estimated annual payment shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year. The Sponsor shall submit a statement from its independent auditor verifying the amounts used to compute the payments are correct as reported. The statement and supporting documents (which may be from the Sponsor's Federal tax return) shall be due by February 28 following the subject year. Any adjustment in payment (from the estimated payment) shall be made on or before that date. Any claim for overpayment shall be made by appropriate adjustment in the estimated annual payment next due.  
152.008 - Preference to Township residents. 
Sec. VIII. To the extent permissible under the federal, state, or local fair housing laws, the Sponsor shall give preference for occupancy of the Development to qualified applicants who are Township Residents.  
152.009 - Benefits. 
Sec. IX. The benefits of tax exemption granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be allocated by the Sponsor exclusively to the Low Income Persons or Families of the Development in the form of reduced rent. The Sponsor shall, at the request of the Township, submit to the Township such evidence and documentation as may be reasonably necessary to verify Sponsor's compliance with this requirement.  
152.010 - Duration. 
Sec. X. Commencing with the year 2009 and ending with the tax year 2044, this Ordinance shall remain in effect and shall not terminate from the effective date hereof, provided that the Development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section 42 and that construction of the Development commences on or before December 31, 2007.  
152.011 - Audits; inspections of record. 
Sec. XI. Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the Sponsor shall provide the Township such accounting records, audits and financial reports as the Township shall reasonably require to verify the computation of the annual service charge as provided by this Ordinance. Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the books and records of the Sponsor pertaining to the Development shall be available for review and audit by the Township at all reasonable times.  
152.012 - Lien. 
Sec. XII. Annual service charges payable pursuant to the Ordinance shall be a lien on the Development and, if delinquent, shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as general property taxes.  
152.013 - Severability. 
Sec. XIII. The various sections and provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section or provisions of this Ordinance other than the Section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
152.014 - Effective date. 
Sec. XIV. This Ordinance shall be effective thirty (30) days after publication in a local newspaper of general circulation.  
153.000 - HOUSING LICENSING CODE Ord. No. 2012-08 Adopted: Nov. 14, 2012 
 
153.001 - Title. 
Sec. 801.001. This Code shall be known as the "Housing Licensing Code" and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this Code".  
153.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. 801.002. The purpose of this Code is to provide minimum requirements for the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the owners and occupants of certain residential buildings.  
153.003 - International Property Maintenance Code. 
Sec. 801.003. The current edition of the "International Property Maintenance Code" including any and all future amendments to said International Property Maintenance Code, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in its entirety, together with and subject to the additional definitions described in Section 801.004 [153.004], the modifications and amendments described in Section 801.007 [153.007], and the provisions of the other Sections of this Code.  
153.004 - Scope. 
Sec. 801.004. 
(A)	Application. This Code shall apply to all rented or leased buildings, including manufactured homes, or any portions thereof, that are used or intended to be used for human habitation as a two-family dwelling, a multi-family dwelling, a rooming dwelling, a boarding dwelling, a lodging dwelling, or a hotel or motel. This Code shall also apply to single-family dwellings which are leased or rented by the owner for more than one hundred and eighty (180) days during any twelve-month period. In addition, if a building that is licensed under this Code but does not comply with all of the provisions of the Code is thereafter unlicensed for one year or more, the building must thereafter comply with this Code before it acquires a new license. 
(B)	Alterations. Existing licensed buildings that are subject to this Code, but that do not comply with this Code shall, at the time of alteration or repair, and with respect to this new work, be altered or repaired to conform to this Code, the Michigan Building Code- current edition, and the laws of the state of Michigan. 
(C)	Relocation. Buildings which are moved or relocated shall be considered new buildings and shall comply with all of the requirements of this Code. 
(D)	Severability. If a section, subsections, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or a violation of the laws of the State of Michigan, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code.  
153.005 - Definitions. 
Sec. 801.005. 
(A)	Boarding dwelling. A rooming dwelling where meals are provided. 
(B)	Building, existing. A building constructed prior to this Code or one which was built pursuant to a valid building permit. 
(C)	Ceiling height. The clear vertical distance from finished floor to the finished ceiling. 
(D)	Designated agent. A person, firm or corporation acting on behalf of, representing, or caring for the property on behalf of the owner. 
(E)	Dwelling. A building including manufactured homes, used in whole or in part for human habitation. 
(F)	Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
(G)	Exit. A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way, and shall include intervening, doorways, corridors, ramps, stairways, smoke proof enclosures, horizontal exits, exit courts, and yards. 
(H)	Family. A family is defined as either: 
(1)	Up to three unrelated persons living together as a single dwelling unit.
(2)	Parents (or persons legally married), with their direct lineal descendants, whether natural or adopted; and including domestic employees thereof, together with not more than two persons not so related, living together in the whole or part of the dwelling comprising a single dwelling unit. 
(I)	Functional family. A Functional family shall mean a collective number of individuals living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a regular and permanent nature and having a distinct domestic character or a demonstrable and recognizable bond where each party is responsible for the basic material needs of the other and all are living and cooking as a single housekeeping unit. A functional family shall be given the same rights and privileges and shall have the same duties and responsibilities as a family, as defined herein for purposes of construing and interpreting the Zoning Ordinance. 
a.	This definition of a functional family shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, group, coterie, or organization, nor include a group of individuals whose association is temporary or seasonal in character or nature, or for the limited duration of their education, nor a group whose sharing of a dwelling unit is not to function as a family, but merely for convenience and economics. Nor shall it include residents of a state-licensed residential facility except to the extent permitted by the law. 
b.	Any person seeking the rights and privileges afforded a member of a functional family by this chapter shall have the burden of proof by clear and convincing evidence of each of the elements of a functional family. 
(J)	Good repair. Suitable general condition after repair. 
(K)	Guest room. Any room or rooms used, or intended to be used by a guest which is a person sharing a rooming or dwelling unit in a non-permanent status for not more than 72 hours, for sleeping purposes. Every 100 square feet of superficial floor area in a guest room. 
(L)	Habitable room. Any room meeting the requirements of this Code for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, services rooms connecting corridors, laundries, foyers, storage spaces, unfinished attics, utility rooms, cellars and similar spaces. 
(M)	Home day care. Any dwelling to include buildings and structures occupied by persons of any age who receive custodial care for less than 24 hours by individuals other than parents or guardians or relatives by blood, marriage, or adoption, and in a place other than the home of the person cared for. 
(N)	Hotel and motel. A building containing six or more guest rooms used for the accommodation of transient guests, whether rented or hired out to be occupied or are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. If used or intended to be used or designed primarily for accommodation of transient or non-transient guest[s], the designation given by the owner (such as hotel, motel, motor inn, or similar) may (but is not required) be used in determining its classification. It does not include any jail, hospital, or institution in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
(O)	Human habitation. Living quarters used by people whether for a portion of a day or longer, containing certain provisions for sleeping and may include provisions for living, cooking, dining, and sanitation. 
(P)	Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is 8 body-ft. (2.4m) or more in width or 40 body-ft. (12.2m) or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 ft.2 (29.7 m2) or more and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating and electrical systems contained therein; except that such terms shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the regulatory agency. Calculations used to determine the number of square feet in a structure is based on the structure's exterior dimensions, measured at the largest horizontal projections when erected on site. These dimensions include all expandable rooms, cabinets, and other projections containing interior space, but do not include bay windows. 
a.	Single-wide units in a mobile home park will comply with Public Act 215 of 2009.
b.	Single-wide units outside mobile home parks will comply as a single-family dwelling unit. 
(Q)	Multi-family dwelling. A building containing three or more dwelling units. 
(R)	Rental inspector. The duly appointed Union Township Rental Inspector or a regularly authorized assistant. 
(S)	Rental unit. Any dwelling unit rented or leased or any dwelling occupied as a home or family unit containing certain rooms in excess of those occupied by members of the immediate family. 
(T)	Rooming dwelling. A building containing one or more units that is approved for use by three or more person[s], not meeting the definition of a family, per dwelling unit. This is also known as a Rooming House. 
(U)	Superficial floor area. Is the net floor area within the enclosing walls of the room in which the ceiling height is not less than five feet excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes, cabinets, kitchen units, or fixtures. 
(V)	Tenant. Any person, other than a legal or equitable title holder, occupying or possessing a dwelling or part thereof. 
(W)	Two-family dwelling. A building used exclusively or designed for occupancy of two individual families living independently from each other.  
153.006 - Responsibilites of owners. 
Sec. 801.006. Every owner shall comply with the following provisions. 
(A)	At the time a new tenant occupies a vacant dwelling unit, the new tenant shall be provided with a clean, healthful and safe dwelling unit, free of visible mold and mildew. 
(B)	Maintain the public or shared areas of a dwelling or the premises in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition. 
(C)	Maintain in good repair every dwelling and premises and all parts thereof, including, but not limited to, plumbing, heating, ventilating, and electrical systems, and the interiors and exteriors of dwelling and dwelling units. 
(D)	Maintain all fixtures, furniture, and furnishings that are furnished by the owner in a safe condition and in good repair, compliant with the manufacturer's requirements. 
(E)	Display in a conspicuous place in a common way of the dwelling or dwelling unit a copy of the housing license or attach a copy of the then current Housing License to the holder at the time of execution of the lease, or include the following provisions in the lease: 
"The Charter Township of Union regulates rental properties within the Township. Your Landlord will provide you a copy of the current housing license for your property without charge upon your written request to the Landlord. You may also acquire a copy of the current housing license your property by contacting the Charter Township of Union Rental Inspector at 989-772-4600 x242." 
(F)	Include within the terms of every written lease the provisions set forth in the Township's Nuisance Party Ordinance being part 61 of the Charter Township of Union's Compilation of Ordinances. 
(G)	Cooperate with and assist the township in the enforcement of the Township's Nuisance Party Ordinance being part 61 of the Charter Township of Union's Compilation of Ordinances. 
(H)	An owner or agent shall not allow a dwelling unit to be occupied by more persons than such dwelling unit is licensed for or allow any portion of the dwelling unit to be occupied in such a manner that any of the provisions of this Code are violated. 
(I)	Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this Code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions with the required permits. 
(J)	Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this Code or a previous regulation or Code under which the building was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required by applicable law to be removed from or shut off for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this Code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protections and safety systems and devices in existing buildings. 
(K)	All water leaks shall be property [properly] repaired.
(L)	All locations within the building for which the Landlord is responsible for under the Lease, shall be kept free of visible mold, mildew and other environmental hazards. 
(M)	Comply with other applicable provisions of this Code. 
153.007 - Repsonsibilities of occupants. 
Sec. 801.007. Every occupant shall cooperate with and assist the owner to keep and maintain the building, dwelling unit and premises to meet the minimum requirements of this Code. In addition: 
(A)	Every occupant shall notify the owner or his/her agent in writing of any water leaks or of any condition believed to be in violation of this Code which directly affects the dwelling unit within a reasonable time of discovery of any leaks or condition. 
(B)	Every occupant may at any time notify the Rental Inspector of any condition believed to be a violation of this Code. 
(C)	Every occupant shall properly use all facilities, including bathroom and kitchen facilities, and shall maintain them in a manner that is sufficiently clean and sanitary as not to place other occupants within that building at risk for safety or health reasons. 
(D)	An occupant shall not sublet or allow any portion of the dwelling unit to be occupied in such a manner that any of the provisions of this Code are violated. 
(E)	Every occupant shall properly use the designated parking area provided by the applicable lease and shall not park across sidewalks or lawns. 
(F)	Occupants of any dwelling unit shall be responsible jointly and/or severally for any violation of this section of this Code. 
(G)	Every occupant shall assist the owner and cooperate with the township in compliance with and enforcement of the Township's Nuisance Party Ordinance being part 61 of the Charter Township of Union's Compilation of Ordinances. 
(H)	Occupants shall not place any article of furniture and/or an appliance manufactured for and intended primarily for indoor use out of doors, in yards, on open porches, or patios. 
(I)	No occupant of any dwelling unit or building shall cause intentional destruction nor allow the intentional destruction by others to the dwelling unit or building or any part thereof. 
(J)	No occupant shall access, nor permit access by others, to the rooftop of any structure. Exception: access by property maintenance personnel shall be permitted for necessary repairs. 
(K)	Every occupant shall properly use all facilities and maintain them in a clean and sanitary manner free of excessive accumulations of waste product or clutter, unwashed clothing and unclean dishware or cookware. All areas, for which the Tenant is responsible for under the Lease, shall be kept free of visible mold or mildew. 
(L)	No occupant of any dwelling unit or building shall allow refuse, debris or other substance to accumulate in the dwelling unit or building or any other area, which said occupant has use or possession thereof, which puts other occupants of that building at risk for health or safety reasons.  
153.008 - Referenced codes and standards. 
Sec. 801.008. The following sections and subsections of the International Property Maintenance Code are revised, amended and/or replaced by the following sections: 
301.4 Owner occupied rental. Owner occupied portions of residential dwelling buildings shall be inspected annually to insure [ensure] that a non-owner occupant of that residential dwelling building will not be subject to risk because of safety or sanitary conditions existing in the owner occupied portion of the residential dwelling building. 
301.5 New rental properties. Each dwelling added to the housing licensing program after June 1, 2012, shall be considered as new construction with respect to fire resistance rate construction, fire protection systems and means of egress and shall comply with all sections of this Code and all other applicable Codes. 
301.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation (see 403.1) of habitable rooms, food preparations areas, food service areas or any area where products to be included or utilized in for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25mm) and every swinging screen or storm door shall have a self closing device in good working condition. 
304.18.1 Doors. Each dwelling added to the housing licensing program after the adoption date of this Code, shall provide all doors providing access to a dwelling unit that is equipped with a deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein. Such deadbolt locks shall in be installed according to manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. All deadbolt locks shall be designed and installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the dwelling unit without the use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort. 
307.4 Garbage facilities shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the township's zoning requirements and The International Property Maintenance Code. 
307.5 Occupant Responsibilities. Occupants of all dwellings are required to comply with The International Property Maintenance Code. 
403.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section 402.1. 
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated. 
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors comply with the Michigan Residential Building Code for light and ventilation in habitable rooms. 
403.6 Sleeping rooms with two doors. Sleeping rooms with an exterior door in lieu of a window shall be provided with a screen door at the exterior for ventilation. 
404.3.2 Elevated sleeping surface. Lofts, bunk beds or other elevated sleeping surfaces shall be installed not closer than 30 inches from the top of the sleeping surface to the ceiling of the room. Lofts, bunk beds or other elevated sleeping surfaces shall not block any opening or windows that are required means of egress by any applicable code. 
404.4.2 Access from bedrooms. Each dwelling added to the housing licensing program after the adoption date of this Code shall not have bedrooms which constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not service [serve] as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces. 
404.8 Minimum floor area. Each dwelling subject to this Code shall have the minimum number of square feet of total floor area as set forth in Chapter 21 of the Charter Township of Union's Zoning Ordinance 1991-1995 as amended, except as provided in 154.007. 
702.5 Under-stair protections. Enclosed accessible spaces under stairs shall have the walls, under stair surface and any soffit protected on the enclosed side with minimum ½ inch gypsum wallboard, taped and finished. Use of under stair storage areas, which pose difficulty for compliance with this Code, shall be discontinued and permanently sealed from future use. Under stair mechanical areas, which pose difficulty for compliance with this Code, may be protected by the installation of domestic water sprinkler head(s) to completely protect the area. 
702.6 Emergency escape. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall be provided and installed in accordance with this Code, as follows: 
702.6.1 Emergency space and rescue openings for existing rental dwellings shall be provided and installed in accordance with the Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings. 
702.6.2 Emergency escape and rescue openings for each dwelling added to the rental housing licensing program after the adoption date of the Code shall be provided and installed in accordance with the Michigan Residential Building Code. 
703.3 Separation required. Each dwelling subject to this Code with attached garage or storage areas shall have a fire separation extending the full width and height of the common wall(s) with the living portion of the structure. All separations shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Michigan Residential Building Code. If the living space of the structure is located above a garage space, the common floor/ceiling between the two spaces shall be separated in accordance with the garage separations section of this and all applicable codes. Fire resistance-rated floor-ceiling and all assemblies shall extend to and be tight against the exterior wall, and wall assemblies shall extend tight to and be sealed to the underside of the roof sheathing. 
704.2 Smoke Alarms. Each dwelling added to the housing licensing program after the adoption of this Code shall have smoke alarms installed in accordance with the Michigan Residential Building Code. Dwellings licensed on or before the adoption date of the Code shall comply with State of Michigan law as amended for the Michigan Building Code (R408.30446), the Michigan Residential Code (R408.30546) and the Michigan Rehabilitation Code. When any new smoke alarm is installed in any dwelling licensed under this Code after this date, the smoke alarm shall comply with the following provisions: 
• There needs to be smoke detectors: 
1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms; 
2. In each room used for sleeping purposes; 
3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars, but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. 
• If a unit does not have smoke detectors in ALL the above locations, then a violation will be issued allowing 30 days for the smoke detectors to be installed. Only wired (preferred) or sealed (non-removable) non-rechargeable 10-year battery devises can be installed. 
• If a unit has battery smoke detectors (9v style) it will be allowed (not noted as a violation), BUT a Recommendation for upgrading all detectors to be wired (interconnected) (preferred) or sealed (non-removable) battery, non-rechargeable 10-year battery will be made. This recommendation is allowed to be made twice with the expectation that the detector(s) be upgraded by the third annual inspection cycle. 
• New rentals after June 1, 2012 will need to meet current code regardless of the age of the property. 
704.2.1 A smoke alarm shall receive its primary power from the building wiring (provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source) and shall be equipped with a back-up battery, or 
704.2.2 A smoke alarm shall be sealed and have a non-removable, not-rechargeable batteries [battery] which will last ten (10) years. 
704.6 Smoke alarm maintenance. Smoke alarms shall be maintained in good working condition and shall be replaced in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and the detector listing. Smoke alarms shall be maintained free of accumulations of dirt, dust and other materials that may impede operation. Covers shall be maintained on all alarm units for proper testing. 
The following test is not found in the housing code, it is referenced in the NFPA standards located within the Rental Inspector's office. 
NFPA 72 1999 Edition Section 8-3.5 recommends following manufacturer recommendations for replacing smoke alarms but states, [smoke alarms] "shall not remain in service longer than 10 years from the date of installation." 
704.7 Carbon Monoxide Detectors. There needs to be a minimum of at least one battery unit in the dwelling unit. It needs to be located near a register (if available) in the vicinity of the bedrooms. Plug-in battery back-up is the best option, but battery only is acceptable. 
704.8 Egress Windows. All bedrooms need to have at least one egress window. 
• On current rentals if an existing window is operational and is a viable and have [has] a reasonable means of escape but does not meet egress requirements, it will comply. But a Recommendation to upgrade the window(s) will be made. This recommendation is allowed to be made with the expectation when the property is upgraded (permit required) the window(s) will be upgraded to comply with the Michigan Building Code requirement for installation [of] an egress window. 
• On current rentals if the current window is not operational or viable and have [has] a reasonable means of escape, then a violation will be issued, allowing 30 days for the window to be altered, to manufacturer's specifications, or an egress window to be install[ed] according to the Michigan Building Code requirement for installation of an egress window. 
807.008.1 Michigan Residential Building Code 
Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings 
The International Property Maintenance Code 
The Codes and standards referenced in this Ordinance are considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this Code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this Code shall apply. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this Code and the codes described in this Ordinance.  
153.009 - Housing license application; fee. 
Sec. 801.009. 
(A)	No person shall operate or permit occupancy of a dwelling covered by this Code unless a current, unrevoked housing license has been issued by the Rental Inspector, or designee, in said person's name for the specific named dwelling. 
(B)	The following shall apply to the issuance of any housing license:
(1)	Application for housing license or for renewal shall be made in writing by the Owner to the Rental Inspector on forms furnished by the Rental Inspector and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee. 
(a)	If after inspection(s) by the Rental Inspector, or designee, the dwelling is found to be in accordance with all provisions of this Code, and all applicable fees have been paid, a housing license will be issued. 
(b)	A housing license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance (unless sooner revoked) and may be renewed for successive periods of one year, except the Rental Inspector is authorized, for the first such housing license issued for a dwelling, to issue the housing license for a period of up to one year for the purpose of adjusting the time when such housing license expires. 
(2)	Applicants shall designate in writing with each application or renewal, an agent upon whom service or notice under this Code and service or process for violation of this Code many be made in the absence of the owner. The agent designated must reside within one hour of Charter Township of Union to receive such notice. This designated agent must give written approval for the use of his/her name as the designated agent. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. 
(3)	Every person holding a housing license shall provide in the lease, with a written provision that the tenant or roomer will allow the Rental Inspector or his/her designee, access to the dwelling and/or dwelling unit for the purpose of inspection required as to [a] prerequisite to granting or renewal of a housing license, or for the purpose of investigating a complaint. 
(4)	No housing license is transferable to another dwelling, and each person issued a housing license shall give notice in writing to the Rental Inspector within (7) seven days after having transferred or otherwise disposed of legal control of any licensed dwelling. Such notice shall include the name and address of persons succeeding to the ownership or control of such dwelling, and to whom the housing license is to be transferred. Within ten (10) days of any transfer of ownership, the assigned shall comply with division 801.003 [section 153.003]. 
(5)	Application for the renewal of a housing license shall be made at least 30 days prior to the expiration date of the existing housing license. Late applications will be charged a late fee. 
(6)	A record of all housing licenses issued shall be kept on file in the offices of the Rental Inspector, and copies will be furnished upon request. 
(7)	Housing license fees shall be set by resolution of the Board. 
153.010 - Temporary license. 
Sec. 801.010. The Rental Inspector may issue a temporary housing license for all or part of a dwelling in the process of erection or alteration if the dwelling or part thereof to be occupied complies with the provision of this Code. No temporary housing license may be issued for longer than six months, and no temporary housing license shall be effective more than (5) five days after the erection or alteration of the dwelling is completed.  
153.011 - Enforcement. 
Sec. 801.011. 
(A)	General. The Rental Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this Code. 
(B)	Inspections. The Rental Inspector, or designee, shall make all required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible Officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The Rental Inspector is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise. 
(C)	Right of entry. The Rental Inspector, or designee, is authorized to enter all buildings or structures subject to this Code at reasonable times in order to inspect the buildings or structures, subject to the constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the Rental Inspector is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law.  
153.012 - Housing board of appeals. 
Sec. 801.012. 
(A)	Creation. A Housing Board of Appeals is hereby created to provide a reasonable interpretation of this [the] provisions of this Code and to give relief where unnecessary hardship would result from carrying out the strict letter of this Code. The duty of the Board shall be to consider appeals from decisions of the officials charged with the enforcement of this Code and to determine in particular cases whether any deviation from the strict enforcement of this Code will violate the intent of this Code or jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare. 
(B)	Membership and appointment. A Housing Board of Appeals shall be appointed to perform the duties of the Housing Board of Appeals. 
(C)	Public meetings. 
(1)	The Housing Board of Appeals shall meet in a fixed place, and all meetings shall be open to the public. 
(2)	When an appeal has been properly filed and is to be considered, the Housing Board of Appeals shall give at least (10) ten days notice of the time and place of the hearing in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the township. The Housing Board of Appeals shall also give (5) five days notice by personal service by mail to the applicant, and Rental Inspector, and, when an appeal applies to the condition or appearance of the outside of a building or to conduct by an occupant which the Housing Board of Appeals reasonably believes may adversely impact neighboring properties, to any person to whom real property is assessed that is within 100 feet of the premises of the appeal, and such notice will be addressed to the respective owners at the address given on the last assessment roll. Any party may appear at such hearings in person or by agent. 
(D)	Rules, minutes and records. The Housing Board of Appeals shall adopt its own rules or procedures and keep a record of its proceedings, showing the action of the Board. Such records shall be considered public records. 
(E)	Appeal cases. Any person affected by any notice or order which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of this Code who has not otherwise been offered a hearing under this Code may require and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Housing Board of Appeals, provided that such person shall file in the office of the Rental Inspector a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth the name, address, and phone number of the petitioner and a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing. Petition shall be filed within ten (10) days after the day the notice of order is served. Upon receipt of such a petition, the Rental Inspector shall set a time for the hearing before the Housing Board of Appeals and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. 
(F)	Fee for appeal cases. A fee shall be paid to the Township Treasurer before filing a petition as set forth in division (E) above. The Board shall set this fee by resolution. 
(G)	Stay of order. Any determination made by the Rental Inspector which is appealed to the Housing Board of Appeals under [this] division [section] shall be stayed until a disposition of the appeals is made by the Housing Board of Appeals unless there is a health or safety issue. 
(H)	Action of Board. After a hearing, the Housing Board of Appeals shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice and order depending upon its findings. If it clearly appears that, by reason of special conditions, undue hardship would result from the strict application of any section of this Code, the Housing Board of Appeals may permit a variance from the mandatory provisions thereof in such a manner that the public safety shall be secured, substantial justice done, and the spirit of the provisions of this Code upheld. All decisions to permit a variance under this section shall be by a majority vote of the total membership of the Board, excluding the alternate member. 
(I)	Appeals of Rental Board of Appeals decisions. Any appeals after a final decision is made will be brought to the Circuit Court.  
153.013 - Determination and notice of violation. 
Sec. 801.013. 
(A)	If upon inspection the Rental Inspector finds a violation of this Code, he/she shall issue a notice and order directed to the owner of record stating the date of inspection, the name of the inspector, and nature of the violation, and the time within which the correction shall be completed. 
(B)	A violation which is determined by the Rental Inspector to constitute a hazard to health or the occupants or the community as a whole, shall be ordered corrected within the shortest reasonable time, and notice of having begun compliance shall be given to the Rental Inspector by the owner within 48 hours. All other violations shall be corrected within 30 calendar days from the date of notice. 
(C)	At the end of the period of time the Rental Inspector has allowed for the correction of any violation notice as provided, the Rental Inspector shall reinspect the licensed dwelling, and if he/she determines that the conditions requiring corrections set forth in the notice sent have not been corrected, the Rental Inspector may issue an Order notifying the owner of the continuing violation(s) and schedule a hearing to suspend the housing license under the following procedure: 
(1)	The hearing will be held before the Housing Board of Appeals.
(2)	Notice of the continuing violation(s) and the date and place of the hearing will be provided to the owner at least five (5) days before the hearing. 
(3)	At the hearing, the Rental Inspector, or designee, shall present evidence to establish that a violation of the Code exists. 
(4)	The owner shall have the right to present evidence and ask questions of the Rental Inspector, or designee. 
(5)	The Rental Inspector, or designee, shall have the right to ask questions of the Owner.
(6)	The hearing panel shall determine, by a preponderance of the evidence, if a violation of the Code exists and if the housing license is suspended. 
(7)	Within seven (7) days after the hearing, the hearing panel shall present a written decision to the Rental Inspector and the Owner. 
(D)	Any person whose housing license under this section has been suspended shall be entitled to an appeal to the Housing Board of Appeals. If no appeal is properly presented within 21 days following the issuance of the order of suspension, the housing license shall be revoked except that if prior to the revocation of the housing license any person whose housing license has been ordered suspended may request re-inspection, upon a showing that the violations cited in the notice have been corrected. 
(E)	If, upon re-inspection pursuant to the request of the person whose housing license has been ordered suspended but not yet revoked, the Rental Inspector finds the dwelling in connection with which notice was issued is now in compliance with this Code and with applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto; he/she shall reinstate the housing license. A request for reinspection shall not extend the suspension period. 
(F)	If an appeal to the Housing Board of Appeals is taken, and if the Housing Board of Appeals does not reverse the decision, the housing license shall be revoked within ten (10) days following the denial of the appeal by the Housing Board of Appeals. 
(G)	If an owner or occupant fails to comply with an order of suspension which has not been appealed, or which the Housing Board of Appeals has sustained, the Rental Inspector or his/her agent may take action to abate or enjoin the violation and enforce provisions of this Code. 
(H)	When an uncorrected violation creates an imminent danger to the health and safety of the occupants of the dwelling or premises, the Township may file an action seeking a preliminary injunction or other temporary relief appropriate to remove such danger during the pendency of any action.  
153.014 - Notice. 
Sec. 801.014. Service and terms. 
(A)	All notices shall be in writing and shall be deemed given when one of the following is done: 
(1)	Personal service.
(2)	A copy of such notice is sent by certified mail. Postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
(3)	If no address so appears nor is known to the Rental Inspector, a copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner at the address of the building or structure and a copy of the notice and order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the building or structure. 
(4)	Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mails; proof of service of the notices and the manner of such service shall be made by affidavit sworn to by the person affecting such service, declaring time, date, and the manner in which the service was made. The affidavit, together with a receipt for mailing and any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the copy of the notice retained by the Rental Inspector. 
(B)	Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailings; proof of service of the notices and the manner of such service shall be made by affidavit sworn to by the person affecting such service, declaring time, date, and the manner in which the service was made. The affidavit, together with a receipt for mailing and any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the copy of the notice retained by the Rental Inspector. 
(C)	The failure of any person to receive notice as provided for above shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this Code.  
153.015 - Penalty. 
Sec. 801.015. Any person knowingly or intentionally violating a provision of this Code shall be held responsible for and prosecuted as a misdemeanor in accordance with the Municipal Ordinance Violation Bureau (Part 3 of the Charter Township of Union's Compilation of Ordinances) and MCLA 600.8701 et seq. 
The Rental Inspector, or designee, may issue citations pursuant to the Municipal Ordinance Violation Bureau (Part 3 of the Charter Township of Union's Compilation of Ordinances) and/or MCLA 600.8701 et seq. and may issue appearance tickets in accordance with MCLA 764.9 (C), or take any other legal action necessary to enforce this Code for uncorrected violations, including, but not limited to, initiation [of] legal proceedings in District Court or Circuit Court.  
153.016 - Severability. 
Sec. 801.016. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
153.017 - Repeal. 
Sec. 801.017. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance including Ordinance Number 2010-03 are hereby repealed, except that this Ordinance shall not be construed to repeal any provision in the Township Zoning Ordinance, the Township Subdivision Control Ordinance, or the Township Building Code.  
154.000 - HUMAN RIGHTS Ord. No. 2012-06 Adopted: Oct. 10, 2012 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION CODE OF ORDINANCES BY ADDING A NEW ORDINANCE TITLED "HUMAN RIGHTS," TO PROHIBIT DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT, HOUSING AND PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS AND TO PROVIDE PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS. 
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION:
 
154.001 - Purpose. 
Sec. 1. 
(A)	The Township intends that no individual be denied the equal protection of the laws; nor shall any person be denied the enjoyment of his or her civil rights or be discriminated against because of race, religion, color, national origin, sex, age, marital status, physical or mental disability, height, weight, familial status, sexual orientation or gender identity. 
(B)	The prohibitions against discrimination in this ordinance are intended to supplement federal and state civil rights law prohibiting discrimination in the areas of employment, housing and public accommodations. However, this chapter shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent with jurisprudence regarding the freedom of speech and exercise of religion under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(C)	Nothing in this ordinance is intended to require or shall be construed to require preferential treatment of any individual or group identified in subsection (A).  
154.002 - Definitions. 
Sec. 2. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(A)	Age. Chronological age. 
(B)	Authorized Township official. Code enforcement personnel or any other personnel of the Township designated and authorized by the Township Manager, this code or any ordinance to investigate or issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
(C)	Complainant. An individual or other person who files a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter. 
(D)	Discriminate, discrimination. To make a decision, offer to make a decision or refrain from making a decision based in whole or in part on the race, religion, color, national origin, sex, age, marital status, physical or mental disability, height, weight, familial status, sexual orientation or gender identity of an individual. Sex discrimination includes sexual harassment and discrimination based on pregnancy, childbirth, or a medical condition related to pregnancy or childbirth that does not include non-therapeutic abortion not intended to save the life of the mother. 
(E)	Educational institution. A public or private institution or a separate school or department thereof, including an academy, college, elementary or secondary school, extension course, kindergarten, nursery, local school system, or university, or a business, nursing, professional, secretarial, technical, or vocational school. For the purposes of this definition, educational institution includes an agent of an educational institution. 
(F)	Employee. An individual who is hired for a wage, salary, fee, payment or other remuneration to perform work for an employer. 
(G)	Employer. A person who has one or more employees, and includes an agent of that person. 
(H)	Employment agency. A person regularly undertaking, with or without compensation, to procure, refer, recruit, or place an employee for an employer or to procure, refer, recruit, or place for an employer or person the opportunity to work for an employer. For purposes of this definition, employment agency includes an agent of that person. 
(I)	Familial status. One or more individuals under the age of 18 residing with a parent or other person having custody or in the process of securing legal custody of the individual or individuals or residing with the designee of the parent or other person having or securing custody, with the written permission of the parent or other person. For the purposes of this definition, "parent" shall include an individual who is pregnant. 
(J)	Gender identity. An individual's appearance, expression, identity or behavior as being either male or female, whether or not that appearance, expression, identity or behavior is different from that which is traditionally associated with the individual's designated gender at birth. 
(K)	Housing accommodation. Any improved or unimproved real property, or a part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or residence of one or more individuals. 
(L)	Immediate family. A spouse, parent, child or sibling. 
[L.1]	Individual. A single human being. 
(M)	Labor organization. An organization of any kind, an agency or employee representation committee, group, association, or plan in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours, or other terms or conditions of employment. For purposes of this definition, a labor organization need not be subordinate to or affiliated with a national or international labor organization. 
(N)	Marital status. The state of being married, unmarried, divorced or widowed. 
(O)	Person. An individual, agent, association, corporation, labor organization, legal representative, partnership, receiver, trust or any other legal or commercial entity. 
(P)	Physical or mental disability. A determinable physical or mental characteristic of an individual, which may result from disease, injury, congenital condition of birth, or functional disorder, if the characteristic substantially limits a major life activity of that individual and is unrelated to the individual's ability to perform the duties of a particular job or position, is unrelated to the individual's ability to utilize and benefit from a place of public accommodation, or is unrelated to the individual's ability to acquire, rent, or maintain property. For the purposes of this definition, physical or mental disability does not include any condition caused by the current illegal use of a controlled substance or the use of intoxicating liquors by an individual. 
(Q)	Place of public accommodation. A business, or an educational, refreshment, entertainment, recreation, health, or transportation facility, or institution of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public. 
(R)	Private club. An establishment that is not open to the public. A private club is one whose members' association with each other and the club is sufficiently intimate, small and exclusive that it is not open to the public. 
(S)	Religious organization or institution. A religious corporation, association, educational institution or society, which is, in whole or substantial part, owned, supported, controlled or managed by a particular religion whose purpose or character is directed toward the propagation of that particular religion and that has the inculcation of religious values or the provision of charity as its purpose; primarily employs persons who share its religious tenets; and primarily serves persons who share its religious tenets or, on a charitable basis, the broader community. Religious organization or institution includes, for illustration and not limitation: churches, mosques, synagogues and other houses of worship; any subsidiary organizations; educational institutions affiliated with, controlled, or managed by those houses of worship or with articles of incorporation, bylaws and other documents stating an intention to inculcate its religious tenets in students; and, faith-based organizations that, due to a sense of duty based on particular religious tenets, provide charitable services to the public. 
(T)	Respondent. A person against whom a complaint is filed under this chapter. 
(U)	Sex. The actual biological state of being male or female as of birth, or subsequent alteration through surgical procedure, and without regard to any outward physical display or expression of gender identity. 
(V)	Sexual harassment. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct or communication of a sexual nature under the following conditions: 
(1)	Submission to the conduct or communication is made a term or condition, either explicitly or implicitly, to obtain employment, housing, or public accommodations. 
(2)	Submission to or rejection of the conduct or communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting the individual's employment, housing, or public accommodations. 
(3)	The conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's employment, public accommodations or public services, or housing, or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive employment, housing, or public accommodations. 
(W)	Sexual orientation. Male or female homosexuality, heterosexuality or bisexuality, whether by orientation or practice. Sexual orientation does not include any sexual activity or attempted activity otherwise prohibited by law. 
(X)	Township manager. The Township Manager of the Township, or his or her designee.  
154.003. - Employment practices. 
Sec. 3. Except as otherwise provided in section 170.07 [154.007]: 
(A)	An employer shall not discriminate against an individual with respect to recruitment, employment, compensation, work classifications, promotion or demotion, termination, or a term, condition or privilege of employment. 
(B)	A labor organization shall not exclude or expel from membership a member or applicant for membership, or otherwise discriminate against a member or applicant for membership with respect to collective bargaining, member grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours or other terms or conditions of employment. 
(C)	An employment agency shall not discriminate in the procurement, referral, recruitment, or placement of an individual for employment with an employer.  
153.004 - Housing practices. 
Sec. 4. Except as otherwise provided in section 7 [154.007]: 
(A)	A person shall not discriminate in leasing, selling, or otherwise making available any housing accommodation. 
(B)	A person shall not discriminate in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection with any housing accommodation. 
(C)	A person shall not discriminate in providing financing for the purchase, repair, or remodeling of any housing accommodations. 
(D)	A person shall not discriminate in making referrals, listings or otherwise providing information regarding housing accommodations.  
154.005 - Public accommodations. 
Sec. 5. Except as otherwise provided in section 7 [154.007], a person shall not discriminate in making available full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of any place of public accommodation.  
154.006 - General prohibited practices. 
Sec. 6. Except as otherwise provided in section 7 [154.007]: 
(A)	A person shall not adopt, enforce, or employ any policy or requirement, or print, post, circulate, mail or otherwise publish any statement, advertisement, sign, or notice which discriminates or suggests discrimination in providing employment, housing or public accommodations. 
(B)	A person shall not coerce, threaten or retaliate against another for making a complaint or assisting in any investigation regarding a violation or alleged violation of this chapter. A person shall not require, request, conspire with, coerce or otherwise assist a person to retaliate against a person for making a complaint or assisting in an investigation. 
(C)	A person shall not conspire with, assist, coerce, or request another to discriminate in any manner prohibited by this chapter. 
(D)	A person shall not adopt, enforce, or employ any policy, practice or requirement which has the effect of discriminating in a manner prohibited by this chapter, except when there is a bona fide business necessity for such a policy, practice or requirement. For the purposes of this chapter, bona fide business necessity means that the policy, practice or requirement is reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the person's business. A bona fide business necessity does not arise due to a mere inconvenience or because of suspected or actual objection by neighbors, customers, or other persons.  
154.007 - Exceptions. 
Sec. 7. Any other provision of this chapter notwithstanding: 
(A)	The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any religious organization or institution with respect to its employment of individuals. 
(B)	A religious organization or institution may restrict the occupancy of any of its housing facilities or place of public accommodations operated as a part of its religious activities to persons of its denomination or those who conform to the moral tenets of that religious organization or institution. This exception shall apply to a religious organization or institution that allows persons other than its members to use its facilities if its facilities remain exempt from Michigan property taxation pursuant to section 7s of 1893 PA 206, as amended, MCL 211.7s. 
(C)	The owner of a housing facility or accommodation devoted entirely to the housing of individuals of one gender may restrict the occupancy of such a facility or accommodation on the basis of gender. 
(D)	The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the rental of a housing accommodation in a building that contains housing accommodations for not more than two (2) families living independently of each other if the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family resides in one (1) of the housing accommodations, or to the rental of a room or rooms in a single family dwelling by a person if the lessor or a member of the lessor's immediate family resides in the dwelling. 
(E)	The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any arrangement for shared ownership, lease or residency of a dwelling unit. 
(F)	An educational institution may limit the use of its facilities to those affiliated with such institution. 
(G)	A governmental institution may restrict any of its facilities or restrict employment opportunities based on duly-adopted institutional policies that conform to state and federal laws and regulations. 
(H)	A person may discriminate based on an individual's age when such discrimination is required or permitted by local, state or federal law. 
(I)	A person may provide discounts on products or services to students, or on the basis of age. 
(J)	A person may refuse to enter into a contractual relationship with an unemancipated minor. 
(K)	A person may restrict the use of restrooms, lavatories, locker room facilities, shower facilities, or changing rooms on the basis of gender. Restrictions for the use of restrooms, lavatories, locker room facilities, shower facilities, or changing rooms as provided in this section shall not be considered a violation of this chapter's prohibitions on discrimination based on gender identity. 
(L)	A person may restrict participation in an instructional program, athletic event or on an athletic team on the basis of age, height, weight or gender. 
(M)	A person may restrict membership in a private club that is not open to the public.
(N)	An employer may restrict employment opportunities to members of one's family.
(O)	An employer offering health or pension plans may provide for marital or familial status limitations in such plans provided those limitations conform to state and federal laws, rules and regulations. Further, nothing in this ordinance shall be construed or interpreted to neither require, nor prohibit, a private employer from offering employment benefits to the same-sex partner of an employee. 
(P)	This chapter shall not prohibit the Township from allowing use of its facilities or services by persons that may be affiliated with, or otherwise supported by a religious organization or institution, which may espouse policies or practices inconsistent with the general intent of this chapter. Further, this chapter shall not prohibit the Township from allowing use of its facilities or services by persons not generally affiliated with or supported by a particular religious organization or institution, but who may espouse policies or practices inconsistent with the general intent of this chapter. 
(Q)	This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit a township employee from exercising his or her First Amendment rights to donate to a charitable organization of his or her choosing through the use of the Township's automatic payroll deduction program. This chapter shall not be construed to limit the availability of the Township's automatic payroll deduction program only to charitable organizations that support or conform to the general intent and purposes of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Township retains the discretion to determine whether or not to participate in or allow any payroll deduction. 
(R)	This chapter is not intended to and shall not be construed to require an educational institution to, and an educational institution shall not use this ordinance as a justification to, suspend, expel or otherwise discipline a student enrolled in a medical, pharmaceutical, nursing, counseling, social work, or psychology program because the student refuses to counsel or serve a client or patient in a manner that conflicts with a sincerely held religious belief of the student. However, this provision is not intended to alter or affect any professional ethics or academic standards or codes of conduct. 
(S)	This chapter is not intended to and shall not be construed to require an employer to, and an employer shall not use this ordinance as a justification to, take any employment, promotion, compensation, benefits, termination or extension of employment action against, or alter the employment privileges of a professional employee, because that professional employee refuses to provide medical, social work, psychological or other professional counseling services when that counseling would reasonably conflict with that employee's sincerely held religious beliefs. However, this provision is not intended to alter or affect any professional ethics standards or codes of conduct.  
154.008 - Investigation and enforcement procedure. 
Sec. 8. 
(A)	Any person claiming to be discriminated against in a manner prohibited by this chapter, and not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, may, within 180 days of the alleged violation, file a signed, written complaint with the Township Manager, specifying, in detail, the names, dates, known witnesses and other pertinent facts relevant to the alleged violation. For any complaint alleging a violation of state or federal law, the Township Manager shall refer the complainant to the appropriate state or federal agency responsible for investigation and enforcement of such alleged violations. 
(B)	After receiving a complaint, the Township Manager shall review the complaint and may, in his or her reasonable discretion, do any of the following: 
(1)	Undertake, or refer to Township staff or the Township attorney to undertake an investigation of the alleged violation. 
(2)	Refer the matter to an authorized Township official or the Township attorney to issue a municipal civil infraction citation and prosecute the violation as a municipal civil infraction. 
(3)	Refer the matter to the Isabella County Trial Court Alternative Program for Dispute Resolution, or other organization for conciliation or facilitative mediation services. A complainant or respondent failing to appear for a scheduled conciliation or mediation shall pay any costs resulting from such failure to appear. If a conciliation or mediation agreement is entered into under this section, the parties shall be bound to its terms. A breach of such an agreement by the respondent shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(4)	Notify the complainant that no Township action will be taken related to the complaint. Such a determination shall not be evidence of non-violation should the complainant choose to initiate a private civil action against the alleged violator as provided in this section. 
(C)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit a person's right to initiate a private civil action for an alleged violation as provided in Section 170.09 [154.009] of this chapter.  
154.009 - Private cause of action for damages or injunctive relief. 
Sec. 9. A person alleging a violation of this chapter may bring a civil action within 180 days of the alleged violation, or 180 days after the end of an action taken by the Township under section 8 [154.008], whichever is later, for appropriate injunctive relief or damages, or both, in a court of competent jurisdiction.  
154.010 - Remedies. 
Sec. 10. 
(A)	If a violation of this chapter is prosecuted as a municipal civil infraction under the Township Code § 36.01 et seq., fines of up to $2,500 may be assessed. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, a court shall have equitable jurisdiction to enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce any provision of this ordinance, including, but not limited to, abatement of the violating condition or the granting of injunctive relief. 
(B)	A court rendering judgment in a private civil action brought pursuant to section 9 [154.009] of this chapter may order any remedy authorized by Article 8 of the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act, 1976 PA 453, as amended, MCL 37.2101 et seq. 
(C)	Each day upon which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate and new violation. 
154.011 - Violators operating under license issued by Township. 
Sec. 11. The Township Manager may suspend the license of any person operating under a license issued by the Township, or any agency thereof, found to be in violation of this chapter and provide opportunity for a hearing conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Township Code under which that person is licensed to determine whether such license should be revoked. The provisions of this section are not applicable to violations which are remedied through either conciliation or mediation services. However, a violation of a conciliation or mediation agreement shall be grounds for the revocation of a license as provided under this section.  
154.012 - Severability. 
Sec. 12. If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, that portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.  
154.013 - Publication and effective date. 
Sec. 13. The Township Clerk shall cause to be published a notice of adoption of this ordinance within 10 days of the date of its adoption. This ordinance shall take effect 30 days after its adoption.  
175.000 - WEST DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1985-1 Adopted: October 7, 1985 
An Ordinance to Establish a Downtown Development Authority in Union Township, Isabella County, Pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of Michigan, 1975; to Provide for Establishment of a Board of Trustees for the Authority; to Define the Boundaries of the Downtown District Constituting the Downtown Development Authority; to Provide for Levy and Collection of a Downtown Development Tax; and to Provide for All Other Matters Necessary and Related Thereto. 
TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
 
175.001 - Title of ordinance. 
Sec. 1. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Union Township West Downtown Development Authority Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1990-9, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1991-3, 2-13-91) 
175.002 - Definitions. 
Sec. 2. The terms used in this Ordinance shall have the same meanings as given to them in Act 197 or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this Ordinance: 
Authority means the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority created by this Ordinance. 
Act 197 means Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975, as amended, now in effect or hereafter amended. 
Board of Directors means the Board of Directors of the Authority, the governing body of the Authority. 
Chief Executive Officer means the Supervisor of the Township. 
Township means Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan. 
Downtown District means the Downtown District designated by this Ordinance as now existing or hereafter amended. 
Township Board means the governing body of Union Township, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 1990-9, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1991-3, 2-13-91) 
175.003 - Determination of necessity. 
Sec. 3. The Township Board hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the Township to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of Union Township to eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth by amending the district boundaries of the West Downtown Development Authority pursuant to Act 197. 
(Ord. No. 1990-9, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1991-3, 2-13-91) 
175.004 - Creation of authority. 
Sec. 4. There is hereby created pursuant to Act 197, a Downtown Development Authority for Union Township, Michigan. The Authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of "Union Township West Downtown Development Authority." The Authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this Ordinance and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this Ordinance or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the Authority.  
175.005 - Description of Downtown District. 
Sec. 5. The Downtown District in which the Authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Act 197 shall consist of the territory in Union Township, Michigan, described as follows: 
Being part of Sections 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 28, and 29 of Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Northwest corner of the South half of the Southeast ¼ of Section 17; thence Easterly along the North line of the South half of the Southeast ¼ of Section 17 to the East line of Section 17; thence Easterly along the North line of the Southwest ¼ of the Southwest ¼ of Section 16 to the East line of said Southwest ¼ of Southwest ¼; thence Southerly along said East line to the intersection of said line and a line 792 feet North of and parallel with the South line of Section 16; thence Easterly along said line to the East line of the Southwest ¼ of Section 16; thence Southerly along said East line to the center of Section 21; thence Westerly along the South line of the Northwest ¼ of Section 21 to the West right-of-way line of Lincoln Road; thence Northerly along said line to the North line of the South 20 acres of the East ½ of the Northeast ¼ of Section 20; thence Westerly along said line to the West line of the East ½ of the Northeast ¼ of Section 20; thence Northerly along said line to the South line of the Northwest ¼ of the Northeast ¼ of Section 20; thence Westerly along said line to the West line of the Northeast ¼ of Section 20; thence Northerly along said line to the Northwest corner of the Northeast ¼ of Section 20; thence continuing Northerly along the West line of the Southeast ¼ of Section 17 to the Point of Beginning. 
Also beginning at the intersection of the South right-of-way line of Remus Road (M-20) and the West line of the Northeast ¼ of Section 20; thence Westerly along said South right-of-way line to the West line of Section 19, said line also being the centerline of Meridian Road; thence Northerly along the West line of Section 19 and Section 18 approximately 1150 feet; thence Easterly to the East right-of-way line of Meridian Road; thence Southerly along said East right-of-way line approximately 1050 feet to the North right-of-way line of Remus Road (M-20); thence Easterly along said North right-of-way line to the East line of the Southwest ¼ of Section 17; thence Southerly along said East line to the Point of Beginning. 
Also beginning at the intersection of the East right-of-way line of Lincoln Road and the North line of the Southwest ¼ of Section 21; thence Southerly along said East right-of-way line to the North right-of-way line of Broomfield Road; thence Easterly along said North right-of-way line to the East line of the Southwest ¼ of Section 21; thence Southerly to the South right-of-way [of] Broomfield Road; thence Westerly along said South right-of-way line to the West right-of-way line of Lincoln Road; thence Northerly along said West right-of-way line to the North line of the Southeast ¼ of Section 20; thence Easterly to the Point of Beginning. 
Also beginning at the intersection of the West right-of-way line of Lincoln Road and the North line of the South ½ of the Southeast ¼ of Section 17; thence Northerly along said West right-of-way line to the South right-of-way line of Pickard Road; thence Easterly to the East right-of-way line of Lincoln Road; thence Southerly along said line to the North line of the South ½ of the Southwest ¼ of Section 16; thence Westerly to the Point of Beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1986-5, 12-18-86; Ord. No. 1987-1, 4-24-87; Ord. No. 1988-10, 12-14-88; Ord. No. 1990-9, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1991-3, 2-13-93)  
175.006 - Board of Directors. 
Sec. 6. The Authority shall be under supervision and control of a Board of Directors consisting of the Chief Executive Officer of the Township and eight members as provided by Act 197. The members shall be appointed by the Chief Executive Officer, subject to approval by the Township Board and shall hold office for the terms provided in Act 197. All members shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed.  
175.007 - Powers of the Authority. 
Sec. 7. The Authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by law and herein.  
175.008 - Fiscal and financial responsibilities. 
Sec. 8. 
(a)	The Authority shall prepare budgetary information, expense reports, and financial data as required in Act 197. 
(b)	The Board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the Council on the same date that the proposed budget for the Township is submitted to the Board. The Authority shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the Township Board. The Authority may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with its operation and any improvements where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the development and finance plan. 
The Authority shall submit financial reports to the Board at the same time and on the same basis as other departments of the Township are required to submit reports. The Authority shall be audited annually and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the Board.  
175.009 - Downtown Development Authority Finances. 
Sec. 9. The Authority is hereby authorized by the Township to effect financing for Authority needs from one or more of the sources authorized by Act 197.  
175.010 - Section headings; severability; repealer. 
Sec. 10. Section headings are provided for convenience only and are not intended to be part of this Ordinance. If any portion of this Ordinance shall be held to be unlawful, the remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
175.011 - Publication, recording and filing. 
Sec. 11. This Ordinance or a summary thereof shall be published once after its adoption in the Morning Sun, a newspaper of general circulation in the County of Isabella within 30 days and the Township Clerk shall file a certified copy of the Ordinance with the Michigan Secretary of State promptly after its adoption. A true copy of this Ordinance may be inspected or obtained at the Township Offices, 2010 S. Lincoln Road, Mt. Pleasant, Michigan.  
175.012 - Effective date. 
Sec. 12. This Ordinance shall be effective immediately.  
176.000 - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN Ord. No. 1985-3 Adopted: December 19, 1985 
An Ordinance to Approve the Development and Tax Increment Finance Plan of the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority Pursuant to Section 19 of Act 197, Public Acts of 1975 as Amended. 
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
WHEREAS, the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority has completed a Tax Increment Finance and Development Plan that identifies specific development and rehabilitation activities to occur in the district described in attachment A; and 
WHEREAS, the Union Township Board has held a public hearing on a Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan for the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority, pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of 1975 as amended; and 
WHEREAS, the Township Board has approved a resolution determining that the plan constitutes a public purpose; and 
WHEREAS, the formation of a development area citizens council was not necessary; and 
WHEREAS, the plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 14 (2) and Section 17 (2) of the Act; and 
WHEREAS, the proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing; and 
WHEREAS, the development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of Act 197; and 
WHEREAS, the land to be acquired within the development area is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and the Act; and 
WHEREAS, the Development Plan is in reasonable accord with the Master Plan of the Township; and 
WHEREAS, public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the development area; and 
WHEREAS, changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the municipality. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, AS FOLLOWS: 
 
176.001 - [Approval.] 
Sec. 1. The Township Board of Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan hereby approves the Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan of the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority with modification.  
177.000 - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN Ord. No. 1987-2 Adopted: May 13, 1987 
An Ordinance to Approve the Development and Tax Increment Finance Plan of the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority Pursuant to Section 19 of Act 197, Public Acts of 1975 as Amended. 
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
WHEREAS, the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority has completed a Tax Increment Finance and Development Plan that identifies specific development and rehabilitation activities to occur in the district described in attachment A; and 
WHEREAS, the Union Township Board has held a public hearing on a Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan for the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority, pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of 1975 as amended; and 
WHEREAS, the Township Board has approved a resolution determining that the plan constitutes a public purpose; and 
WHEREAS, the formation of a development area citizens council was not necessary; and 
WHEREAS, the plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 14 (2) and Section 17 (2) of the Act; and 
WHEREAS, the proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing; and 
WHEREAS, the development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of Act 197; and 
WHEREAS, the land to be acquired within the development area is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and the Act; and 
WHEREAS, the Township does not have an updated Master Plan, and 
WHEREAS, public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the development area; and 
WHEREAS, changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the municipality. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, AS FOLLOWS: 
 
177.001 - [Approval.] 
Sec. 1. The Township Board of Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan hereby approves the Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan of the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority without modification.  
178.000 - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN Ord. No. 1989-6 Adopted: May 10, 1989 
An Ordinance to Approve the Development and Tax Increment Finance Plan of the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority Pursuant to Section 19 of Act 197, Public Acts of 1975 as Amended. 
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
WHEREAS, the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority has completed a Tax Increment Finance and Development Plan that identifies specific development and rehabilitation activities to occur in the district described in attachment A; and 
WHEREAS, the Union Township Board has held a public hearing on a Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan for the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority, pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of 1975 as amended; and 
WHEREAS, the Township Board has approved a resolution determining that the plan constitutes a public purpose; and 
WHEREAS, the formation of a development area citizens council was not necessary; and 
WHEREAS, the plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 14 (2) and Section 17 (2) of the Act; and 
WHEREAS, the proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing; and 
WHEREAS, the development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of Act 197; and 
WHEREAS, the land to be acquired within the development area is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and the Act; and 
WHEREAS, the plan is in reasonable accord with the township's adopted Master Plan; and 
WHEREAS, public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the development area; and 
WHEREAS, changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the municipality. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, AS FOLLOWS: 
 
178.001 - [Approval.] 
[Sec. 1.] The Township Board of Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan hereby approves the Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan of the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority without modification.  
179.000 - DEVELOPMENT AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCE PLAN AMENDMENTS Ord. No. 1991-4 Adopted: February 13, 1991 
Ordinance Approving Amendments to Development and Tax Increment Finance Plan of the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority. 
WHEREAS, the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority (the "Authority") has prepared and recommended for approval certain amendments (the "Amendments") to the Authority's existing Development and Tax Increment Finance Plan (the "Plan"); and, 
WHEREAS, the Township Board has held a public hearing on the Amendments to the Plan for the Development Area (the "Development Area") pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of Michigan, 1975, as amended (the "Act"); and, 
WHEREAS, the Township Board has given the taxing jurisdictions in which the Development Area is located an opportunity to meet with the Township Board and to express their views and recommendations regarding the Plan, as required by the Act; and 
WHEREAS, it was determined that it is not necessary to establish a development area citizens' council. 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION ORDAINS: 
 
179.001 - Definitions. 
Sec. 1. Where used in this Ordinance the terms set forth below shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Base year assessment roll means the base year assessment roll prepared by the Township Assessor in accordance with the ordinance approving the Plan. 
Captured assessed value means the amount in any one year by which the current assessed value as finally equalized, of all taxable property in the Development Area exceeds the initial assessed value. 
Development Area shall mean the Development Area as described in the 1991 amendments. 
Development Plan means the Development Plan prepared by the Authority and included in the Plan originally approved by the Township Board on November 19, 1985. 
Downtown Development Authority or DDA means the Union Township West Downtown Development Authority. 
Initial assessed value means the most recently assessed value as finally equalized of all the taxable property within the boundaries of the Development Area at the time of adoption of the ordinance approving the original Plan. 
1991 amendments means the "Amendments to Development and Tax Increment Finance Plan" for the Township of Union, as transmitted to the Township Board by the Authority for public hearing, and confirmed by this Ordinance, copies of which are on file in the office of the Township Clerk. 
Project fund means the fund established pursuant to Section 9 [179.009] of this Ordinance. 
Taxing jurisdiction shall mean each unit of government levying an ad valorem property tax on property in the Development Area.  
179.002 - Review considerations. 
Sec. 2. As required by the Act the Township Board has in reviewing the 1991 amendments, taken into account the following considerations: 
(a)	The Plan and the 1991 amendments thereto meet the requirements set forth in Section 17 (2) of the Act. 
(b)	The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(c)	The development, including the improvements described in the 1991 amendments, is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act. 
(d)	The land included within the Development Area to be acquired, if any, is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the Plan and the purposes of the Act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
(e)	The Development Plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the Township.
(f)	Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the Development Area. 
(g)	Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities, to the extent required by the Plan, including the 1991 amendments, are reasonably necessary for the projects described therein and for the Township.  
179.003 - Public purpose. 
Sec. 3. The Township Board hereby determines that the Plan, including the 1991 amendments, constitutes a public purpose.  
179.004 - Best interest of the public. 
Sec. 4. The Township Board hereby determines and redetermines that it is in the best interests of the public to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district, [to] eliminate the causes of that deterioration, and to promote economic growth to proceed with the 1991 amendments to the Plan.  
179.005 - Approval and adoption of 1991 amendments to Plan. 
Sec. 5. The 1991 amendments to the Plan are hereby approved and adopted. The Plan shall terminate on December 31, 2020 or the date of final maturity of the last series of bonds issued pursuant to the Plan, including the 1991 amendments, whichever is later, except as it may be extended by subsequent amendment of the Plan pursuant to the Act. A copy of the Plan and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the Township Clerk's office.  
179.006 - Boundaries of Development Area. 
Sec. 6. The boundaries of the Development Area as set forth in the 1991 amendments to the Plan are hereby approved and confirmed.  
179.007 - Confirmation and maintenance of base year assessment roll. 
Sec. 7. 
(a)	The base year assessment roll previously prepared by the Township Assessor is hereby confirmed and maintained as the roll applicable to the Plan, including the 1991 amendments. The base year assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in the Development Area on the effective date of the ordinance approving the Plan and on the effective date of any ordinance approving the addition of property to the Development Area, and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in the Development Area. 
(b)	The Township Assessor shall transmit copies of the base year assessment roll to the Township Treasurer, County Treasurer, Authority and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the base year assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with previous ordinances and this Ordinance and the tax increment financing plans contained in the Plan and the 1991 amendments.  
179.008 - Preparation of annual base year assessment roll. 
Sec. 8. Each year within 15 days following the final equalization of property in the Development Area, the Township Assessor shall prepare an updated base year assessment roll. The updated base year assessment roll shall show the information required in the initial base year assessment roll and, in addition, the captured assessed value for that year. Copies of the annual base year assessment roll shall be transmitted by the Assessor to the same persons as the initial base year assessment roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with the Development Plan.  
179.009 - Establishment of project fund; approval of depositary. 
Sec. 9. The Treasurer of the Authority shall establish a separate fund which shall be kept in a depositary bank account or accounts in a bank or banks approved by the Board of the Authority. All moneys received by the Authority pursuant to the 1991 amendments shall be deposited in the project fund. All moneys in the project fund and earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with the Plan, including the 1991 amendments.  
179.010 - Payment of tax increments to Authority. 
Sec. 10. The Township Treasurer and the County Treasurer shall, as ad valorem taxes are collected on the property in the Development Area, pay that proportion of the taxes, except for penalties and collection fees, that the captured assessed value bears to the initial assessed value, to the Treasurer of the Authority for deposit in the project fund. The payments shall be made on the date or dates on which the Township Treasurer and the County Treasurer are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions.  
179.011 - Use of moneys in the project fund. 
Sec. 11. The moneys credited to the project fund and on hand therein from time to time shall be used annually in the following manner and following order of priority: 
First, to pay into the debt retirement fund or funds for all outstanding series of bonds issued pursuant to the Plan, including the 1991 amendments thereto, or any other series of bonds or other obligations pledging tax increment revenues of the Authority as a source of debt service payments, or to pay to the Township to meet its obligations to the county or other governmental unit issued on behalf of the Township to pay the costs of improvements described in the Plan or the 1991 amendments thereto, an amount equal to the interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal whether by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund. 
Second, to establish a reserve account for payment of principal of and interest on bonds issued pursuant to the Plan to the extent required by any resolution authorizing bonds. 
Third, to pay the administrative, auditing and operating costs of the Authority and the Township pertaining to the Development Area, including planning and promotion to the extent provided in the annual budget of the Authority. 
Fourth, to repay amounts advanced by the Township for project costs, including costs for preliminary plans, and fees for other professional services. 
Fifth, to pay, to the extent determined desirable by the Authority and approved by the Township, the cost of completing the remaining public improvements as set forth in the Plan to the extent those costs are not financed from other sources. 
Sixth, to pay the cost of any additional improvements to the Plan that are determined necessary by the Authority and approved by the Township Board in accordance with the Act.  
179.012 - Annual report. 
Sec. 12. Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Authority shall submit to the Township Board, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a report on the status of the project fund. The report shall include the amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount and purpose of expenditures from the account, the amount of principal of and interest on any outstanding indebtedness, the amount in any bond reserve account, the initial assessed value of the Development Area, the captured assessed value of the Development Area and the amount of captured assessed value retained by the Authority, the tax increments received and the amount of any surplus from the prior year, and any additional information requested by the Township Board or deemed appropriate by the Authority. The Secretary of the Authority shall cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township.  
179.013 - Refund of surplus tax increments. 
Sec. 13. Any surplus money in the project fund at the end of a year, as shown by the annual report of the Authority, shall be paid by the Authority to the Township Treasurer or the County Treasurer, as shown by the annual report of the Authority, as the case may be, and rebated by each to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction. For the purpose of this section, tax increment revenues not required to carry out the Plan, including the 1991 amendments, and not identified in the Authority's budget as being accumulated or carried over to meet debt service requirements in subsequent years, shall be deemed surplus money.  
179.014 - Agreement(s) with taxing jurisdictions. 
Sec. 14. The Township Supervisor Township and Township Clerk are hereby authorized to execute an agreement with one or more taxing jurisdictions or with the Township Treasurer and County Treasurer providing in substance that the Township Treasurer and County Treasurer may discontinue or limit payment of taxes that would otherwise be transferred and paid over to the Authority to the extent that further payments would result in refunds as described in Section 13 [179.013] of this Ordinance.  
179.015 - Conflict and severability. 
Sec. 15. All ordinances, resolutions and orders or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed, and each section of this Ordinance and each subdivision of any section thereof is hereby declared to be independent, and the finding or holding of any section or subdivision thereof to be invalid or void shall not be deemed or held to affect the validity of any other section or subdivision of this Ordinance.  
179.016 - Paragraph headings. 
Sec. 16. The paragraph headings in this Ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be a part of this Ordinance.  
179.017 - Publication and recordation. 
Sec. 17. This Ordinance shall be published in full promptly after its adoption in the Morning Sun, Mt. Pleasant, Michigan, a newspaper of general circulation in the Township, qualified under state law to publish legal notices, and shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Township, which recording shall be authenticated by the signatures of the Township Supervisor and the Township Clerk.  
179.018 - Effective date. 
Sec. 18. This Ordinance is hereby determined by the Township to be immediately necessary for the preservation of the health and safety of the Authority and the Township and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication as required by law.  
190.000 - EAST DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1985-2 Adopted: October 21, 1985 
An Ordinance to Establish a Downtown Development Authority in Union Township, Isabella County, Pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of Michigan, 1975; to Provide for Establishment of a Board of Trustees for the Authority: to Define the Boundaries of the Downtown District Constituting the Downtown Development Authority: to Provide for Levy and Collection of a Downtown Development Tax: and to Provide for All Other Matters Necessary and Related Thereto. 
TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN ORDAINS:
 
190.001 - Title of Ordinance. 
Sec. 1. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "East Downtown Development Authority Ordinance."  
190.002 - Definitions. 
Sec. 2. The terms used in this Ordinance shall have the same meanings as given to them in Act 197 or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this Ordinance: 
Authority means the Union Township Development Authority created by this Ordinance. 
Act 197 means Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975, as amended, now in effect or hereafter amended. 
Board of Directors means the Board of Directors of the Authority, the governing body of the Authority. 
Chief Executive Officer means the Supervisor of the Township. 
Downtown District means the downtown district designated by this Ordinance as now existing or hereafter amended. 
Township means Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan. 
Township Board means the governing body of Union Township, Michigan.  
190.003 - Determination of necessity. 
Sec. 3. The Township Board of Union Township hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the Township to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of Union Township to eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth by establishing a Downtown Development Authority pursuant to Act 197.  
190.004 - Creation of Authority. 
Sec. 4. There is hereby created, pursuant to Act 197, a Downtown Development Authority for Union Township, Michigan. The Authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of "Union Township East Downtown Development Authority." The Authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this Ordinance and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this Ordinance or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the Authority.  
190.005 - Description of downtown district. 
Sec. 5. The Downtown District in which the Authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Act 197 shall consist of the territory in Union Township, Michigan, described as follows: 
Part of Sections 11, 12, 13, and 14 of Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan, described as: Beginning at the Northeast corner of Section 13; thence Southerly along the centerline of Summerton Road to the intersection of the centerline of said road and the extended South right-of-way line of Broadway Road; thence Westerly along the South right-of-way line and extended South right-of-way line of Broadway Road to the intersection of the South right-of-way line of Broadway Road and the East right-of-way line of US-27; thence Northerly along the East right-of-way line of US-27 to a point 649 feet South of the South right-of-way line of Pickard Road (M-20); thence Westerly along a line parallel to the South right-of-way line of Pickard Road (M-20) to the West right-of-way line of First Street; thence Northerly along said West right-of-way line of First Street to the South right-of-way line of Palmer Street; thence Westerly along the South right-of-way line of said street to the East line of Wards View Subdivision; thence Southerly along said East line to the Southeast corner of said Subdivision; thence Westerly along [the] South line of said subdivision to the East right-of-way line of Isabella Road; thence Southerly along said East right-of-way line to the intersection of the extended East right-of-way line of Isabella Road and the South right-of-way line of Broadway Road; thence Westerly along the said right-of-way line to the West line of the Southeast ¼ of the Northeast ¼ of Section 14; thence Northerly along said line to the extended South line of the plat of Carter's Addition; thence Easterly along said extended line to the Southwest corner of Lot 23 of the plat of Carter's Addition; thence Northerly along the West line of said plat to a point approximately 660 feet South of the North line of Section 14; thence Westerly parallel to and approximately 660 feet South of the North line of Section 14 to the East line of the West ½ of the East ½ of the Northwest ¼ of the Northeast ¼ of Section 14; thence Northerly along said line to a point approximately 500 feet South of the North line of Section 14; thence Westerly parallel to and approximately 500 feet South of the North line of Section 14 to the West line of the of the [sic] Northeast ¼; thence Northerly along said line to the Northerly right-of-way line of Airport Road; thence Easterly along said North right-of-way line to the East line of the Northwest ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of Section 11; thence South along said line to the Northwest corner of Tillicium Drive; thence Westerly along the North right-of-way line of said drive to the West right-of-way line of Belmont Drive; thence Southerly 66 feet along the West right-of-way line of Belmont Drive to the Southerly right-of-way line of Tillicium Drive; thence Westerly along the South right-of-way line of Tillicium Drive to the East line of the Northwest ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of Section 11; thence South along said line to the Northwest corner of Lot 1 of the plat of Belmont Park; thence Easterly along the North line of said lot to the Northeast corner of said lot; thence Southerly along the East line of said lot to a point 17 feet South of the North line of Lots 1 and 2 of said plat; thence Easterly parallel to the North line of said lots to the West right-of-way line of Belmont Drive; thence Northerly along said West right-of-way line of said drive to the extended North line of Lots 3 and 4 of said plat; thence Easterly along said North line to the East line of said plat; thence Northerly along the East line of said plat to the Northeast corner of Edgewood Subdivision; thence Easterly along the South line of Airport Acres Subdivision to the Westerly right-of-way line of US-27; thence North to the extended North right-of-way line of Airport Road; thence Easterly along said North right-of-way line and the extended North right-of-way line to the centerline of Summerton Road; thence Southerly along the East line of Section 12 to the place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1989-2, 2-2-89; Ord. No. 1991-2, 2-13-91) 
190.006 - Board of Directors. 
Sec. 6. The Authority shall be under supervision and control of a Board of Directors consisting of the Chief Executive Officer of the Township and eight members as provided by Act 197. The members shall be appointed by the Chief Executive Officer, subject to approval by the Township Board and shall hold office for the terms provided in Act 197. All members shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed.  
190.007 - Powers of the Authority. 
Sec. 7. The Authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by law and herein.  
190.008 - Fiscal and financial responsibilities. 
Sec. 8. 
(a)	The Authority shall prepare budgetary information, expense reports, and financial data as required in Act 197. 
(b)	The Board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the Council on the same date that the proposed budget for the Township is submitted to the Board. The Authority shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the Township Board. The Authority may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with its operation and any improvements where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the development and finance plan. 
[c.]	The Authority shall submit financial reports to the Board at the same time and on the same basis as other departments of the Township are required to submit reports. The Authority shall be audited annually and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the Board.  
190.009 - Downtown Development Authority finances. 
Sec. 9. The Authority is hereby authorized by the Township to effect financing for Authority needs from one or more of the sources authorized by Act 197.  
190.010 - Section headings; severability; repealer. 
Sec. 10. Section headings are provided for convenience only and are not intended to be part of this Ordinance. If any portion of this Ordinance shall be held to be unlawful, the remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
190.011 - Publication, recording and filing. 
Sec. 11. This Ordinance or a summary thereof shall be published once after its adoption in the Morning Sun, a newspaper of general circulation in the County of Isabella within 30 days and the Township Clerk shall file a certified copy of the Ordinance with the Michigan Secretary of State promptly after its adoption. A true copy of this Ordinance may be inspected or obtained at the Township offices, 2010 S. Lincoln Road, Mt. Pleasant, Michigan.  
190.012 - Effective date. 
Sec. 12. This Ordinance shall be effective immediately.  
191.000 - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN Ord. No. 1985-4 Adopted: December 19, 1985 
An Ordinance to Approve the Development and Tax Increment Finance Plan of the Union Township East Downtown Development Authority Pursuant to Section 19 of Act 197, Public Acts of 1975 as Amended. 
THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS:
WHEREAS, the Union Township East Downtown Development Authority has completed a Tax Increment Finance and Development Plan that identifies specific development and rehabilitation activities to occur in the district described in attachment A; and 
WHEREAS, the Union Township Board has held a public hearing on a Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan for the Union Township East Downtown Development Authority, pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of 1975 as amended; and 
WHEREAS, the Township Board has approved a resolution determining that the plan constitutes a public purpose; and 
WHEREAS, the formation of a development area citizens council was not necessary; and 
WHEREAS, the plan meets the requirements set forth in Section 14 (2) and Section 17 (2) of the Act; and 
WHEREAS, the proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing; and 
WHEREAS, the development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of Act 197; and 
WHEREAS, the land to be acquired within the development area is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and the Act; and 
WHEREAS, the Development Plan is in reasonable accord with the Master Plan of the Township; and 
WHEREAS, public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the development area; and 
WHEREAS, changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the municipality. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, AS FOLLOWS: 
 
191.001 - [Approval.] 
[Sec. 1.] The Township Board of Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan hereby approve the proposed amendments and the agreement contained in the amendments that the DDA East will furnish tax increment revenues necessary to pay debt service on obligations entered into by the Township to finance improvements described in the Plan and the amendment, and that any obligations entered into [in] the future by the Township to construct or finance improvements described in the Plan and amendments will be entered into on the express understanding that the DDA will pay to the Township tax increment revenues required to pay debt service to the Tax Increment Financing and Development Plan of the Union Township East Downtown Development Authority without modification. 
(Ord. No. 1989-5-B, 3-30-89) 
192.000 - DEVELOPMENT AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCE PLAN AMENDMENT Ord. No. 1991-6 Adopted: May 22, 1991 
Ordinance Approving Amendments to Development and Tax Increment Finance Plan of the Union Township East Downtown Development Authority. 
WHEREAS, the Union Township East Downtown Development Authority (the "Authority") has prepared and recommended for approval certain amendments (the "amendments") to the Authority's existing Development and Tax Increment Finance Plan (the "Plan"); and, 
WHEREAS, the Township Board has held a public hearing on the amendments to the Plan for the Development Area (the "Development Area") pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of Michigan, 1975, as amended (the "Act"); and, 
WHEREAS, the Township Board has given the taxing jurisdictions in which the Development Area is located an opportunity to meet with the Township Board and to express their views and recommendations regarding the Plan, as required by the Act; and 
WHEREAS, it was determined that it was necessary to establish a Development Area Citizens Council. 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION ORDAINS: 
 
192.001 - Definitions. 
Sec. 1. Where used in this Ordinance the terms set forth below shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Base year assessment roll means the base year assessment roll prepared by the Township Assessor in accordance with the ordinance approving the Plan. 
Captured assessed value means the amount in any one year by which the current assessed value as finally equalized, of all taxable property in the Development Area exceeds the initial assessed value. 
Development Area shall mean the Development Area as described in the 1991 amendments. 
Development Plan means the Development Plan prepared by the Authority and included in the Plan originally approved by the Township Board on November 19, 1985. 
Downtown Development Authority or DDA means the Union Township East Downtown Development Authority. 
Initial assessed value means the most recently assessed value as finally equalized of all the taxable property within the boundaries of the Development Area at the time of adoption of the ordinance approving the original Plan. 
1991 amendments means the "amendments to [the] Development and Tax Increment Finance Plan" for the Township of Union, as transmitted to the Township Board by the Authority for public hearing, and confirmed by this Ordinance, copies of which are on file in the office of the Township Clerk. 
Project fund means the fund established pursuant to Section 9 [192.009] of this Ordinance.  
192.002 - Review considerations. 
Sec. 2. As required by the Act the Township Board has, in reviewing the 1991 amendments, taken into account the following considerations: 
(a)	The Plan and the 1991 amendments thereto meet the requirements set forth in section 17 (2) of the Act. 
(b)	The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(c)	The development, including the improvements described in the 1991 amendments, is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act. 
(d)	The land included within the Development Area to be acquired, if any, is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the Plan and the purposes of the Act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
(e)	The Development Plan is in reasonable accord with the Master Plan of the Township.
(f)	Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the Development Area. 
(g)	Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities, to the extent required by the Plan, including the 1991 amendments, are reasonably necessary for the projects described therein and for the Township.  
192.003 - Public purpose. 
Sec. 3. The Township Board hereby determines that the Plan, including the 1991 amendments, constitutes a public purpose.  
192.004 - Best interest of the public. 
Sec. 4. The Township Board hereby determines and redetermines that it is in the best interests of the public to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district, eliminate the causes of that deterioration, and to promote economic growth to proceed with the 1991 amendments to the Plan.  
192.005 - Approval and adoption of 1991 amendments to Plan. 
Sec. 5. The 1991 amendments to the Plan are hereby approved and adopted. The Plan shall terminate on December 31, 2011 or the date of final maturity of the last series of bonds issued pursuant to the Plan, including the 1991 amendments, whichever is later, except as it may be extended by subsequent amendment of the Plan pursuant to the Act. A copy of the Plan and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the Township Clerk's office.  
192.006 - Boundaries of Development Area. 
Sec. 6. The boundaries of the Development Area as set forth in the 1991 amendments to the Plan are hereby approved and confirmed.  
192.007 - Confirmation and maintenance of base year assessment roll. 
Sec. 7. 
(a)	The base year assessment roll previously prepared by the Township Assessor is hereby confirmed and maintained as the roll applicable to the Plan, including the 1991 amendments. The base year assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in the Development Area on the effective date of the ordinance approving the Plan and on the effective date of any ordinance approving the addition of property to the Development Area, and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in the Development Area. 
(b)	The Township Assessor shall transmit copies of the base year assessment roll to the Township Treasurer, County Treasurer, Authority and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the base year assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with previous ordinances and this Ordinance and the tax increment financing plans contained in the Plan and the 1991 amendments.  
192.008 - Preparation of annual base year assessment roll. 
Sec. 8. Each year, within 15 days following the final equalization of property in the Development Area, the Township Assessor shall prepare an updated base year assessment roll. The updated base year assessment roll shall show the information required in the initial base year assessment roll and, in addition, the captured assessed value for that year. Copies of the annual base year assessment roll shall be transmitted by the Assessor to the same persons as the initial base year assessment roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with the Development Plan.  
192.009 - Establishment of project fund; approval of depository. 
Sec. 9. The Treasurer of the Authority shall establish a separate fund which shall be kept in a depository bank account or accounts in a bank or banks approved by the Board of the Authority. All monies received by the Authority pursuant to the 1991 amendments shall be deposited in the project fund. All monies in the project fund and earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with the Plan, including the 1991 amendments.  
192.010 - Payment of tax increments to Authority. 
Sec. 10. The Township Treasurer and the County Treasurer shall, as ad valorem taxes are collected on the property in the Development Area, pay that proportion of the taxes, except for penalties and collection fees, that the captured assessed value bears to the initial assessed value, to the Treasurer of the Authority for deposit in the project fund. The payments shall be made on the date or dates on which the Township Treasurer and the County Treasurer are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions.  
192.011 - Use of monies in the project fund. 
Sec. 11. The monies credited to the project fund and on hand therein from time to time shall be used annually in the following manner and following order of priority: 
First, to pay into the debt retirement fund or funds for all outstanding series of bonds issued pursuant to the Plan, including the 1991 amendments thereto, or any other series of bonds or other obligations pledging tax increment revenues of the Authority as a source of debt service payments, or to pay to the Township to meet its obligations to the county or other governmental unit issued on behalf of the Township to pay the costs of improvements described in the Plan or the 1991 amendments thereto, an amount equal to the interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal, whether by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund. 
Second, to establish a reserve account for payment of principal of an interest on bonds issued pursuant to the Plan to the extent required by any resolution authorizing bonds. 
Third, to pay the administrative, auditing and operating costs of the Authority and the Township pertaining to the Development Area, including planning and promotion to the extent provided in the annual budget of the Authority. 
Fourth, to repay amounts advanced by the Township for project costs, including costs for preliminary plans, and fees for other professional services. 
Fifth, to pay, to the extent determined desirable by the Authority and approved by the Township, the cost of completing the remaining public improvements as set forth in the Plan to the extent those costs are not financed from other sources. 
Sixth, to pay the cost of any additional improvements to the Plan that are determined necessary by the Authority and approved by the Township Board in accordance with the Act.  
192.012 - Annual report. 
Sec. 12. Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the Authority shall submit to the Township Board, with copies to each Taxing Jurisdiction, a report on the status of the project fund. The report shall include the amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount and purpose of expenditures from the account, the amount of principal of and interest on any outstanding indebtedness, the amount in any bond reserve account, the initial assessed value of the Development Area, the captured assessed value of the Development Area and the amount of captured assessed value retained by the Authority, the tax increments received and the amount of any surplus from the prior year, and any additional information requested by the Township Board or deemed appropriate by the Authority. The Secretary of the Authority shall cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township.  
192.013 - Refund of surplus tax increments. 
Sec. 13. Any surplus money in the project fund at the end of a year, as shown by the annual report of the Authority, shall be paid by the Authority to the Township Treasurer or the County Treasurer, as shown by the annual report of the Authority, as the case may be, and rebated by each to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction. For the purpose of this section tax increment revenues not required to carry out the Plan, including the 1991 amendments, and not identified in the Authority's budget as being accumulated or carried over to meet debt service requirements in subsequent years shall be deemed surplus money.  
192.014 - Agreement(s) with taxing jurisdiction. 
Sec. 14. The Township Supervisor and Township Clerk are hereby authorized to execute an agreement with one or more taxing jurisdictions or with the Township Treasurer and County Treasurer providing in substance that the Township Treasurer and County Treasurer may discontinue or limit payment of taxes that would otherwise be transferred and paid over to the Authority to the extent that further payments would result in refunds as described in Section 13 [192.013] of this Ordinance.  
192.015 - Conflict and severability. 
Sec. 15. All ordinances, resolutions and orders or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed, and each section of this Ordinance and each subdivision of any section thereof is hereby declared to be independent, and the finding or holding of any section or subdivision thereof to be invalid or void shall not be deemed or held to affect the validity of any other section or subdivision of this Ordinance.  
192.016 - Paragraph headings. 
Sec. 16. The paragraph headings in this Ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be a part of this Ordinance.  
193.000 - DEVELOPMENT AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCE PLAN AMENDMENT Ord. No. 1994-8 Adopted: December 28, 1994 
Approving Amendments to Development Plan and Tax Increment Finance Plan for the Township of Union East Downtown Development Authority. 
WHEREAS, on November 21, 1985, the Township Board of the Township of Union (the "Township") adopted Ordinance No. 1985-4 approving the Tax Increment Finance and Development Plan (the "Original Plan") Union Township East Downtown Development Authority (the "Authority") pursuant to Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended ("Act 197"); and, 
WHEREAS, on May 22, 1991, the Township Board of the Township of Union adopted Ordinance No. 1991-6 approving the latest amendments to the Original Plan (as amended by all amendments through Ordinance No. 1991-6, the "Amended Plan") of the Authority; and 
WHEREAS, the Authority has prepared and recommended for approval amendments to the Amended Plan for the Development Area in the Downtown District within the Township; and, 
WHEREAS, on December 14, 1994, the Township Board held a public hearing on the amendments proposed by the Authority pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of Michigan, 1975, as amended (the "Act"); and, 
WHEREAS, the Township Board has given the taxing jurisdictions in which the Development Area is located an opportunity to meet with the Township Board and to express their views and recommendations regarding the Amended Plan, as amended by the proposed amendments of the Authority, as required by the Act; and, 
WHEREAS, after consideration of the proposed amendments of the Authority to the Amended Plan, the Township Board has determined to approve both the amendments to the Amended Plan attached as Exhibit A and incorporated by reference herein (the "Plan Amendments") and the Amended Plan, as amended by the Plan Amendments (together, the "Plan"). 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE TOWNSHIP OF UNION ORDAINS: 
 
193.001 - Findings. 
Sec. 1. 
(a)	The plan meets the requirements set forth in the Act.
(b)	The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(c)	The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act.
(d)	The Development Plan is in reasonable accord with the Master Plan of the Township.
(e)	Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the project area.  
193.002 - Public purpose. 
Sec. 2. The Township Board hereby determines that the Plan constitutes a public purpose.  
193.003 - Best interest of the public. 
Sec. 3. The Township Board hereby determines that it is in the best interests of the public to proceed with the Plan in order to halt property value deterioration, to increase property tax valuation, to eliminate the causes of the deterioration in property values, and to promote growth in the Downtown District.  
193.004 - Approval and adoption of Plan amendments and Plan. 
Sec. 4. The Plan amendments and the Plan are hereby approved and adopted. A copy of the Plan and the Plan amendments shall be maintained on file in the Township Clerk's office.  
193.005 - Revision of base year assessment roll; payment of tax increments to Authority. 
Sec. 5. The Township Assessor shall prepare a updated base year assessment roll of property within the Development Area as such area is amended by the Plan amendments. The new base year assessment roll shall show the initial assessed value, determined in compliance with Act 197, of all property within the Development Area as such Development Area is amended by the Plan amendments and shall compute the captured assessed value of the Development Area is [in] accordance with Act 197 for use in determining tax increment revenues from levies imposed after December 31, 1994 by each taxing jurisdiction. To the extent authorized by Act 197, the Plan or any agreement with a taxing jurisdiction permitting sharing of tax increment revenues of the Authority pursuant to Act 197, the Township Treasurer and the County Treasurer shall transmit tax increment revenues, as defined by Act 197, to the Authority for deposit in the project fund.  
193.006 - Amendment of Ordinance No. 1991-6; conflict and severability. 
Sec. 6. Ordinance No. 1991-6 is hereby amended to incorporate the changes to the amended Plan as amended by the Plan amendments, and is otherwise ratified and confirmed as being in full force and effect. All other ordinances, resolutions and orders or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance and the amended Plan, as amended by the Plan amendments approved hereby, are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. Each section of this Ordinance and each subdivision of any section thereof is hereby declared to be independent, and the finding or holding of any section or subdivision hereof to be invalid or void shall not be deemed or held to affect the validity of any other section or subdivision of this Ordinance.  
193.006[A] - Paragraph headings. 
Sec. 6[A]. The paragraph headings in this Ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be a part of the Ordinance.  
193.007 - Publication and recordation. 
Sec. 7. This Ordinance shall be published in full promptly after its adoption in the Mt. Pleasant Morning Sun, a newspaper of general circulation in the Township, qualified under state law to publish legal notices, and shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Township, which recording shall be authenticated by the signature of the Township Clerk.  
193.008 - Effective date. 
Sec. 8. This Ordinance is hereby determined by the Township Board to be immediately necessary for the interests of the Township and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication as required by law.  
194.000 - DEVELOPMENT AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCE PLAN AMENDMENT Ord. No. 2011-08 Adopted: November 17, 2011 
Approving Amendment to the Tax Increment Finance and Development Plan of
WHEREAS, the Union Township East Downtown Development Authority (the "EDDA") has previously prepared and recommended for approval a Tax Increment Finance and Development Plan (the "Original Plan") which was approved by the Township Board of the Charter Township of Union (the "Township") pursuant to Ordinance No. 1985-4 adopted on December 19, 1985; and 
WHEREAS, the Township has approved amendments to the Original Plan in 1989 pursuant to Ordinance No. 1985-5-B adopted on March 30, 1989 and Ordinance No. 1989-6 adopted on May 10, 1989, and has approved an amendment and restatement of the Original Plan in 1991 pursuant to Ordinance No. 1991-6 adopted on May 22, 1991 (the Original Plan as amended and restated, the "Plan"); and 
WHEREAS, the Board of the Union Township Economic Development Authority (the "Authority"), as governing body of the EDDA, has prepared and recommended for approval amendments to the Plan, attached hereto as Exhibit A (the "Plan Amendment"); and 
WHEREAS, on November 9, 2011, the Township Board held a public hearing on the Plan Amendment pursuant to Act 197, Public Acts of Michigan, 1975, as amended (the "Act"); and 
WHEREAS, the Township Board has given the taxing jurisdictions subject to capture in the Downtown District an opportunity to meet with the Township Board and to express their views and recommendations regarding the Plan Amendment, as required by the Act; and 
WHEREAS, after consideration of the Plan Amendment, the Township Board has determined to approve the Plan Amendment. 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION ORDAINS:
 
194.001 - Findings. 
Sec. 1. 
(a)	The Plan Amendment meets the requirements set forth in the Act.
(b)	The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the Authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(c)	The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act.
(d)	The land included within the Development Area to be acquired, if any, is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the Plan Amendment and the purposes of the Act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
(e)	The development plan portion of the Plan as amended by the Plan Amendment is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the Township. 
(f)	Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the project area. 
(g)	Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities, to the extent required by the Plan Amendment, are reasonably necessary for the project and for the Township. 
(h)	The Township Board has considered the findings and recommendations of the Development Area Citizens Council.  
194.002 - Public purpose. 
Sec. 2. The Township Board hereby determines that the Plan, as amended by the Plan Amendment, constitutes a public purpose.  
194.003 - Best interest of the public. 
Sec. 3. The Township Board hereby determines that it is in the best interests of the public to proceed with the Plan Amendment in order to halt property value deterioration, to increase property tax valuation, to eliminate the causes of the deterioration in property values, and to promote growth in the Downtown District.  
194.004 - Approval and adoption of plan amendment. 
Sec. 4. The Plan Amendment is hereby approved and adopted. A copy of the Plan, the Plan Amendment and all later amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the Township Clerk's office.  
194.005 - Amendment to ordinance number; conflict and severability. 
Sec. 5. Ordinance No. 1991-6 is hereby amended by this Ordinance. All ordinances, resolutions and orders or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of the Ordinance are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed, and each section of the Ordinance and each subdivision of any section thereof is hereby declared to be independent, and the finding or holding of any section or subdivision thereof to be invalid or void shall not be deemed or held to affect the validity of any other section or subdivision of the Ordinance.  
194.006 - Paragraph headings. 
Sec. 6. The paragraph headings in this Ordinance are furnished for convenience of reference only and shall not be considered to be a part of the Ordinance.  
194.007 - Publication and recordation. 
Sec. 7. This Ordinance shall be published in full promptly after its adoption in the Morning Sun, a newspaper of general circulation in the Township, qualified under State law to publish legal notices, and shall be recorded in the Ordinance Book of the Township, which recording shall be authenticated by the signature of the Township Clerk.  
194.008 - Effective date. 
Sec. 8. The Ordinance is hereby determined by the Township Board to be immediately necessary for the interests of the Township and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication as required by law.  
200.000 - LOT DIVISION IN RECORDED PLATS ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1991-11 Adopted: June 26, 1991 
An Ordinance to Regulate the Division of Lots in Recorded Plats in the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan; to Regulate the Division of Lots in Recorded Plats, to Set Forth a Procedure for Township Board Approval of Such Lot Divisions, and to Prescribe Penalties for the Violation of the Provisions of this Ordinance. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION, ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN ORDAINS:
 
200.001 - Title. 
Sec. I. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Lot Division In Recorded Plats Ordinance."  
200.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate and control the division of lots in recorded plats within the Charter Township of Union in order to promote the public safety, health, and general welfare.  
200.003 - Authority. 
Sec. III. This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Subdivision Control Act of 1967, Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, Section 263 and Act 246 Public Acts of 1945, as amended, which authorizes Township boards to adopt ordinances to secure the public health, safety, and general welfare.  
200.004 - Lot division in recorded plats. 
Sec. IV. 
A.	The division of a lot in a recorded plat is prohibited, unless approved following application to the Charter Township of Union Board (hereinafter "Township Board"). The application shall be filed with the Charter Township of Union Zoning Official (hereinafter "Zoning Official") and shall state the reasons for the proposed division. The Zoning Official shall refer the application to the Charter Township of Union Planning Commission (hereinafter "Planning Commission") for a recommendation to the Township Board. The Planning Commission shall then forward their recommendations to the Township Board which shall decide whether to accept or reject the Planning Commission's recommendation. No lot in a recorded plat shall be divided into more than four parts and the resulting lots shall be not less in area than 65 feet wide at the front line or less than 12,000 square feet in area unless the Township Zoning Ordinance allows for lots of a lesser size and sewer and water are available to the lot. No building permit shall be issued, or any building construction commenced, unless the division has been approved by the Township Board and the suitability of the land for building sites has been approved by the County or District Health Department. The division of a lot resulting in a smaller area than prescribed herein may be permitted but only for the purpose of adding to the existing building site or sites. The application shall so state and shall be in affidavit form and shall contain a drawing showing the dimensions and description of each part of the lot as proposed for dividing. 
B.	Approval of the division of a lot in a recorded plat shall be contingent on an agreement in writing by the applicant that any sales contract, deed or any other document presented for recording at the office of the County Register of Deeds shall be accompanied by a copy of the written approval of the Township Board and a copy of the drawing of the lot as approved for dividing.  
200.005 - Enforcement and penalties for failure to comply with this Ordinance. 
Sec. V. Any person who shall violate any of the terms of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both, plus costs of prosecution. Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall prevent the Township Board, public official, or private citizen from taking lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this Ordinance or the Michigan Subdivision Control Act.  
200.006, 200.007 - [Reserved.]  
200.008 - Severability. 
Sec. VIII. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
200.009 - Effective date. 
Sec. IX. This Ordinance will take effect 30 days after publication. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
201.000 - SUBDIVISION OF LAND Ord. No. 1994-6 Adopted: December 28, 1994 
An ordinance to regulate the subdivision of land in the Charter Township of Union. The subdivision of land shall be regulated: 
(1)	To further the orderly layout and use of land consistent with the Comprehensive Community Plan, such as, but not limited to subdivisions and condominiums; 
(2)	To require that the land be suitable for building sites and public improvements and that there be adequate drainage thereof; 
(3)	To control development within floodplain areas;
(4)	To promote the public health, safety and general welfare;
(5)	This legislation is enacted pursuant to the provisions of MCL 51.191, et seq., MCL 42.1, et seq., and MCL 560.101, et seq. 
 
201.001 - Definitions. 
Sec. I. For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words used herein are defined as follows: 
1.01. Alley. A public or private right-of-way shown on a plat which provides secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land. 
1.015. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Public Law 101-336, signed into federal law on July 26, 1990. 
1.02. Block. A city square, also the length of one side of such a square. 
1.03. Board. The Board of County Road Commissioners of the County of Isabella. 
1.04. Board's Specifications. The requirements and specifications for street construction as issued by the County Road Commission. 
1.05. Caption. The name by which the plat is legally and commonly known. 
1.06. Commission. The Planning Commission of the Charter Township of Union. 
1.07. Comprehensive Plan. The Master Plan or Development Plan which has been adopted by the Planning Commission as specified in [the] zoning ordinance adopted as amended. 
1.08. Construction Standards. Standards and specifications of construction and installation as established and administered by the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County Road Commission, or by any other governmental agencies having jurisdiction. 
1.09. County Plat Board. As defined by Subdivision Control Act of 1967, Public Act 288, as amended. 
1.10. Cul-de-sac. A minor street with only one open end and with the other end being terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
1.11. Easement. A nonprofitable interest in land owned by another that entitles its holder to a specific limited public or private use. 
1.12. Engineer. A licensed professional engineer; see subsection 1.40 below. 
1.13. Floodplain. That area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other similar body of water which will be inundated by a flood which can reasonably be expected for that region. 
1.14. Governing Body. The Township Board of the Charter Township of Union. 
1.15. Government survey. The land surveyed, subdivided and monumented by the United States Public Land Survey. 
1.16. Health Department. The State, City, County or District Health Department having jurisdiction. 
1.17. Improvements. Street construction and surfacing, curb and gutter, water mains, storm and sanitary sewers, sidewalks, walkways, graded outlots and bridges or culverts. 
1.18. Land. All land areas occupied by real property. 
1.19. Lot. A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
1.20. Major Street and Thoroughfare Plan. The master plan of highways, major streets and parkways adopted by the Planning Commission. 
1.21. Michigan Coordinate System. The System defined in State Act No. 9 of the Public Acts of 1964, being Sections 54.231 to 54.239 of the Complied Laws of 1948. 
1.22. Municipality. Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan. 
1.23. Outlot (when included within the boundary of a recorded plat). A lot set aside for purposes other than a building site, park, or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. 
1.24. Parcel. A continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in this Ordinance. 
1.25. Planner. The Planning Consultant, Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Township Clerk or any person designated to administer this Ordinance. 
1.26. Plat. A map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
A.	Preliminary Plat. A map showing salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for the purpose of preliminary consideration. 
B.	Final Plat. An instrument by which the subdivision's recorded. 
1.27. Proprietor. A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them which may hold any ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
1.28. Public sewer. A sewage system as defined in State Act No. 98 of the Public Acts of 1913, as amended, being Sections 325.201 to 325.214 of the Compiled Laws of 1948. 
1.29. Authority. Co-partnerships or municipal or other public authority providing gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, sewer for other services of a similar nature. 
1.30. Public water. A water works system, as defined in State Act No. 98 of the Public Acts of 1913, as amended. 
1.31. Replat. The process of changing, or the map or plat which changes, the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of the outlot is not a replat. 
1.32. School Board. The Board of Education or legislative body of the local school district. 
1.33. School Superintendent. The administrative head of the local school district. 
1.34. Street. A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place, court or however otherwise designated. 
A.	Arterial street. A street which is used primarily for high volume and high speed traffic and designated as arterial in the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.	Collector street. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
C.	Minor street. A street which is used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
1.35. Subdivider. A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or a combination of any of them, intending to subdivide land as defined and controlled by this Ordinance. 
1.36. Subdivide or subdivision. The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development, where the act of division creates five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of ten years. 
1.37. Subdivision Control Act. Act 288, Public Acts of Michigan, 1967, as amended. 
1.38. Surveyor. Either a land surveyor who is licensed in Michigan as a Professional Land Surveyor or a civil engineer who is licensed in Michigan as a Professional Engineer. 
1.39. Topographical map. A map showing existing physical characteristics, with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of proposed grades and drainage. 
1.40. Township Engineer. The resident or consulting engineer designated as an official engineer for the Township. 
1.41. Walkway. A public or private right-of-way across a block to be used by pedestrians and/or for underground utilities and located so as to connect two or more streets or a street and a public land parcel. 
1.42. Zoning Board of Appeals. The Charter Township of Union Zoning Board of Appeals. 
1.43. Zoning Ordinance. Charter Township of Union Ordinance No. 1991-5, being the Zoning Ordinance of the Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, as amended.  
201.002 - Scope and limitations. 
Sec. II. 
2.01. Existing recorded subdivision lots. This Ordinance shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, or to any plat previously granted preliminary plan approval by [the] Governing Body. 
2.02. Existing laws, restrictions, covenants. Nor is it intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annual [annul] or in any way impair or interfere: 
A.	With existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this Chapter [Ordinance]; or, 
B.	With private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreement; or, 
C.	With restrictive covenants running with the land to which the Township is a party.
2.03. Greater restrictive provisions control. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.  
201.003 - Filing of plats by subdivider. 
Sec. III. 
3.01. Preliminary Plat specifications. The Preliminary Plat shall be filed with the Township Clerk in conformity with the requirements and specifications as set forth in the Subdivision Control Act, the Board's Specifications and the following: 
A.	The plan shall be drawn to a scale not greater than 200 feet to one inch.
B.	The existing development, including officially platted or dedicated streets within areas adjacent to the proposed plat shall be shown on the plan. 
C.	North point and original date shall be shown. Date of revision shall be provided on all revised plans submitted. 
D.	Locations and pertinent dimensions of proposed lots and parks.
E.	The locations, size and essential invert elevations of the nearest available public sanitary and storm sewers and water main, existing and proposed, shall be shown. 
F.	The proposed numbers of lots shall be shown by numerical order commencing with the number one and with no omissions or duplications. 
G.	There shall be no block numbers or letters.
H.	Type and width of proposed roadway construction shall be shown.
I.	A written statement of intent and what action has been taken relative to the installation of utilities and roadway construction shall by [be] furnished. 
J.	When the Preliminary Plat includes only a portion of the subdivider's total tract of land, there shall be shown in sketch form the proposed development for the remaining portion of said tract proposed to be subdivided in the future. 
3.02. Preliminary Plat approval by Commission. 
A.	Check for compliance. Upon receipt of the Preliminary Plat from the Governing Body, the Planning Commission shall review said plat for the purpose of checking its compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, Major Street and Thoroughfare Plan and other specifications of this Ordinance the Subdivision Control Act and the Board's Specifications. 
B.	Written approval with changes indicated. Indicated recommendations of approval of the Preliminary Plat shall be submitted to the Governing Body for consideration. Written approval by the Commission shall be indicated on the Preliminary Plat along with any changes or requirements that said Commission may make, constituting acceptance thereof as a basis for the preparation of the Final Plat. 
3.03. Final Plat specifications. The Final Plat shall be filed with the Township Clerk in compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act, the Board's Specifications, and the following: 
A.	Water and sewer feasible and adequate. A statement by the Township Engineer that the proposed water mains, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers, and storm sewers as shown on the Preliminary Plat, are feasible and adequate to serve the proposed lots and that they conform to the general plan of the District. 
B.	Financial assurance for sanitary sewers. Proof of cash deposit or other financial assurance acceptable to the Governing Body, in the amount of the Township Engineer's estimated cost for sanitary sewer construction in accordance with subsection 6.02 [201.006 (6.02)] of this Ordinance. 
C.	Financial assurance for water mains. Proof of a cash deposit or other financial assurance acceptable to the Governing Body, in the amount of the Township Engineer's estimated cost for water main construction in accordance with subsection 6.02 [201.006 (6.02)] of this Ordinance. 
D.	Plat restrictions. Plat restrictions, if such are proposed by the subdivider, shall be submitted with the Final Record Plat. These restrictions shall become a part of the Final Record Plat and shall be recorded along with the plat in the office of the County Register of Deeds of Isabella County.  
201.004. - Final Record Plat approval. 
Sec. IV. 
4.01. Basis for granting by Commission. Final Record Plat approval will be recommended only under the following conditions: 
A.	That the subdivider has submitted through the Governing Body the Final Record Plat.
B.	That the subdivider has submitted through the Governing Body necessary engineering drawings, as required by this Ordinance, and said drawings have been checked and approved for engineering accuracy by the Township Engineer. 
C.	That the subdivider has installed all improvements, or in lieu thereof, has made arrangements for the installation of said improvements in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
4.02. Recommendations to Governing Body. After final review, the Commission shall submit recommendations of approval, along with the necessary agreements, restrictions and fees, as required herein, and the Final Record Plat. 
4.03. Action by Governing Body. Upon receipt of the recommendations on the Final Plat and other material from the Planning Commission, the Governing Body shall take action upon said plat in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act, the Board's Specifications, this Ordinance and any other Township Ordinance, Code provisions or regulations. 
A.	Disapproval. 
a.	Notification of reasons in writing. In case of disapproval, the reasons for such action shall, be [by] written communication, be transmitted to the subdivider and the Commission. 
b.	Resubmission of changes or alterations. Both the subdivider and the Commission shall, within a reasonable time, resubmit to the Governing Body any changes or alterations stipulated in the Governing Body's action of disapproval. 
B.	Approval. Upon approval of the Final Plat, the Township Clerk shall, in accordance with the Subdivision Control Act, the Board's Specifications and any other applicable requirements, file said record plat, agreements, and restrictions with the County Clerk.  
201.005 - General specifications and design standards. 
Sec. V. These specifications and standards shall be in conformity with the provisions as set forth in the Subdivision Control Act, the Board's Specifications and the following: 
5.01. Streets and alleys. The subdivision of land or the dedication of land for streets, alleys, highways, parks or other public uses shall conform to the Major Street and Thoroughfare Plan and Comprehensive Plan. 
A.	Location and arrangement. 
a.	In the preparation of [a] new subdivision, provisions shall be made for the continuation of existing or platted streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions or parcels of land, insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. The center lines of such streets shall continue with the center lines of existing streets. 
b.	In general, the streets shall extend to the boundary of the subdivision to provide for proper connection with the street system for contiguous and adjacent land. 
c.	Contours, when required by the Commission or if topography dictates, shall be provided.
d.	If there exists a dedicated and recorded one-half street on an adjoining plat, the other one-half must be dedicated on the proposed plat to make the street complete. 
B.	Right-of-way widths. Minimum right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
a.	Arterial, collector, parkways, and local: Major arterial, collector streets, parkways, and local streets, in accordance with the minimum requirements as set forth in the adopted rules and regulations known as "Requirements and Specifications for Private Road Construction of the Board of County Road Commissioners of Isabella County," effective, [sic] and any amendments thereof, or as may be otherwise required by the terms of the Major Street Plan adopted by the Township Board upon the advice of the Township Planning Commission. 
b.	Alleys and service drives: 40 feet. 
c.	Walkways: Ten feet. 
d.	Culs-de-sac: Width of right-of-way and roadway design for culs-de-sac shall be in accordance with "Requirements and Specifications for New Street Construction of the Board of County Road Commissioners of Isabella County." 
C.	Alleys in Residential Districts. Alleys shall not be accepted in Residential Districts unless specifically required by the Commission. 
D.	Street names. Street names shall not be the same as any other street name presently existing in Isabella County. 
5.02. Blocks. 
A.	Length. No block shall be more than 1320 feet in length except along major roads. 
B.	Easements. In blocks of 660 feet or greater in length, the Commission may require an easement for public utilities at or near the middle of the block. 
C.	Intersecting streets. The number of intersecting streets along highways and major streets shall be held to a minimum. 
5.03. Lots. 
A.	Accessible to a public street. All lots shall have acceptable access to a public street. 
B.	Side lot lines. The side lines of lots shall be approximately radial or perpendicular to the street upon which the lots face. 
C.	Corporate boundary lines. No lot shall be divided by a corporate boundary line. Such boundary line may be the lot line or center line of streets or alleys. 
D.	Widths, depths, and area. Lot widths, depths and area shall conform to the stipulations as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. 
E.	Corner lot width. Corner lots shall be of sufficient width to allow conformance with building lines as established in the Zoning Ordinance. 
F.	Restrictive covenant. Where lots are developed so that they abut an arterial street, highway or parkway and are provided with an alternate means of access, the subdivider may be required to record with the Register of Deeds, Isabella County, Michigan, a restrictive covenant running with the land providing that no right to access by vehicular traffic to the arterial street, highway or parkway is permitted from or onto such lots. 
G.	Partitioning or dividing. An existing lot may be partitioned or divided, where each of the resulting parcels is to be developed, or used in conjunction with an immediately contiguous lot as a single building site, in conformance with Ordinance 1991-11, Lot Division in Recorded Plats. 
5.04. General requirements. 
A.	Variations and Exception Considerations. In cases where variations and exceptions from the dimensional standards, improvement requirements and open space requirements are deemed necessary due to unusual physical conditions or new design techniques, said variations shall be considered by the Commission and appropriate recommendations made to the Governing Body in accordance with the provisions of Section 9 [201.009]. 
B.	Dedicated ingress and egress. Every subdivision shall have dedicated means of ingress and egress. 
C.	Adequate water or sewer disposal. No plat shall be approved where inadequate water supply or sewage disposal conditions exist as determined by the Health Department. 
D.	Not specifically stipulated compliance. Requirements and specifications not specifically stipulated in this Ordinance shall comply with the Subdivision Control Act and the Board's Specifications.  
201.006 - Improvements: road and street. 
Sec. VI. Improvements shall be installed in conformity with the Subdivision Control Act, the Board's Specifications and as follows: 
6.01. Installation. The minimum improvements shall be installed according to the Isabella Road Commission Standards, [which] are as follows: 
A.	Roadway construction. Roadway construction shall be in accordance with Requirements and Specifications for Private Road Construction of the Board of County Road Commissions of Isabella County. 
B.	Culverts and bridges. Culverts and bridges shall be constructed when determined to be necessary by the official having jurisdiction. The subdivider shall pay 100 percent of the labor and materials needed to construct said culvert and/or bridge. 
C.	Sanitary sewer lines. Sanitary sewer lines shall be installed by way of an easement from any portion of the proposed subdivision, of which of the subdivider shall pay 100 percent of the labor and materials needed for the installation of up to and including eight-inch diameter sewer mains within the subdivision being platted. 
D.	Water lines. Water lines shall be installed by way of an easement from any portion of proposed subdivision, of which the subdivider shall pay 100 percent of the labor and materials needed for the installation of up to and including eight-inch diameter water mains within the subdivision being platted. Provisions shall be made to loop the water lines to the water source. 
E.	Storm sewer lines. Storm sewer lines (including catch basins and manholes) shall be installed in accordance with the adopted rules and regulations of the County Drain Commissioner of Isabella County. 
F.	Utility easement. A ten-foot utility easement shall be provided in the plat for each lot. 
G.	Storm drainage. Rear-lot storm drainage shall be provided as approved by the Township Engineer. 
H.	Sidewalks. Sidewalks may be constructed on an easement parallel to or within all road rights-of-way and shall be in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act requirements. The cost of said sidewalks shall be paid by the subdivider. 
I.	Removal and replacement of monuments. If, during the process of the installation of improvements, it is deemed necessary to remove any monuments or benchmarks, the subdivider or his contractor shall obtain permission from the Township Engineer to make such removal. All monuments or benchmarks removed, relocated or destroyed shall be replaced in their proper location by the subdivider at his expense. 
6.02. Financing. Prior to the final plat approval, the financing of the installation of road and street construction (including storm sewer and drainage facilities) shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Subdivision Control Act, the Board's Specifications, and for other improvements as follows: 
A.	Water mains and sanitary sewers. To insure the completion of water mains and sanitary sewers: 
a.	Deposit for water mains. The subdivider shall deposit with the Township Treasurer the estimated cost as determined by the Township Engineer of the water mains required to serve the lots in said plat; provided, however, that the estimated cost shall not include the additional cost of water mains larger than eight inches in diameter. 
b.	Deposit for sanitary sewers. The subdivider shall deposit with the Township Treasurer the estimated costs as determined by the Township Engineer of the sanitary sewers required to serve the lots in said plat; an amount equal to the number of lots times the unit assessment for the district in which the property is located less the amount of previous assessments against the property. Provided, however, that the estimated cost shall not include the additional cost of sewer mains larger than eight inches in diameter. 
c.	Added costs paid from Township funds. When water mains larger than eight inches and sewer mains larger than eight inches are required and water and sewer lines have extended to the plat, the additional cost will be payable from Township funds. 
d.	Utilities installation expedited. Upon receipt of deposit for the cost of sanitary sewer and water mains, the Governing Body shall order construction plans, receive bids, award contracts and have said utilities installed as soon as possible, unless a memorandum of understanding between the Township and proprietor is adopted by the Governing Body. 
e.	Final accounting of funds. When construction is completed, the final accounting of the funds deposited will be made with the subdivider. 
f.	Petition for installation and assessment. The subdivider may request, by petition of the Governing Body, the installation of the improvements required by the subdivider, wherein the Governing Body may install all or any of the required improvements, and assess the subdivider for said improvements costs, under conditions which the Governing Body may determine. 
B.	Pavements and storm drainage. 
a.	Under jurisdiction of County. Pavements and storm drainage in subdivisions under the jurisdiction of the Board of County Road Commissioners of Isabella County shall be constructed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board of County Road Commissioners of Isabella County. 
b.	Under Jurisdiction of Township. In subdivisions not under the jurisdiction of the Board of County Road Commissioners of Isabella County, arrangements shall be made with the Township in the same manner as for sanitary sewers and water mains.  
201.007 - Amendments. 
Sec. VII. 
7.01. Supplement or change authorized. The Governing Body may, by ordinance, amend, supplement or change this Ordinance. 
7.02. After public hearing with notice. Provided that prior to such amendment, a public hearing is held by both the Commission and the Governing Body after giving notice of hearing at least 15 days prior to the date of hearing, by publication in an official paper of general circulation in the Township and by United States mail to each public utility company and railroad company registered with the Township to receive such notice. 
7.03. Filed with County. A copy of such amendment, supplement or change shall be filed with the County Register of Deeds.  
201.008 - Variances. 
Sec. VIII. 
8.01. For hardship or because impracticable. 
A.	Authority established. The Township Planning Commission may recommend to the Township Board a variance from the provisions of this Ordinance on a finding: 
a.	The [that] undue hardship may result from strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements of the Ordinance; or 
b.	That application of such provision or requirement is impracticable.
B.	Desirable for public interest. The Planning Commission shall only recommend variances that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. 
C.	Consideration. In making its finding, as required hereinbelow, the Planning Commission shall take into account: 
a.	The nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity;
b.	The number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivisions; and,
c.	The probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity.
D.	Findings. No variance shall be recommended unless the Planning Commission finds after a public hearing: 
a.	That there are such special circumstances or conditions affecting said property that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would clearly be impracticable or unreasonable. In such cases the subdivider shall first state his reasons in writing as to the specific provision or requirement involved and submit them to the Planning Commission. 
b.	That the granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which said property is situated. 
c.	That such variance will not violate the provisions of the State Subdivision Control Act. 
d.	That such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Development Plan of this Township. 
E.	Variance findings recorded in minutes. The Planning Commission shall include its findings and the specific reasons and actions therefor in its minutes. 
8.02. Topographical, physical limitation. Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance would result in an extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography, other physical conditions, or other such conditions which are not self-inflicted, or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this Ordinance, the Planning Commission may grant a variance modification or a waiver of these requirements. 
8.03. Planned Unit Development. The developer may request a variance from specified portions of this Ordinance in the case of a Planned Unit Development. 
A.	Consideration. The Planning Commission shall take into account: 
a.	The nature of the proposed use of land and existing use of land in the vicinity;
b.	The number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision; and,
c.	The probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity.
B.	Findings. If, in the judgement of the Planning Commission, such a plan provides adequate public spaces and includes provisions for efficient circulation, light and air and other needs, it shall make findings, as required hereinbelow: 
a.	The proposed project will constitute a desirable and stable community development.
b.	The proposed project will be in harmony with adjacent areas. 
201.009 - Title. 
Sec. IX. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Union Ordinance Number 1994-6, Subdivision Control Ordinance.  
201.010 - Severability. 
Sec. X. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of the Ordinance.  
201.011 - Effective date. 
Sec. XI. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately after publication.  
201.012 - Repealer. 
[Sec. XII.] All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
202.000 - LAND DIVISION ORDINANCE Ord. No. 1997-8 Adopted: May 28, 1997 
An Ordinance to regulate partitioning or division of parcels or tracts of land, enacted pursuant but not limited to Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, and Act 246 of 1945, as amended, being the Township General Ordinance statute; to provide a procedure therefore; to repeal any ordinance or provision thereof in conflict herewith; and to prescribe penalties and enforcement remedies for the violation of this ordinance. 
The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, ordains:
 
202.001 - Title. 
Sec. I. This ordinance shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Union Land Division Ordinance.  
202.002 - Purpose. 
Sec. II. The purpose of this ordinance is to carry out the provisions of the State Land Division Act (1967 PA 288, as amended, formerly known as the Subdivision Control Act), to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with applicable ordinances and said Act, to minimize potential boundary disputes, to maintain orderly development of the community, and otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the township by establishing reasonable standards for prior review and approval of land divisions within the township, including the division of lots within a platted subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1997-10, 7-9-97) 
202.003 - Definitions. 
Sec. III. For purposes of this ordinance certain terms and words used herein shall have the following meaning: 
A.	"Applicant" - a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
B.	"Divided" or "Division" - the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of Sections 108 and 109 of the State Land Division Act. 
C.	"Exempt split" or "exempt division" - the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent; provided all resulting parcels are accessible for vehicular travel and utilities from existing public roads through existing adequate roads or easements, or through areas owned by the owner of the parcel that can provide such access. 
D.	"Forty acres or the equivalent" - either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than 30 acres. 
E.	"Governing body" - the Charter Township of Union Board of Trustees. 
202.004 - Prior approval requirement for land divisions. 
Sec. IV. Land in the Charter Township of Union, including lots in platted subdivisions, shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of the Charter Township of Union Board of Trustees, in accordance with this ordinance and the State Land Division Act; provided that the following shall be exempted from this requirement: 
A.	A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to the State Land Division Act. 
B.	A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with the State Land Division Act. 
C.	An exempt split as defined in this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1997-10, 7-9-97) 
202.005 - Application for land division approval. 
Sec. V. An applicant shall file all of the following with the Township Assessor for review by the assessor and zoning official, and approval by the Township Board of a proposed land division before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year, or for building development: 
A.	A completed application form on such form as may be provided by the Township.
B.	Proof of fee ownership of the land proposed to be divided.
[C.]	A tentative parcel map of the land proposed to be divided, drawn to scale, including an accurate legal description of each proposed division, and showing the boundary lines, approximate dimensions, and accessibility from existing or proposed public roads for automobile and public utilities. 
D.	Proof that all standards of the State Land Division Act and this Ordinance have been met. 
E.	The history and specifications of the land sufficient to establish that the proposed division complies with Section 108 of the State Land Division Act. 
F.	If transfer of division rights is proposed in the land transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer. 
G.	Unless a division creates a parcel which is acknowledged and declared to be "not a development site", all divisions shall result in "buildable" parcels with sufficient area to comply with all required setback provisions, minimum floor areas, off-street parking spaces, approved on-site sewage disposal and water well locations (where public water and sewer service is not available) access to existing public utilities and public roads, and maximum allowed area coverage of buildings and structures on the site. Declared agricultural land and land for forestry use shall not be subject to the foregoing as "development sites" as provided in the State Land Division Act at Section 102. 
H.	The fee as may from time to time be established by resolution of the Township Board of Trustees for land division reviews pursuant to this Ordinance to cover the costs of review of the application and administration of this Ordinance and the State Land Division Act. 
I.	A copy of any and all subdivision deed restrictions, if applicable.
(Ord. No. 1997-10, 7-9-97) 
202.006 - Procedure for review of applications for land division approval. 
Sec. VI. 
A.	Upon receipt of the land division application package, the Township Assessor shall review the application for compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the State of Michigan Land Division Act, and shall submit them forthwith to the Township Zoning Official, who shall likewise review the package for compliance with the Township's Zoning Ordinance. These two officials shall then make a recommendation to the Township Board of Trustees. At their next regularly scheduled meeting, the Board shall approve, approve with reasonable conditions to assure compliance with applicable ordinances and the protection of public health, safety and general welfare, or disapprove the land division applied for within 30 days after receipt of the application package conforming to this Ordinance's requirements, and the assessor shall promptly notify the applicant of the decisions and the reasons for any denial. If the application package does not conform to this Ordinance['s] requirements and the State Land Division Act, the assessor shall return the same to the applicant for completion and refiling in accordance with this Ordinance and the State Land Division Act. 
B.	Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the Township Board may, within 30 days of said decision appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals which shall consider and resolve such appeal by a majority vote of said Board at its next regular meeting or session affording sufficient time for a 20 day written notice to the applicant (and appellant where other than the applicant) of the time and date of said meeting and appellate hearing. 
C.	A decision approving a land division is effective for 60 days, after which it shall be considered revoked unless within such period a document is recorded with the County Register of Deeds office and a recorded copy is filed with the Township Assessor accomplishing the approved land division or transfer. 
D.	The assessor shall maintain an official record of all approved and accomplished land divisions or transfers.  
202.007 - Standards for approval of land divisions. 
Sec. VII. A proposed land division shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
A.	All the parcels to be created by the proposed land division(s) fully comply with the applicable lot (parcel), yard and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, minimum lot (parcel) frontage/width, minimum road frontage, minimum lot (parcel) area, minimum lot width to depth ratio, and maximum lot (parcel) coverage and minimum set-backs for existing buildings/structures, or have received a variance from such requirements from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
B.	The proposed land division(s) comply with all requirements of the State Land Division Act and this Ordinance. 
C.	All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate accessibility, or an area available therefor, to a public road for public utilities and emergency and other vehicles not less than the requirements of all applicable ordinances. 
D.	The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by the division does not exceed a four to one ratio exclusive of access roads, easements, or non-development sites. The permissible depth of a parcel created by a land division shall be measured within the boundaries of each parcel from the abutting road right-of-way to the most remote boundary line point of the parcel from the point of commencement of the measurement. 
The width of a parcel shall be measured at the abutting road right-of-way line, or as otherwise provided in any applicable ordinance. 
E.	No lot in a recorded plat shall be divided into more than four parts, and the resulting lots shall not be less in area than permitted by the township Zoning Ordinance, or by subdivision deed restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 1997-10, 7-9-97) 
202.008 - Consequences of noncompliance with land division approval requirement. 
Sec. VIII. Any parcel created in noncompliance with this ordinance shall not be eligible for any building permits, or zoning approvals, such as special land use approval or site plan approval, and shall not be recognized as a separate parcel on the assessment roll. In addition, violation of this ordinance shall subject the violator to the penalties and enforcement actions set forth in Section IX [202.009] of this ordinance, and as may otherwise be provided by law.  
202.009 - Penalties and enforcement. 
Sec. IX. 
[A.]	Any person who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
[B.]	Any person who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance shall also be subject to a civil action seeking invalidation of the land division and appropriate injunctive or other relief.  
202.010 - Severability. 
Sec. X. The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable and if any clause, sentence, word, section or provision is declared void or unenforceable for any reason by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect any portion of this ordinance other than said part or portion thereof.  
202.011 - Repeal. 
Sec. XI. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed, except that this Ordinance shall not be construed to repeal any provision in the Township Zoning Ordinance, the Township Subdivision Control Ordinance, or the Township Building Code.  
202.012 - Effective date. 
Sec. XII. This ordinance shall take effect seven days following its publication after adoption.  
210.000 - PRIVATE ROADS Ord. No. 2000-09 Adopted: December 18, 2000 
An ordinance to regulate the construction of private roads within the Charter Township of Union. 
The Charter Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, Hereby Ordains:
 
210.001 - Title, intent and purpose. 
Sec. I. This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Union Township Private Road Ordinance". The intent of this ordinance is to provide and manage access to land development, while preserving the regional flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity, and speed. If access systems are not properly designed, these thoroughfares will be unable to accommodate the access needs of development and retain their primary transportation function. This ordinance balances the right of reasonable access to private property, with the right of the citizens of the Charter Township of Union and the State of Michigan to safe and efficient travel. Regulations have been applied to private roads for the purpose of reducing traffic accidents, personal injury, and property damage attributable to poorly designed access systems, and to thereby improve the safety and operation of the roadway network. This will protect the substantial public investment in the existing transportation system and reduce the need for expensive remedial measures. These regulations also further the orderly layout and use of land, protect community character, establish emergency vehicle access and conserve natural resources by promoting well-designed road and access systems and discouraging the unplanned subdivision of land.  
210.002 - Private roads. 
Sec. II.  
1.	Private driveways designed to serve one or two lots which may not be served by a driveway from a public road are exempt from these regulations. Such lots typically do not have frontage on a public road and are served by easements or by "flag" lots. 
2.	Private roads may be permitted in accordance with the requirements of this Section and the following general standards shall apply: 
a)	All private roads in the township shall be constructed to Isabella County Road Commission (I.C.R.C.) specifications as revised and contained in "Standards and Specifications for Plat Development/Site Condominium Development and Street Construction" and have an easement of a minimum of 66 feet in width. 
b)	Private roads that are generally accessible to the public shall have all traffic control features, such as striping or markers, in conformance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
c)	The minimum distance between private road outlets on a single side of a public road shall be 660 feet, or less where provided by access classification and standards for state roads and local thoroughfares. 
d)	All properties served by the private road shall provide adequate access for emergency vehicles and shall conform to the approved local street numbering system. 
e)	All private roads shall be designated as such and will be required to have adequate signage indicating the road is a private road and not publicly maintained. 
f)	All private roads shall have a posted speed limit not to exceed 20 miles an hour.
g)	All private roads shall have adequate provisions for drainage and stormwater runoff as provided in the above referenced ICRC document. 
3.	Private roads serving between three and 13 unplatted lots may utilize the I.C.R.C.'s Typical Rural Residential cross section without the bituminous surface. The road commission shall not be compelled to accept roads constructed to this lesser standard. 
4.	Roads serving more than 13 lots shall be constructed or upgraded to meet all specifications in the above referenced I.C.R.C. document. 
5.	Applications for subdivision and land divisions approvals that include private roads shall include a drainage plan and road construction plan, prepared by a registered engineer. The township appointed engineer shall review private road plans for conformance with this Code. 
6.	Construction permits are required for connection to public roads. Application for road construction shall be made concurrent with the creation of a lot that does not have frontage on a public road. A road construction permit shall be issued after approval of the private road plan and the entire length of the road shall be inspected during construction and upon completion. If found in conformance, a final use permit shall be issued. 
7.	No building permit shall be issued for any lot served by a private road until the private road has been constructed and approved, so that all lots to be served by the private road have access to a public road. All lots that are in existence at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall be issued building permits, providing all other requirements for a building permit are met. 
8.	A road maintenance agreement, drafted by the applicant and approved by the township attorney shall be recorded with the deed of each property to be served by a common private road. The agreement shall provide for: 
a)	A method to initiate and finance a private road and maintain that road in good condition;
b)	A method of apportioning maintenance costs to current and future users;
c)	A provision that the township may inspect, and if necessary, require that repairs be made to the private road to ensure that safe access is maintained for emergency vehicles. If required repairs are not made within six months of date of notice, the township may make the necessary repairs and assess owners of parcels on the road for the cost of all improvements plus an administrative fee, not to exceed 25% of total costs; 
d)	A provision that the majority vote of all property owners on the road shall determine how the road is maintained except in the case of emergency repairs as outlined above; 
e)	A statement that no public funds shall be used to construct, repair or maintain the road; 
f)	A provision requiring mandatory upgrading of the roadway if additional parcels are added to reach the specified thresholds; and 
g)	A provision that property owners along that road are prohibited from restricting or in any manner interfering with normal ingress and egress by any other owners or persons needing to access properties with frontage on that road. 
9.	No private road shall be incorporated into the public road system unless it is built to public road specifications of the county. The property owners shall be responsible for bringing the road into conformance. 
10.	All private roads shall have a sign and name meeting township standards and shall include the following notice: "Private Road" "Not maintained by Public". 
11.	An application fee will be established by the Director of Public Works to cover administrative, processing, and inspection costs. 
12.	The United States postal service and the local school district are not required to use the private road for access to the parcels abutting the private road and may require that service be provided only at the closest public access point.  
210.003 - Severability. 
Sec. III. The provisions, sections, sentences and phrases of this Ordinance are declared to be severable and if any such portion is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall in no way affect or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance.  
210.004 - Effective date. 
Sec. IV. This Ordinance will take effect immediately after publication. 

Charter Township of Union
Isabella County, Michigan
Zoning Ordinance 1991-5
Adopted By
Union Township
April 10, 1991
With amendments through
Ordinance 2013-04
1-2
SECTION 1 TITLE, PURPOSE, AND INTERPRETATION ..........................................................................1-11
1.1 SHORT TITLE..........................................................................................................................1-11
1.2 PURPOSE.................................................................................................................................1-11
1.3 INTERPRETATION..................................................................................................................1-11
SECTION 2 DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAPS .............................................................................................2-1
2.1 ZONE DISTRICTS......................................................................................................................2-1
2.2 THE ZONING MAP....................................................................................................................2-1
SECTION 3 DEFINITIONS............................................................................................................................3-1
3.1 ACCESSORY BUILDING (Amended, Ord 1997-11)...................................................................3-1
3.2 ACCESSORY USE .....................................................................................................................3-1
3.3 ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT ARCADE, AND ADULT VIDEO STORRE (Ameneded Ord 2005-03)......................................................................................................................................3-1
3.4 ADULT CABaRET (Amended, Ord 2005-03)...............................................................................3-1
3.5 ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER (Amended, Ord 2005-03)..............................................3-1
3.6 ALLEY.......................................................................................................................................3-1
3.7 ALTERATION............................................................................................................................3-1
3.8 APARTMENT.............................................................................................................................3-2
3.9 AUTOMOBILE OR VEHICLE STORAGE..................................................................................3-2
3.10 AUTOMOBILE OR VEHICULAR SALES AREA.......................................................................3-2
3.11 BASEMENT AND CELLAR.......................................................................................................3-2
3.12 BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATION......................................................................................3-2
3.13 BILLBOARDS AND SIGNS (Amended, 1996-16 Ordinance) ......................................................3-2
3.14 BUILDING .................................................................................................................................3-7
3.15 BUILDING, HEIGHT OF............................................................................................................3-7
3.16 BUILDING LINE........................................................................................................................3-8
3.17 BULK PLANT ............................................................................................................................3-8
3.18 CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL ..............................................................................................3-8
3.19 CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME..................................................................................3-8
3.20 CUSTOMARY AGRICULTURAL OPERATION........................................................................3-8
3.21 DAY CARE FACILITY...............................................................................................................3-8
3.23 DWELLING................................................................................................................................3-9
3.24 DWELLING UNIT......................................................................................................................3-9
3.24.1 ENCLOSED LOCKED FACILITY (New Or 2011-03)..................................................................3-9
3.25 ESSENTIAL SERVICES (Amended Ord 1999-04) .......................................................................3-9
3.26 EXISTING LOT..........................................................................................................................3-9
3.27 FABRICATION ..........................................................................................................................3-9
3.28 FAMILY (Amended, 1995-6 Ordinance).....................................................................................3-10
3.29 FARM.......................................................................................................................................3-10
1-3
3.295 FARM ANIMALS (New, Ord 1998-17)..................................................................................... 3-10
3.295 FENCE (New, 1991-16 Ordinance)............................................................................................ 3-10
3.30 FILLING STATION................................................................................................................. 3-10
3.31 FLOODPLAIN......................................................................................................................... 3-10
3.32 FLOOR AREA......................................................................................................................... 3-10
3.33 GARAGE, PRIVATE ............................................................................................................... 3-10
3.34 GARAGE, PUBLIC.................................................................................................................. 3-10
3.35 HALF STORY.......................................................................................................................... 3-10
3.36 HOME OCCUPATION (Addition, 1997-12 Ordinance)............................................................. 3-11
3.37 HOUSEHOLD PET .................................................................................................................. 3-11
3.38 INOPERABLE OR UNLICENSED VEHICLE.......................................................................... 3-11
3.39 JUNK YARD............................................................................................................................ 3-11
3.40 KENNEL.................................................................................................................................. 3-11
3.41 LOT ......................................................................................................................................... 3-11
3.42 LOT, CORNER ........................................................................................................................ 3-11
3.43 LOT LINE................................................................................................................................ 3-12
3.44 MAJOR STREET ..................................................................................................................... 3-12
3.44.1 MARIHUANA (New Or 2011-03)............................................................................................. 3-12
3.44.2 MARIHUANA CLUB (New Or 2011-03).................................................................................. 3-12
3.44.3 MARIHUANA DISPENSARY (New Or 2011-03)..................................................................... 3-12
3.44.4 MARIHUANA GROWING FACILITY (New Or 2011-03)........................................................ 3-12
3.45.1 MEDICAL USE OF MARIHUANA (New Or 2011-03) ............................................................. 3-12
3.45 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT............................................................................................... 3-13
3.46 MINOR STREET...................................................................................................................... 3-13
3.47 MOBILE HOME ...................................................................................................................... 3-13
3.48 MOBILE HOME PARK ........................................................................................................... 3-13
3.49 MODULAR HOME.................................................................................................................. 3-13
3.50 MOTEL.................................................................................................................................... 3-13
3.51 MULTI-USE STRUCTRES ...................................................................................................... 3-14
3.52 NON-CONFORMING BUILDING........................................................................................... 3-14
3.53 NON-CONFORMING USE ...................................................................................................... 3-14
3.53.1 NUDE MODEL STUDIO (Amended, Ord 2005-03).................................................................. 3-14
3.54 OPEN SPACE .......................................................................................................................... 3-14
3.55 PARKING AREA..................................................................................................................... 3-14
3.56.1 PERSON (New Or 2011-03)...................................................................................................... 3-14
3.56 PARKING SPACE ................................................................................................................... 3-14
3.57 PLANNING COMMISSION..................................................................................................... 3-14
3.57.1 PRIMARY CAREGIVER (New Or 2011-03)............................................................................. 3-15
3.58 PRINCIPAL OR MAIN USE .................................................................................................... 3-15
3.59 PUBLIC OR INSTITUTIONAL USES...................................................................................... 3-15
1-4
3.60 PUBLIC UTILITY.....................................................................................................................3-15
3.60.1 QUALIFYING PATIENT (New Or 2011-03) .............................................................................3-15
3.61 RIGHT-OF-WAY......................................................................................................................3-15
3.62 ROADSIDE STAND.................................................................................................................3-15
3.62.1 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS (Amended, Ord 2005-03) ................................................3-15
3.63 SHOPPING CENTER Either of the following: (New, 1992-6 Ordinance) .....................................3-15
3.64 SINGLE OWNERSHIP .............................................................................................................3-16
3.65 SITE CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION....................................................................................3-16
3.66 SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS (Amended, Ord 2005-03) ................................................3-16
3.67 SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES (Amended, Ord 2005-03) ..................................................3-16
3.68 STORY.....................................................................................................................................3-16
3.69 STREET LINE ..........................................................................................................................3-16
3.70 STRUCTURE............................................................................................................................3-16
3.71 SUBDIVISION..........................................................................................................................3-16
3.72 SWIMMING POOL...................................................................................................................3-17
3.73 TOWNSHIP BOARD................................................................................................................3-17
3.74 TRAVEL TRAILER AND MOTOR HOME...............................................................................3-17
3.75 USE ..........................................................................................................................................3-17
3.76 VARIANCE..............................................................................................................................3-17
3.77 WILD ANIMAL........................................................................................................................3-17
3.77.1 WIND ENERGY DEFINITIONS.............................................................................................3-17
3.78 YARD.......................................................................................................................................3-19
3.785 YARD SALE (New ORd 2011-06).............................................................................................3-19
3.79 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS (ALSO KNOWN AS BOARD OF APPEALS)........................3-19
3.80 ZONING OFFICIAL .................................................................................................................3-19
3.81 ZONING PERMIT.....................................................................................................................3-19
3.82 DEFINITION OF WORDS (Amended, 1992-2 Ordinance)..........................................................3-19
SECTION 4 AMENDMENTS.........................................................................................................................4-1
4.1 ADOPTION, AMENDMENTS, AND MAP CHANGES (Amended 1998-17)..............................4-1
4.2 SITE SKETCH............................................................................................................................4-2
SECTION 5 BOARD OF APPEALS................................................................................................................5-1
5.1 BOARD OF APPEALS................................................................................................................5-1
5.2 REMOVAL (Amended Ord 1998-17) ...........................................................................................5-1
5.3 MEETINGS; RECORDS .............................................................................................................5-1
5.4 PROCEDURE.............................................................................................................................5-1
5.5 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS .........................................................................................................5-2
5.6 TIME TO AND NOTICE OF APPEAL; TRANSMISSION OF RECORDS...................................5-2
5.7 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL ..................................................................................................5-3
1-5
5.8 BOARD OF APPEALS: POWERS AND DUTIES...................................................................... 5-3
5.9 LAND USE VARIANCES.......................................................................................................... 5-4
5.10 HEAR AND MAKE DETERMINATIONS; PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS.............................. 5-4
5.11 DECISIONS OF BOARD NOT FINAL....................................................................................... 5-4
SECTION 6 PERMITS AND FEES ................................................................................................................ 6-1
6.1 PURPOSE .................................................................................................................................. 6-1
6.2 ZONING PERMITS.................................................................................................................... 6-1
6.3 APPLICATION OF ZONING PERMIT....................................................................................... 6-1
6.4 TEMPORARY PERMITS........................................................................................................... 6-2
6.5 APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY PERMIT ........................................................................... 6-3
6.6 FEES.......................................................................................................................................... 6-3
SECTION 7 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT............................................................................. 7-1
7.1 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION................................................................................................ 7-1
7.2 ZONING OFFICIAL................................................................................................................... 7-1
7.3 ENFORCEMENT....................................................................................................................... 7-1
7.4 PENALTIES (Ord 1999-03) ....................................................................................................... 7-1
7.45 NUISANCE PER SE: ABATEMENT (Ord. 1998-1) ................................................................... 7-1
7.5 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES........................................................................................................ 7-2
7.6 SHOW CAUSE HEARING......................................................................................................... 7-2
7.7 APPEARANCE TICKETS.......................................................................................................... 7-3
7.8 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION (New Ord 2006-10)........................................................................... 7-3
7.9 REGISTRATION TO RECEIVE NOTIFICATIN BY MAIL (New Ord 2006-10).......................... 7-6
SECTION 8 GENERAL PROVISIONS.......................................................................................................... 8-1
8.1 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS........................................................................................................ 8-1
8.2 ACCESSORY USE..................................................................................................................... 8-1
8.3 ANIMALS, KEEPING OF (Amended, Ord 1998-17) ................................................................... 8-4
8.4 AUTOMOBILE OR VEHICLE STORAGE................................................................................. 8-4
8.5 BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATIONS (Addition, A-D, 1997-12 Ordinance)........................... 8-4
8.6 BUILDING AND LAND USE RESTRICTIONS......................................................................... 8-5
8.7 CONTROL OF HEAT, GLARE, FUMES, DUST, NOISE, VIBRATION, AND ODORS.............. 8-6
8.8 CORNER CLEARANCE............................................................................................................ 8-6
8.9 CORNER LOTS ......................................................................................................................... 8-6
8.10 DIVISION OF PROPERTY ........................................................................................................ 8-6
8.11 DOUBLE-FRONTED LOTS....................................................................................................... 8-6
8.12 DWELLING UNITS................................................................................................................... 8-6
8.13 EFFECT OF ZONING................................................................................................................ 8-7
8.14 ESSENTIAL SERVICES (Amended Ord 1999-04) ...................................................................... 8-7
1-6
8.15 EXISTING LOTS........................................................................................................................8-8
8.16 FENCES OR WALLS (Amended, 1991-16 Ordinance) .................................................................8-8
8.17 FRONT YARDS REQUIREMENTS............................................................................................8-8
8.18 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.............................................................................................................8-8
8.19 HOME OCCUPATIONS (A-F Added, 1997-12 Ordinance)..........................................................8-8
8.20 LIMITATIONS ON PUBLIC OR GROUP ORGANIZATIONS BUILDINGS.............................8-11
8.21 MOVED BUILDINGS AND TEMPORARY BUILDINGS.........................................................8-11
8.22 OIL, GAS, AND OTHER DRILLING ACTIVITY......................................................................8-11
8.23 OUTDOOR STORAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL....................................................................8-11
8.24 PRINCIPAL USE ......................................................................................................................8-13
8.25 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL (D, Amended, 1991-16 Ordinance) .............................................8-13
8.26 RAZING OF BUILDINGS.........................................................................................................8-13
8.27 REAR DWELLINGS.................................................................................................................8-13
8.28 REQUIRED SPACES OR AREAS.............................................................................................8-14
8.29 REQUIRED WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY SEWERAGE FACILITIES...........................8-14
8.30 RESTORATION OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS .............................................................................8-14
8.31 SCREENING PROVISIONS......................................................................................................8-14
8.32 SEWAGE DISPOSAL...............................................................................................................8-17
8.325 SIDEWALKS............................................................................................................................8-17
8.33 SITE CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS..................................................................................8-17
8.34 STATE-LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES.....................................................................8-18
8.35 SUBDIVISION RESTRICTIONS ..............................................................................................8-18
8.36 SURFACE WATER ..................................................................................................................8-18
8.37 TRANSITION AREA (Amended, 1992-6 Ordinance) .................................................................8-18
8.38 YARDS ALONG ZONE BOUNDARIES...................................................................................8-18
8.385 YARD SALES (NEW ORD 2011-06).........................................................................................8-18
8.39 USES NOT DESIGNATED(Addition, 1996-16 Ordinance).........................................................8-19
8.40 URBAN OVERLAY ZONE.......................................................................................................8-19
SECTION 9 NON-CONFORMING USES.......................................................................................................9-1
9.1 CONTINUANCE OF EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USES ...................................................9-1
9.2 CHANGE OF USE ......................................................................................................................9-1
9.3 REPLACEMENT OF NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, RESIDENCE ................................9-1
9.4 REPLACEMENT OF NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, BUSINESS ...................................9-1
9.5 NON-CONFORMING USES DISCONTINUED..........................................................................9-1
9.6 RESTORATION AND REPAIRS ................................................................................................9-1
9.7 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.....................................................................................................9-1
9.8 PLANS ALREADY FILED .........................................................................................................9-2
9.9 UTILIZATION OF NONCONFORMING EXISTING LOTS........................................................9-2
1-7
SECTION 10 PARKING AND LOADING SPACES....................................................................................... 10-1
10.1 GENERAL............................................................................................................................... 10-1
10.2 NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED ................................................ 10-1
10.3 JOINT USE OF FACILITIES.................................................................................................... 10-3
10.4 LOCATION OF FACILITIES................................................................................................... 10-3
10.5 SIZE OF PARKING SPACE..................................................................................................... 10-3
10.6 REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING AREAS (B, Amended, 1992-6 Ordinance) ......................... 10-3
10.7 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES .......................................................................................... 10-5
SECTION 11 BILLBOARDS AND SIGNS .................................................................................................... 11-1
11.1 GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS............................................................................................... 11-1
11.2 SIGNAGE DISPLAY AREA COMPUTATION ........................................................................ 11-1
11.3 MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL......................................................................................... 11-2
11.4 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS .................................................................................................. 11-3
11.5 RIGHTS OF APPEAL .............................................................................................................. 11-3
11.6 PROHIBITED SIGNS............................................................................................................... 11-4
11.7 SIGN REGULATIONS - REFER TO EACH DISTRICT CHART FOR AREA, HEIGHT AND SETBACK REGULATIONS..................................................................................................... 11-6
11.8 SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT OVER 10 ACRES............................11-11
11.11 SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - BUSINESS DISTRICTS...............................................................11-20
11.12 SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ............................................................11-24
11.13 SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT – OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS...................................................11-27
SECTION 12 SITE PLAN REVIEW............................................................................................................... 12-1
12.1 USES REQUIRING SITE PLAN APPROVAL.......................................................................... 12-1
12.2 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS (Amended, 1996-6 Ordinance)................................................. 12-1
12.3 REVIEW PROCEDURE (Amended, 1996-16 Ordinance).......................................................... 12-2
12.4 STANDARDS FOR REVIEW................................................................................................... 12-2
12.5 REGULATIONS ...................................................................................................................... 12-3
SECTION 13 AGRICULTURAL (AG) DISTRICT ......................................................................................... 13-1
13.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.............................................................................................. 13-1
13.2 PERMITTED USES (F, no. 16, New; 1992-6 Ordinance)........................................................... 13-1
13.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS...................................................................................................... 13-2
SECTION 14 R-1 RURAL-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT .................................................................................. 14-1
14.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.............................................................................................. 14-1
14.2 USE REGULATIONS............................................................................................................... 14-1
14.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS...................................................................................................... 14-1
1-8
SECTION 15 R-2A ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY, LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.......................15-1
15.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE...............................................................................................15-1
15.2 PERMITTED USES ..................................................................................................................15-1
15.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.......................................................................................................15-1
SECTION 16 R-2B ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY, MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ................16-1
16.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE...............................................................................................16-1
16.2 PERMITTED USES ..................................................................................................................16-1
16.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.......................................................................................................16-1
SECTION 17 R-3A MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT............................................................17-1
17.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE...............................................................................................17-1
17.2 PERMITTED USES (A, Amended; C, no. 5, New; C, no. 6, New; 1995-6 Ordinance)..................17-1
17.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.......................................................................................................17-1
SECTION 18 R-3B MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (Addition Ordinance 2004-01) ..............................................................................................................................18-1
18.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE...............................................................................................18-1
18.2 PERMITTED USES ..................................................................................................................18-1
18.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.......................................................................................................18-1
SECTION 19 R-4 MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT ....................................................................................19-1
19.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE...............................................................................................19-1
19.2 PERMITTED USES ..................................................................................................................19-1
SECTION 20 R-5 MOBILE OR MODULAR HOME DISTRICT .....................................................................20-1
20.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE...............................................................................................20-1
20.2 PERMITTED USES ..................................................................................................................20-1
20.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.......................................................................................................20-1
SECTION 21 REQUIRED CONDITIONS FOR AG, R-1, R-2A, R-2B, R-3A, R3B, R-4, AND R-5 DISTRICTS .........................................................................................................................................21-1
SECTION 22 B-4 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT .....................................................................................22-1
22.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE...............................................................................................22-1
22.2 PERMITTED USES (R, no. 7, New; 1991-16 Ordinance)...........................................................22-1
22.3 SPECIAL USES (Amended Ord 2005-03) ..................................................................................22-5
22.4 REQUIRED CONDITIONS ............................................................................................................22-5
SECTION 23 B-5 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT ....................................................................................23-1
1-9
23.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.............................................................................................. 23-1
23.2 PERMITTED USES.................................................................................................................. 23-1
23.3 Special Uses: (Amended, Ord 2005-03) ........................................................................................... 23-6
23.4 REQUIRED CONDITIONS...................................................................................................... 23-6
SECTION 24 B-6 AUTO-RELATED HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT ...................................................... 24-1
24.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.............................................................................................. 24-1
24.2 PERMITTED USES (I, New, 1992-6 Ordinance)....................................................................... 24-1
24.3 SPECIAL USES ....................................................................................................................... 24-1
24.4 DISTRICT STANDARDS......................................................................................................... 24-1
SECTION 25 B-7 RETAIL AND SERVICE HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT............................................ 25-1
25.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.............................................................................................. 25-1
25.2 PERMITTED USES (H, New, 1992-6 Ordinance; I, New, 1993-11 Ordinance)........................... 25-1
25.3 SPECIAL USES (C, New, 1993-6 Ordinance) ........................................................................... 25-1
25.4 DISTRICT STANDARDS (Amended, 1991-16 Ordinance) ....................................................... 25-2
SECTION 26 I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ....................................................................................... 26-1
26.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.............................................................................................. 26-1
26.2 PERMITTED USES (B, no. 11, New; 1992-6 Ordinance) .......................................................... 26-1
26.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS...................................................................................................... 26-6
SECTION 27 I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT................................................................................. 27-6
27.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.............................................................................................. 27-7
27.2 PERMITTED USES (B, no. 11, New; 1991-16 Ordinance; J, Amended, 1992-6 Ordinance)........ 27-7
27.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.....................................................................................................27-12
SECTION 28 OS OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS.......................................................................................... 28-1
28.1 INTENT................................................................................................................................... 28-1
28.2 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED ............................................................................................. 28-1
28.3 SPECIAL USES ....................................................................................................................... 28-1
28.4 REQUIRED CONDITIONS...................................................................................................... 28-2
SECTION 29 SCHEDULE OF LOT, YARD, AND AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS ................................................................................................................. 29-1
SECTION 30 SPECIAL USE PERMITS......................................................................................................... 30-1
30.1 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................ 30-1
30.2 APPLICATION PROCEDURES............................................................................................... 30-1
30.3 BASIS OF DETERMINATIONS .............................................................................................. 30-2
1-10
30.4 SPECIAL USES PERMITTED (X, New, 1993-6 Ordinance; Y, New, 1995-6 Ordinance)............30-3
SECTION 31 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (P.U.D.) ............................................................................31-1
31.1 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (P.U.D.), AS DEFINED AND ALLOWED IN THE SUBSECTION BELOW: ...........................................................................................................31-1
31.2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.......................................................................................................31-1
31.3 PROCEDURE...........................................................................................................................31-1
31.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (P.U.D.)...........................31-2
31.5 PERMITTED USES ..................................................................................................................31-2
31.6 REQUIRED CONDITIONS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT......................................31-3
SECTION 32 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ...........................................................................................32-5
32.1 SEVERABILITY.......................................................................................................................32-5
32.2 ANNUAL REPORT ..................................................................................................................32-5
32.3 EFFECTIVE DATE...................................................................................................................32-5
32.4 REPEAL OF PRIOR ZONING ORDINANCE............................................................................32-5
1-11
ZONING ORDINANCE
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF UNION
ISABELLA COUNTY, MICHIGAN
ORDINANCE NO. 1991-5
An ordinance to establish Zoning regulations for the unincorporated portions of the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan, providing for the repeal of the existing Zoning Ordinance, administration, enforcement and amendment, and prescribing penalties for the violation thereof, in accordance with the provisions of Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended. The people of Union Township do Ordain:
SECTION 1 TITLE, PURPOSE, AND INTERPRETATION
1.1 SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known, referred to and cited as the Union Township Zoning Ordinance.
1.2 PURPOSE
This Ordinance shall affect the use and occupancy of all land and every building in the Township. This Ordinance has been made in accordance with Michigan Complied Laws, and is designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other danger; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population, and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, parks and other public requirements. These regulations have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view to conserving property values; encouraging the most appropriate use of land and to be in keeping with the general trend and character of population and building development.
1.3 INTERPRETATION
It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or Ordinances, except those specifically repealed by the Ordinance, or of any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement. Where this Ordinance imposes greater lot areas, or larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or Ordinance or by such rules, regulations, or permits or by such private restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. In the case of mobile home parks, any higher standards than imposed by State law must be approved pursuant to Rule 120 of the Mobile Home Commission Rules, 1987, as amended.
Union Township 2-1 Districts and,
Zoning Ordinance Zoning Maps
SECTION 2 DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAPS
2.1 ZONE DISTRICTS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Township of Union is hereby divided into the following zoned Districts:
AG Agricultural District
R-1 One-family Residential District
R-2A One and Two-Family District
R-2B One and Two-Family District
R-3A Apartment and Condominiums District
R-3B Medium Density Apartment and Condominiums District
R-4 Mobile or Modular Home District
R-5 Single-wide Mobile Home District
B-4 General Business District
B-5 Highway Business District
B-6 Auto-Related Highway Business District
B-7 Retail and Service Highway Business District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 General Industrial District
OS Office / Service
2.2 THE ZONING MAP
The locations and boundaries of these descriptions are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "The Zoning Map of the Township of Union, Isabella County, Michigan," which is hereby adopted as a part of this Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map shall be located in the Township Hall and shall be the final authority in any dispute concerning District Boundaries. The Official Map shall be kept up to date and any amendments to the Ordinance involving the Official Map shall become legal only after such changes are noted and portrayed on said map in accordance with Section 4, Amendments, in this Ordinance. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of Districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerline.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following Township boundaries shall be construed as following such lot lines.
Union Township 2-2 Districts and,
Zoning Ordinance Zoning Maps
Boundaries indicated as following shorelines or riverbanks shall be construed as following such shoreline or riverbank, and in the event of change in the shoreline or riverbank shall be construed as moving with said shoreline or riverbank.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following property lines or section lines or other lines of the government survey shall be construed as following such property lines as of the effective date of this Ordinance (or applicable amendment), section lines or other lines of the government survey.
Wherever boundaries do not follow lines as described in A. through E., above, the location will be determined by measurement using the proper scale of the zoning map.
Union Township 3-1 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
SECTION 3 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The singular includes the plural. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. The word "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied."
3.1 ACCESSORY BUILDING (AMENDED, ORD 1997-11)
A non-dwelling structure.
3.2 ACCESSORY USE
Any use customarily incidental and subordinate to the main use of the premises.
3.3 ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT ARCADE, AND ADULT VIDEO STORRE (AMENEDED ORD 2005-03)
A business with a substantial portion of its inventory, or floor space displaying inventory, characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in books, magazines, pictures, photographs, videos, movies, cassettes, discs, or other media that is offered for sale, rental, or viewing on site for any form of payment. “Substantial portion” means twenty percent (20%) or more.
3.4 ADULT CABARET (AMENDED, ORD 2005-03)
A business which, as one of its principal business purposes, regularly offers viewing on the premises to customers, for any form of payment, live performances characterized by an emphasis on the display or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
3.5 ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER (AMENDED, ORD 2005-03)
A business which, as one of its principal business purposes, regularly offers viewing on the premises to customers for any form of payment, movies, videos or motion pictures characterized by an emphasis on the display or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
3.6 ALLEY
A public or private right-of-way that provides secondary access to a lot, block, or parcel of land.
3.7 ALTERATION
An addition, removal, or physical conversion of a building.
Union Township 3-2 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
3.8 APARTMENT
A room or suite of rooms, including bath and kitchen facilities, in a two-family, multiple dwelling, or group housing development intended or designed for use as a residence by a single family.
3.9 AUTOMOBILE OR VEHICLE STORAGE
Any storage or parking of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, boats, trailer, motor homes, or motorcycles in excess of ninety (90) days and not incidental to a public garage.
3.10 AUTOMOBILE OR VEHICULAR SALES AREA
Any space used for display, sale, or rental of motor vehicles, trailer of all kinds, farm equipment, mobile homes, boats, motorcycles, snowmobiles, or similar vehicles, either new or used, that are in an operable condition.
3.11 BASEMENT AND CELLAR
A portion of a building that is partly below and partly above grade.
3.12 BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATION
A use that is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit in which transient guests are provided a sleeping room and board in return for payment. A bed and breakfast operation shall meet all of the requirements in Section 8.5.
3.13 BILLBOARDS AND SIGNS (AMENDED, 1996-16 ORDINANCE)
A Abandoned Sign: A sign that no longer identifies or advertises a currently operating business, lessee, service, owner, product, or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found.
B. Air-Filled or Gas-Filled Balloon Sign: A sign that is made of nonporous bag or tough light material filled with heated air or a gas lighter than air used to convey advertising copy or announce a special event on a temporary basis.
C. Animated Sign: See Message Center.
D. Awning: A movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and of a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building.
E. Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a pole or a building. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
F. Beacon/Search: A stationary or portable light which projects illumination, single color or multi-colored, in any manner which is intended to attract or divert attention. This term is not intended to include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under the safety regulations described by the Federal Aviation Administration of similar agencies.
G. Billboard: The standard 300 square foot off-premises advertising sign accepted nationally by the outdoor advertising industry.
Union Township 3-3 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
H. Billboard Trailer Sign: A 300 square foot painted bulletin erected on a trailer.
I. Building Code: The building code adopted by the Township of Union.
J. Canopy: Any sign that is part of a covered structure which provides a protective cover over a door entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee sign is not a canopy sign.
K. Commodity Sign: A sign advertising a product produced on said property.
L. Construction Identification: A sign which identifies the name of project developers, contractors, engineers, and architects on a site being developed. Only for projects that require a site plan review.
M. Construction Development Identification: Signs advertising lot description/location in a residential or commercial development of six (6) or more units.
N. Copy (Changeable/Replacing): The changing of the advertising copy, characters, or message on an approved painted or printed sign or on a theater marquee and similar approved signs which are specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy.
O. Courtesy Sign: A sign which provides information of a non-advertising or courtesy nature, including, but not limited to, “No Smoking”, “Restroom”, “No Solicitors”, “Self Service”, “Vacancy”, “No Vacancy”, “Credit Cards Accepted”, “Parking”, “Entrance”, and “Telephone”.
P. Days: Refers to Calendar days.
Q. Directional Sign: - Vehicular & Pedestrian. Any sign of a non-commercial nature which directs the reader to specific public or private parking areas, access drives, loading and unloading areas, receiving areas, and specific buildings or facilities.
R. Display Face: See Sign Face.
S. Electric Sign: Any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including illumination by exterior light sources, such as floodlights.
T. Flag: See TEMPORARY SIGNS.
U. Freestanding Elevated Sign: A sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, poles or braces extended from the ground or from an object on the ground. The sign shall not be attached to any building or any other structures.
V. Freestanding Ground Sign: A sign which is directly attached to a self-supporting ground structure and not elevated by poles, braces, or columns. The sign shall not be attached to any building or any other structure whether portable or stationary.
W. Front Address: See FRONTAGE, BUILDING.
X. Frontage, Building: A wall or side of the building that faces the front yard, at the address side.
Union Township 3-4 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Y. Frontage, Yard: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street or place line and the main building or any projection of permitted uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension.
Z. Garage/Yard Sale: A private sale of personal property used to dispose of personal household possessions. Not for the use of any commercial venture.
AA. Ground Pole Sign: See FREESTANDING ELEVATED.
BB. Identification and Informal Signs: Sign of an identification or of informational nature bearing no advertising such as but not limited to directional, courtesy, public interest, identification or public agency signage.
CC. Illuminated Sign: Any sign that provides artificial light by either emission or reflection.
Illumination, Direct. Lighting by means of an unshielded light source, including but not limited to neon tubing and spot lights.
Illuminated, Flashing. An illuminated sign on which artificial light is not maintained stationary or consistent in intensity at all times when in use.
Illuminated, Internal. Lighting by means of a light source which is within a sign having a translucent background or silhouetting opaque letters or designs, or within letters or designs which are themselves made of a translucent material.
DD. Integrated Business Identification Sign: A sign which serves as a common or collective identification for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same zone lot (e.g., shopping centers, office complex, etc.). Such sign may name the persons, or businesses, but carry no other advertising matter.
EE. Light Source: Includes neon, fluorescent or similar tube lighting, an incandescent bulb, including the light-producing elements therein, and any reflecting surface which, by reason of its construction and/or placement, becomes, in effect, the light source.
FF. Logo, Symbol, Trademark: “Logo, Symbol, Trademark”: means a letter, symbol or sign used to represent an entire word.
GG. Maintenance: The replacing, repairing, or repainting of a portion of a sign structure, the periodic changing of bulletin board panels or the renewing of copy which has been made unacceptable or unusable by ordinary wear and tear, weather or accident. The replacing or repairing of a sign or sign structure which has been damaged to an extent exceeding fifty percent of the appraised replacement cost, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall be considered as maintenance only when such sign conforms to all applicable provisions of this chapter and when the damage has been caused by an act of God or a violent accident.
HH. Marquee: A permanently roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting from the building.
II. Marquee Sign: A sign depicted to be easily relocated to a different site to advertise, mark or otherwise draw attention to various types of businesses. Such designation includes trailer mounted signs with interchangeable letters.
Union Township 3-5 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
JJ. Message Center Sign: Any structure utilizing an illuminated message capable of being programmed or changed electronically.
KK. Non-Conforming (Illegal) Sign: A sign which was in violation of the ordinances of the Township governing the erection or construction of such sign at the time of its erection, and which sign has been erected or is being displayed in violation of this Ordinance. Non-conforming illegal signs include signs which are posted, nailed, painted, or otherwise unlawfully displayed upon utility poles, trees, fences, or other signs.
LL. Non-Conforming (Legal) Signs: Any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, and any amendments thereto, and which does not conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this Ordinance and could not be constructed under the terms of this Ordinance.
MM. Number of Signs: For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements clearly organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign.
NN. Off-Premises Advertising Sign: Including a billboard or general outdoor advertising device, which sign advertises or directs attention to a business, commodity, service or activity conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the same lot upon which or within the same building where such sign is located.
OO. Owner: A person, firm, corporation or other legal entity recorded as such on the records of the County Register of Deeds, including a duly authorized agent or attorney or a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary or person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question.
PP. Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
QQ. Political Signs: “Political Signs”:
RR. Portable Sign: A sign which identifies and/or directs attention to the business, profession, commodity, service, entertainment or activity conducted, sold, displayed, offered or stored on the premises where the sign is located.
SS. Projecting Sign: See WALL PROJECTING SIGN.
TT. Public Agency Sign: Any sign of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, on the approval of a public officer in the performance of his/her public duty, such as, but not limited to safety signs, danger signs, or traffic signs.
UU. Public Entrance Signs: An entrance to a building or premises which is customarily used or intended for use by the general public.
VV. Public Interest Signs: Any such signs may include but are not limited to names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental, citations, and commemorative tables. Any sign which identifies memorial plaques, centennial farms/homes, natural features, historical occurrences or interests are also permitted.
Union Township 3-6 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
WW. Pylon Sign: A sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, poles or braces extended from the ground or from and object on the ground, or a sign which is erected on the ground, provided that no part of the sign is attached to any part of any building, structure or other sign. Pylon sign includes a pole sign, pedestal sign and ground sign.
XX. Real Estate Sign: A sign indicating the availability for sale of the specific lot, building, or portion of a building upon which the sign is erected or displayed.
ZZ. Rental/Lease Sign: A sign indicating the availability for rent or lease of the specific lot, building or portion of a building upon which the sign is erected or displayed.
AAA. Roof Sign: A sign painted on the roof of a building, supported by poles, uprights or braces extending from the roof of a building or projecting above the roof line of a building.
BBB. Sign: Any writing, letter, word, symbol, pictorial representation, decoration, form or structure which by reason of its shape, color message, wording, symbol, design, illustration, motion, or otherwise, attracts or is designed to attract attention or to communicate a visual message.
CCC. Sign Area: The entire area measured enclosing the extreme limits of the advertising display together with any frame or other material forming an integral part of the display, excluding the necessary supports, braces or uprights of the sign.
DDD. Sign Face: The surface of a sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated.
EEE. Sign Structure: Any supports, uprights, braces or framework of a sign.
FFF. Street Address: See Frontage, Building.
GGG. String Lights: Prohibited. Non-seasonal lights in a series.
HHH. Subdivision Identification: A sign which serves as a common or collective identification of a recorded subdivision, (Ord 2004-04) or collection of eight (8) or more lots under common development.
III. Suspended Sign: A sign suspended from the ceiling of an arcade, marquee or canopy.
JJJ. Temporary Sign: A sign, banner or similar device or display which is intended for a temporary period, for the purpose of announcing a special event or advertising or directing persons to a developing subdivision or other land or building development. Such sign may be constructed of cloth, canvas, cardboard, wall board, plywood or other light temporary material, with or without a structural frame.
KKK. Time-Temperature-Date Sign: A sign whose primary function is that of conveying the time and temperature.
LLL. Wall Sign: A sign displayed upon the wall of a building where the exposed face of the sign is in a plane parallel to the plane of such wall - not extending over three (3) inches.
1. Wall Sign - Attached, projecting up to three (3) inches.
2. Wall Projection Sign - Projecting beyond three (3) inches up to fifteen (15) inches.
Union Township 3-7 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
3. Projecting Sign - Projecting beyond fifteen (15) inches to forty-eight (48) inches.
MMM. Wind Sign: A sign consisting of one or more banners, flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers or captive balloons, or other objects or materials fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind or breeze.
NNN. Window Sign: A sign which is painted on, applied to, attached to or located within a window, which sign can be seen through the window from beyond the property line. Merchandise which is included in a window display shall not be included as part of a window sign.
3.14 BUILDING
Any enclosed structure having a roof supported by columns, walls or other support used for the purpose of housing or storing of persons, animals or chattels or carrying on business activities or other similar uses.
3.15 BUILDING, HEIGHT OF
The vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of the finished grade line of the ground at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs; and the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
Union Township 3-8 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
3.16 BUILDING LINE
A line defining the front, side, and rear yard requirements outside of which no building or structure may be located. It will be that line that coincides with any portion of the building nearest the lot line that includes sun porches, porches, and foundations, but not steps.
3.17 BULK PLANT
An establishment for the storage of products in bulk and/or in packages, for the distribution by tank car, tank vehicle, or motor truck.
3.18 CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL
A building in which a group of physicians, dentists, or physicians and dentists or related medical professionals and their allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of practicing their profession. The clinic may include a medical or dental laboratory. It shall not include in- patient care or operating rooms for major surgery.
3.19 CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME
A building where infirm or aged persons are furnished shelter, care, food, lodging, and nursing care for a compensation.
3.20 CUSTOMARY AGRICULTURAL OPERATION
Any land or building used for orchards, nurseries, animal husbandry, dairying, or for the purpose of producing vegetables, livestock or fowl, grain, or other crops. (New Or 2011-03)The term Customary Agricultural Operation does not include the transfer, sale, delivery, production, manufacture or cultivation of marihuana.
3.21 DAY CARE FACILITY
A facility for the care of children under eighteen (18) years of age, as licensed and regulated by the State under Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1973 and the associated rules promulgated by the State Department of Social Services. Such organizations shall be further defined as follows:
A. Family Day-Care Home: A private home in which one (1) to six (6) children are received for care and supervision, including those children less than seven (7) years old in the resident family. This number shall not include more than two (2) children less than twelve (12) months old.
B. Group Day-Care Home: A private home where from seven (7) to twelve (12) children are received for care and supervision. This number shall not include more than two (2) children younger than two (2) years old.
C. Child-care Center: A facility, other than a private home, where one (1) or more children are received for care and supervision.
3.22 DIS-MANTLED MOTOR VEHICLE
A motor vehicle from which some part or parts that are ordinarily a component thereof, have been removed or are missing.
Union Township 3-9 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
3.23 DWELLING
Any building, or portion thereof, used or designed for the residence of a person, or persons, with facilities for such humans to sleep, cook, and eat; but not including motels, hotels, or tourist cabins.
A. "Dwelling, One Family" means a detached building designed and occupied exclusively by one (1) family.
B. "Dwelling, Two Family" means a detached or duplex building designed and occupied exclusively to two (2) families living independently of each other.
C. "Dwelling, Multiple Family" means a building, or portion thereof, used and designed to contain separate living quarters for three (3) or more families; but that may have joint services or facilities.
D. "Dwelling, Rooming" means a building occupied by one (1) family with accommodations for living and sleeping quarters for two (2) or more additional persons. A rooming dwelling shall not include more than one (1) cooking or eating accommodation.
E. Dwelling, Boarding means a Rooming Dwelling without a common cooking facility for tenants, but where meals are provided by the proprietor of the Boarding Dwelling.
3.24 DWELLING UNIT
One (1) or more rooms designed for or occupied by not more than one family.
3.24.1 ENCLOSED LOCKED FACILITY (NEW OR 2011-03)
A closet, room, or other enclosed area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by a Qualifying Patient or Primary Caregiver, built and maintained in a manner consistent with applicable building and property maintenance codes
3.25 ESSENTIAL SERVICES (AMENDED ORD 1999-04)
The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of overhead or surface or underground gas, electrical, steam, or water distribution or transmission or collection systems; communication systems (excluding towers and antennas); supply or disposal systems; including mains, drains, severs, pipes, conduits, tunnels, wire cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers, poles, electrical substations, gas regulator stations, and other similar equipment and accessories, in connection therewith, reasonable necessary for furnishing adequate service for the public health, safety, or welfare by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions, shall be permitted as authorized by the Zoning Official in any use District.
3.26 EXISTING LOT
A parcel of land created prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, exclusive of any adjacent parcels of land by a description as on a recorded deed, recorded subdivision plat, survey map, or metes and bounds.
3.27 FABRICATION
Fabrication means the stamping, cutting or otherwise shaping of processed materials into useful objects.
Union Township 3-10 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
3.28 FAMILY (AMENDED, 1995-6 ORDINANCE)
One (1) or more persons living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, organized as a single entity in which the members share common kitchen facilities in a domestic bond. No such family shall contain more than three (3) unrelated persons.
3.29 FARM
A parcel of land containing at least ten (10) acres and that carries on the customary agricultural operations.
3.295 FARM ANIMALS (NEW, ORD 1998-17)
Livestock, including beef and dairy cattle, goats, hogs, horses, poultry, sheep and other fur-bearing animals.
3.295 FENCE (NEW, 1991-16 ORDINANCE)
A structure of ordinary design made of conventional fencing materials used to enclose or conceal a yard.
3.30 FILLING STATION
Any place where primary petroleum products, such as gasoline, motor oil, or diesel fuel, are sold at retail.
3.31 FLOODPLAIN
That area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, water course, lake, or flood, which can be reasonably expected for that region.
3.32 FLOOR AREA
A. Gross floor area shall mean the floor areas of all floors of a building or an addition to an existing building. For all office buildings and for any other building where the principal use thereof shall include the basement, the basement floor area shall be included except that part that contains heating and cooling equipment and other basic utilities.
B. Usable floor area shall be eighty (80) percent of the gross floor area of the proposed building, unless the Planning Commission is furnished with detailed floor plans and accurate figures that show a usable floor area of less than eighty (80) percent of the gross floor area.
3.33 GARAGE, PRIVATE
An accessory building, or portion of a main building used for the storage of vehicles.
3.34 GARAGE, PUBLIC
A building or area used for the repair of damaged motor vehicles; boats; trailers of any kind; mobile homes; farm equipment; or similar equipment, including painting thereof. It may also be any portion of a building used for the preparation of sales; periodic servicing; or minor repair of said vehicles for specified compensation.
3.35 HALF STORY
That area of a residence with a finished attic and attic area (where ceiling height is at least seven (7) feet - six (6) inches) approximately fifty (50) percent of the first floor.
Union Township 3-11 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
3.36 HOME OCCUPATION (ADDITION, 1997-12 ORDINANCE)
Any primary or subordinate occupation conducted within a principal or accessory structure by the family residents thereof that is clearly secondary and incidental to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change the character thereof.
3.37 HOUSEHOLD PET
Any animal that is not likely to bite without provocation and that is not likely to cause death, maiming, or illness to a human, provided they are not kept, bred, or maintained for commercial purposes. Such animals shall include but are not limited to birds (caged), fish, rodents (bred), cats (domestic), lizards (nonpoisonous), snakes (nonpoisonous), chinchilla, marmosets (bred), spiders (nonpoisonous), dogs (domestic, and prairie dogs (bred)).
3.38 INOPERABLE OR UNLICENSED VEHICLE
A vehicle that is incapable of being operated or moved under its own power or that is dismantled or wrecked or that is unlicensed in the case of vehicles required to be licensed by the State of Michigan.
3.39 JUNK YARD
The outdoor storage of three (3) or more inoperable or dismantled motor vehicles shall be considered a junk yard, excluding automobile or vehicular sales area, seasonal farm product displays or temporary business displays. Junk yards shall also include those areas used for the outdoor collection, storage, dumping, display, assembly, disassembly, alteration, cleaning, or handling of new or second hand salvaged materials, machinery, vehicles, trailers, furnishings, or parts thereof.
3.40 KENNEL
Any lot or premises used for the keeping, sale, boarding, or breeding of more than four (4) dogs, cats, or other household pets, or any combination thereof, for specified compensation.
3.41 LOT
A lot is a parcel of land, of at least sufficient size to meet minimum requirements for use, coverage and lot area, adequate to provide such setback area and other open space as required by this Ordinance. Such lots shall have frontage on a designated street, road right-of-way, or easement and may consist of:
A. A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land that is described and fixed in a recorded plat.
B. A parcel or tract of land continuous area described by metes and bounds.
C. In the case of division of land on the basis of condominium ownership (site condominium), “lot” shall also include the portion of the condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use as described in the master deed.
3.42 LOT, CORNER
A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets having an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Union Township 3-12 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
3.43 LOT LINE
That said line that borders the lot or, in larger cases, parcel.
A. Front Lot Line: The line that separates the front yard from the street, excluding the road right- of-way. In cases where water frontage is used as front yard, the line shall separate front yard and the water.
B. Rear Lot Line: The line that separates the rear yard and the adjacent lot, street (excluding road right-of-way), or water frontage.
C. Street or Alley Lot Line: Any line separating a lot from a street or alley.
D. Side Lot Line: The line that separates the side yard from the adjacent lot, street, or water frontage (excluding the road right-of-way).
3.44 MAJOR STREET
A major thoroughfare or public street having a principal use or function or providing an arterial route for fast or heavy through traffic. Its secondary use or function is to provide an access to abutting property. Major streets include County primary and secondary roads, State and Federal highways.
3.44.1 MARIHUANA (NEW OR 2011-03)
As defined in Section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368 being MCL 333.7106.
3.44.2 MARIHUANA CLUB (NEW OR 2011-03)
A location where an association or organization, whose purpose is to educate members regarding the medical use of marihuana, whose relationships are of a transitional nature involving three or more unrelated persons, meets. The term Marihuana Club does not include medical marihuana accessory uses conditionally permitted and consistent with Section 8.2.F occurring in dwelling units
3.44.3 MARIHUANA DISPENSARY (NEW OR 2011-03)
Any structure or building where marihuana is transferred, delivered, acquired, or sold to Qualifying Patients pursuant to the MMMA. The term Marihuana Dispensary does not include medical marihuana accessory uses conditionally permitted and consistent with Section 8.2.F occurring in dwelling units.
3.44.4 MARIHUANA GROWING FACILITY (NEW OR 2011-03)
Any structure or building where marihuana is cultivated or manufactured for Qualifying Patients pursuant to the MMMA. The term Marihuana Growing Facility does not include medical marihuana accessory uses conditionally permitted by Section 8.2.F in dwelling units.
3.45.1 MEDICAL USE OF MARIHUANA (NEW OR 2011-03)
The acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer, or transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia related to the administration of marihuana to treat or alleviate a registered Qualifying Patient’s debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with said condition.
Union Township 3-13 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
3.45 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment where massages are administered for pay, including but not limited to massage parlors, health clubs, sauna baths, and steam baths. This definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist duly licensed by the State of Michigan; nor shall this definition be construed to include a barber shop or beauty shop in which massages are administered only to the scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulders. This definition shall not be construed to include a public or nonprofit organization such as a school, park department, YMCA, or YWCA operating a community center, swimming pool, or other educational, cultural, or recreational facilities for residents of the area. This definition shall not be construed to include massage therapists engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions who meet one (1) or more of the following criteria:
A. Proof of graduation from a school of massage licensed by the State Of Michigan.
B. Official transcripts verifying completion of at least three hundred (300) hours of massage training from a North American community College or university, plus three (3) references from massage therapists who are professional members of a massage association referred to in this section.
C. Certificate of professional membership in the American Massage Therapy Association, International Myomassethics Federation, or any other recognized massage association with equivalent professional membership standards.
D. A current license from another state.
3.46 MINOR STREET
A dedicated public street or roadway or a private street or roadway that provides access to abutting properties. A minor street is designed primarily to serve localized neighborhood needs.
3.47 MOBILE HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems in the structure. Mobile home does not include a recreational vehicle.
3.48 MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon which three (3) or more mobile homes are located on a continual, non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made thereof, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incidental to the occupancy of a mobile home.
3.49 MODULAR HOME
A fabricated, transportable building unit designed to be incorporated at a building site into a structure on a permanent foundation to be used for residential uses.
3.50 MOTEL
Union Township 3-14 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in connection units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed primarily for transient sleeping or dwelling units designed primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing accessory of street parking facilities. The term "motel" shall include buildings designated as "auto courts", motor courts", "motor hotels", and similar appellations that are designed as a combined unit of individual rooms under common ownership.
3.51 MULTI-USE STRUCTRES
For the purpose of this ordinance, the term “Muti-Use” shall mean any structure which provides both a business and a residential component.
3.52 NON-CONFORMING BUILDING
Any building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time this Ordinance became effective and that now does not comply with its regulations or any subsequent amendments thereto.
3.53 NON-CONFORMING USE
Any property use that was lawful at the time this Ordinance became effective and that does not now comply with its regulations or any subsequent amendment thereto.
3.53.1 NUDE MODEL STUDIO (AMENDED, ORD 2005-03)
A business which, as one of its principal business purposes, regularly offers for viewing on the premises by customers, live models who display specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, for any form of payment.
3.54 OPEN SPACE
Any unoccupied space, not to include parking areas, devoid of elevated structural manmade improvements, open to the sky on the same lot with a building.
3.55 PARKING AREA
Any area, other than a street or other public way, used for the parking of motor vehicles. A parking area shall be available for public or private use whether for a fee or as an accommodation for residents, clients, customers, or employees.
3.56.1 PERSON (NEW OR 2011-03)
Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, governmental unit, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit.
3.56 PARKING SPACE
An area readily accessible by motor vehicles being not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet and shaped satisfactorily for such use. A parking space is exclusive of access drives and aisles and is not located on a public street or alley right-of-way.
3.57 PLANNING COMMISSION
Union Township 3-15 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
The Planning Commission of Union Township.
3.57.1 PRIMARY CAREGIVER (NEW OR 2011-03)
A person who is at least twenty-one (21) years old and who has agreed to assist with a Qualifying Patient’s medical use of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs and is currently registered pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.
3.58 PRINCIPAL OR MAIN USE
The primary or predominant use of a lot or structure.
3.59 PUBLIC OR INSTITUTIONAL USES
Churches, accredited public, parochial, or private schools, trade schools or colleges, hospitals, nursing, extended care or convalescent homes, parks, nonprofit recreational uses, libraries, government owned facilities, fire stations, or similar uses providing services necessary to the community.
3.60 PUBLIC UTILITY
Any person, firm, or corporation duly authorized to furnish to the public, under State or municipal regulations, electricity, gas, steam, communications, water, etc.
3.60.1 QUALIFYING PATIENT (NEW OR 2011-03)
A person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition and is currently registered pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.
3.61 RIGHT-OF-WAY
A street, alley, thoroughfare, or easement permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles.
3.62 ROADSIDE STAND
A structure portable or permanent for the display and sale of products with no space for customers within the structure itself.
3.62.1 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS (AMENDED, ORD 2005-03)
An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theatre, nude model studio, or other business offering services or the sale or rental of products featuring the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities to an extent described or defined in this ordinance.
3.63 SHOPPING CENTER EITHER OF THE FOLLOWING: (NEW, 1992-6 ORDINANCE)
A. Three (3) or more commercial or service establishments within a single building served by common parking area when the building exceeds 4,000 square feet.
B. Two (2) or more commercial or service establishments within a single building served by a common parking area when the gross area of buildings exceed 10,000 square feet.
Union Township 3-16 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
3.64 SINGLE OWNERSHIP
Ownership by one (1) or more persons, whether jointly as tenants as a whole or as tenants in common, of a parcel of real property.
3.65 SITE CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION
A division of land on the basis of condominium ownership that is not subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended.
3.66 SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS (AMENDED, ORD 2005-03)
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair
anus or buttock, and
any portion of the female breast that includes the nipple or areola, or
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered..
3.67 SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES (AMENDED, ORD 2005-03)
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttock, or female breast;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral-genital sex, or sodomy;
C. Human excretory functions or violent acts upon humans as part of any of the sexual activities described above.
3.68 STORY
A portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar, or unused under floor space is more than six (6) feet above grade, as defined herein, for more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above grade, as defined herein, at any point, such basement, cellar, or unused under floor space shall be considered as a story.
3.69 STREET LINE
The legal line or demarcation between a street or road and abutting land that is also known as the edge or furthest extreme of the right-of-way.
3.70 STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or anything attached to something having permanent location on the ground.
3.71 SUBDIVISION
Union Township 3-17 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land in compliance with Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967 of the State of Michigan, as amended.
3.72 SWIMMING POOL
A constructed basin or structure for the holding of water for swimming and aquatic recreation. Swimming pool does not include plastic, canvas, or rubber portable pools temporarily erected upon the ground and holding less than three hundred (300) gallons of water.
3.73 TOWNSHIP BOARD
The governing body of Union Township.
3.74 TRAVEL TRAILER AND MOTOR HOME
A vehicular transportable structure mounted on wheels that is self propelled or towed by a motor vehicle. A travel trailer is designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. This definition includes but is not limited to portable structures commonly known as travel homes, fold down campers, truck mounted campers, converted buses, and fifth wheels.
3.75 USE
The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which land or a building may be occupied.
3.76 VARIANCE
A variance is defined as a modification of the terms of this Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this Ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area and size of structure of size of yards and open spaces and off street parking and off street loading requirement; establishment or expansion of use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of non-conformities in the Zoning District or adjoining Zoning Districts.
3.77 WILD ANIMAL
Any animal that is likely to bite, without provocation, or is likely to cause the death, maiming, or illness of a human. These animals include but are not limited to alligators (family), deer (family), opossums (family), badgers, dogs (wild family), primates (family), bears, dog-wolves, raccoons, birds (wild), ferrets, skunks, cats (wild family), lemurs, spiders (poisonous), coyotes, lizards (poisonous), weasels (family), and martens. Wild animal also means any animals that a person is prohibited from possessing by law.
3.77.1 WIND ENERGY DEFINITIONS
A. ANEMOMETER TOWER means a freestanding tower containing instrumentation such as anemometers that is designed to provide present moment wind data for use by the supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system which is an accessory land use to a UTILITY GRID WIND ENERGY SYSTEM.
B. AMBIENT means the sound pressure level exceeded 90% of the time or L 90. ANSI means the American National Standards Institute.
Union Township 3-18 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
C. dB(A) means the sound pressure level in decibels. It refers to the “a” weighted scale defined by ANSI. A method for weighting the frequency spectrum to mimic the human ear.
D. DECIBEL means the unit of measure used to express the magnitude of sound pressure and sound intensity.
E. IEC means the International Electrotechnical Commission.
F. ISO means the International Organization for Standardization.
G. LEASE UNIT BOUNDARY means boundary around property leased for purposes of a Wind Energy System, including adjacent parcels to the parcel on which the Wind Energy System tower or equipment is located. For purposes of setback, the Lease Unit Boundary shall not cross road right-of-ways.
H. ON SITE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM means a land use for generating electric power from wind and is an accessory use that is intended to primarily serve the needs of the consumer at that site. On site wind systems may use grid tie or reverse metering to off set utility costs without being considered a Utility Grid System.
I. ROTOR means an element of a wind energy system that acts as a multi-bladed airfoil assembly, thereby extracting through rotation, kinetic energy directly from the wind.
J. SETBACK BOUNDRY AGREEMENT means an easement or lease agreement between adjacent parcels for the purpose of establishing a setback area around an On Site Wind Energy System. For purposes of this provision, adjacent parcels shall not cross a road Right of Way. The agreement shall be filed with the Isabella County Registrar of deeds in a form acceptable for filing.
K. SHADOW FLICKER means alternating changes in light intensity caused by the moving blade of a wind energy system casting shadows on the ground and stationary objects, such as but not limited to a window at a dwelling.
L. SOUND PRESSURE means an average rate at which sound energy is transmitted through a unit area in a specified direction. The pressure of the sound measured at a receiver.
M. SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL means the sound pressure mapped to a logarithmic scale and reported in decibels (dB).
N. UTILITY GRID WIND ENERGY SYSTEM means a land use for generating power by use of wind at multiple tower locations in a community and includes accessory uses such as but not limited to a SCADA TOWER, electric substation. A UTILITY GRID WIND ENERGY SYSTEM is designed and built to provide electricity to the electric utility grid.
O. WIND ENERGY SYSTEM means a land use for generating power by use of wind; utilizing use of a wind turbine generator and includes the turbine, blades, and tower as well as related electrical equipment. This does not include wiring to connect the wind energy system to the grid. See also ON-SITE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM and UTILITY GRID WIND ENERGY SYSTEM.
P. WIND SITE ASSESSMENT means an assessment to determine the wind speeds at a specific site and the feasibility of using that site for construction of a wind energy system.
Union Township 3-19 Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
3.78 YARD
A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion thereof from the ground upward, provided, however, that fences and walls may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations as indicated herein.
A. Front Yard: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the distance between the front lot line and the main wall of the building, excepting steps and unenclosed porches.
B. Rear Yard: A space unoccupied, except for an accessory building, extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the distance between the rear lot line and the rear wall of the main building.
C. Side Yard: A yard between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard shall be measured from the nearest point of the side lot line toward the nearest part of the main building.
3.785 YARD SALE (NEW ORD 2011-06)
Yard Sale, also known as a garage sale, rummage sale, tag sale, attic sale, moving sale, or junk sale, is an informal, irregularly scheduled event for the sale of used goods by private individuals at their residence, and includes fund raising events by nonprofit groups when conducted in non commercial/industrial zoning districts.
3.79 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS (ALSO KNOWN AS BOARD OF APPEALS)
This is the Union Township quasi-judicial body that hears appeals under and in accord with the provisions of this Ordinance and Act 184 of the Public Acts of 1943 of the State of Michigan, as amended.
3.80 ZONING OFFICIAL
The person designated by the Township Board to administer the provisions of this Ordinance. This person shall not be a member of the Township Board.
3.81 ZONING PERMIT
A written statement issued by the Zoning Official authorizing buildings, structures or uses consistent with the requirements of the district in which they may be located.
3.82 DEFINITION OF WORDS (AMENDED, 1992-2 ORDINANCE)
All other words shall have the meaning as defined in the Webster's New World Dictionary, Third College Edition
Union Township 4-1 Amendments
Zoning Ordinance
SECTION 4 AMENDMENTS
4.1 ADOPTION, AMENDMENTS, AND MAP CHANGES (AMENDED 1998-17)
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good Zoning practice require, the regulations and District boundaries set forth in this Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed, provided however that no such action may be taken until a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard, in accordance with Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006 of the State of Michigan, as amended.
A. Any public agency or interested person may make application to the Planning Commission for an amendment or map change. All requests must be submitted on forms carefully filled out with such data and information as to assure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for the permanent record.
B. A fee shall be collected from the applicant sufficient to cover the expenses for said notices and hearings as specified in the schedule of fees.
C. After receipt of a request for a change in the Zoning Ordinance, (map or text amendments) the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Section 7.8” (Amended 2006-10)
D. Township Planning Commission: Following such hearing, or hearings, the Township Planning Commission shall submit the proposed amendment to the County Planning Commission for proper action. The approval of the County Planning Commission shall be conclusively presumed unless such Commission shall , within thirty (30) days of its receipt, have notified the Township Clerk to the contrary.
E. The Planning Commission shall submit the proposed amendment, along with its recommendation, to the Township Board for consideration within sixty (60) days from the conclusion of the public hearing. (Ord. 1998-17)
1. The Township board may adopt or reject the amendment as proposed. However, if the Board decides to make changes it must return the proposed amendment with changes to the Planning Commission for review and comment.
2. After receipt of this report from the Planning Commission the Township Board may proceed to adopt the amendment with or without changes. Adoption must be by Ordinance, with yeas and nays recorded.
3. Whenever a proposed amendment or District change has not been adopted by the Township Board, the Planning Commission may refuse to hold another public hearing on same for at least one (1) year unless it is conclusively proven that new conditions and circumstances exist.
F. A notice of adoption shall be published in a newspaper published in the County with general circulation within the Township within fifteen (15) days after final approval. Said notice shall include the following:
1. In the case of a newly adopted Zoning Ordinance the following statement: "A Zoning Ordinance relating the development and use of land has been adopted by the Union Township Board."
Union Township 4-2 Amendments
Zoning Ordinance
2. In the case of an amendment to an existing Zoning Ordinance, either a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment, including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment.
3. The effective date of the Ordinance.
4. The place and time where a copy of the Ordinance may be purchased or inspected.
G. The Township Clerk must maintain a copy of the amendments, adoption of a new Ordinance, and map changes for public use.
4.2 SITE SKETCH
A sketch of the area and all proposed buildings shall accompany the request for rezoning to the Planning Commission
Union Township 5-1 Amendments
Zoning Ordinance
SECTION 5 BOARD OF APPEALS
5.1 BOARD OF APPEALS
There shall be a board of Appeals that shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Township Board. The first member of the Board of Appeals shall be a member of the Township Planning Commission. The remaining members of the Board of Appeals shall be selected from the electors residing in the unincorporated area of Union Township. The members selected shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests present in the Township. The term of each member shall be for three (3) years, except that of the members first appointed, two (2) shall serve for two (2) years and the remaining members for three (3) years. A successor shall be appointed not more than one (1) month after the term of the preceding member has expired. All vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term.
5.2 REMOVAL (AMENDED ORD 1998-17)
Members of the Board of Appeals shall be removable by the Township Board for nonperformance of duty or misconduct in office upon written charges and after public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself from a vote in which he/she has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself from a vote in which he/she has a conflict of interest shall constitute misconduct in office. Public hearings shall be noticed per Section 7.8.
5.3 MEETINGS; RECORDS
A. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules and a schedule of meetings necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with this Ordinance. The Board of Appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the members of the Board are present. Meetings may be held at other times as the Board may determine. The chairman, or in his/her absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths, and the board may compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public.
B. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately available in the office of the Township Clerk.
5.4 PROCEDURE
A. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Official, or to decide in favor of the applicant, any matter upon which the Board of Appeals is required to pass under this Ordinance, or to effect any variation in this Zoning Ordinance.
Union Township 5-2 Amendments
Zoning Ordinance
B. When an application or appeal has been filed in proper form and with the required data, the Board shall place said application or appeal on the calendar for hearing at the next meeting of the Board and cause notices stating the time, place and object of the hearing to be served. Such notices shall be served personally or by mail at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing upon the applicant or appellant, the Zoning Official and the owners of record of property within three hundred (300) feet of the premises in question which notices, if by mail, shall be addressed to the respective property owners of record at the address given in the last assessment roll. In the event any property immediately adjacent to said premises shall be part of a different governmental subdivision, the owner of any such property shall nevertheless receive notice and shall be entitled to be heard.
C. Upon the day for hearing any application or appeal, the Board may adjourn the hearing in order to permit the obtaining of additional information or to cause such further notice as it deems proper to be served upon such other property owners as it decides may be interested in said application or appeal. In the case of an adjourned hearing, persons previously notified and persons already heard need not be notified of the time or resumption of said hearing.
D. Upon the hearing, any party may be heard in person or by agent or attorney.
E. The Board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made on the premises and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken or may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
F. The decision of the Board shall not be final until twenty-one (21) days after it is made, and any person having an interest affected by any such Ordinance shall have the right to appeal to the Circuit Court on questions of law and fact during said period.
G. Each appeal or application for variance at a regular Zoning Board of Appeals meeting shall be accompanied by a filing fee. Each appeal or application requiring a special meeting shall be accompanied by an additional fee. All fees shall be deposited by the Zoning Official with the Township Treasurer.
5.5 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Official certifies to the Board of Appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him/her that by reason of facts stated in the certification, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent perils to life or property in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order that may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by the Circuit Court on application on notice to the Zoning Official and on due cause shown.
5.6 TIME TO AND NOTICE OF APPEAL; TRANSMISSION OF RECORDS
Appeals shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals by general rule by filing with the Zoning Official and with the Board of Appeals of a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
Union Township 5-3 Amendments
Zoning Ordinance
5.7 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
In authorizing a variance or exception, the Board may in addition to the conditions of approval called for in this Ordinance, attach thereto such other conditions regarding the location, character, landscaping or treatment reasonably necessary to the furtherance of the intent and spirit of this Ordinance and the protection of the public interest including the right to authorize such special exception for a limited period of time. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a nuisance as well as a violation of this Ordinance and punishable under Section 7 of Ordinance.
5.8 BOARD OF APPEALS: POWERS AND DUTIES
A. Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Official in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
B. Interpretation of Zoning Maps: Where the boundaries of Zoning Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map are in question as to exact location or otherwise referred to in Section 2, the Board shall interpret such map in a manner that will carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and the area in question.
C. Variances, Conditions Governing Applications: Procedures to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of Appeals unless and until:
1. A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
a) That special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and that are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same Zoning District;
b) That literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same Zoning District under the terms of this Ordinance;
c) That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
d) That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same Zoning District;
e) No non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same Zoning District, and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other Zoning Districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
2. A Public Hearing, noticed per Section 7.8, is conducted.
3. The Public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney.
4. The Board of Appeals shall determine that the requirements of Section 5.8, C., have been met by the applicant for the variance.
Union Township 5-4 Amendments
Zoning Ordinance
5. The Board of Appeals in granting or denying a variance shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting or denying of the variance. The action taken shall be in writing and a part of the proceedings.
5.9 LAND USE VARIANCES
Under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the Zoning District involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in said District. The Board of Appeals cannot grant use variances at all or use its variance authority to accomplish what would, in effect be a rezoning.
5.10 HEAR AND MAKE DETERMINATIONS; PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS
The Board shall have the power to hear and make determinations regarding applications for the erection and use of a building, or an addition to an existing building, or an addition to an existing building of a public service corporation or for public utility purposes as described under Essential Service in this Ordinance and in any Zoning District to a greater height or of larger area than the District to a greater height or of larger area than the District requirements herein established, and admit the location in any use District of a public utility building, structure or use if the Board shall find such use, height, area, building or structure reasonably necessary for the public convenience and service.
5.11 DECISIONS OF BOARD NOT FINAL
Any person or persons or any taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the Township aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals shall have the right to appeal to the Isabella County Circuit Court on questions of law and fact.
Union Township 6-1 Permits
Zoning Ordinance and Fees
SECTION 6 PERMITS AND FEES
6.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of a Zoning Permit is to determine that the intended use is within the proper District and that there has been full compliance with the use requirements specified for the respective District.
6.2 ZONING PERMITS
No building, structure, or any part thereof, shall be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, or enlarged without first applying for and obtaining a Zoning Permit from the Zoning Official. An exception to this is an accessory building or portable structure less than two hundred (200) square feet in size or less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) in valuation (whichever is less) that shall not require a Zoning Permit as long as the placement of said building conforms with setbacks and height requirements of the District in which they are located.
6.3 APPLICATION OF ZONING PERMIT
To obtain a permit a written application is required by this Ordinance. The applicant shall ensure himself of the following requirements:
A. No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied and no building, or part thereof, or other structure shall be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, or enlarged without first applying for and obtaining a Zoning Permit from the Zoning Official.
B. Every application for a Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale in ink, or prints of same, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon. It shall also show the exact locations, size, and height of the existing buildings and accessory buildings, and the lines within which the proposed building or structure is to be erected or altered. The existing and intended use of each building, or part of a building; the number families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate; and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots, as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance, shall be furnished. One (1) copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans have been approved by the Zoning Official together with permit, as may be granted.
C. Where sewage disposal is a requirement, the sewage disposal system must be approved by the Central Michigan District Health Department prior to issuing a Zoning or Building Permit for a new structure and/or prior to approval for change of use of an existing structure.
D. Before a Building Permit shall be issued, there must be compliance with this Ordinance and the proper zoned District must be present.
E. Except as herein after provided, no building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied and no building, or part thereof, or other structure shall be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with this Ordinance.
F. Permits shall be nontransferable and shall expire after one (1) year from the date of issuance.
Union Township 6-2 Permits
Zoning Ordinance and Fees
G. No persons shall do any grading that would change the grade of a parcel of land more than one (1) foot without first obtaining a grading permit from the Building Official. A permit shall be required for each site and may cover for both excavations and fills.
6.4 TEMPORARY PERMITS
The following temporary uses are permitted upon applying for and obtaining a valid temporary permit, as regulated herein, subject to all the special conditions associated with each temporary use.
A. Mobile Homes, Travel Trailer, and Motor Homes: An individual travel trailer, mobile home, or motor home may be used as temporary living or working quarters within an AG District for up to three hundred sixty-five (365) days while a dwelling or structure is being constructed on the same premises. Said approval shall only apply to the designated site and no travel trailer or mobile home may be parked in a required front yard.
B. An individual travel trailer or motor home may be approved in all Districts as a temporary dwelling for a period up to sixty (60) days for recreational purposes only.
C. Subdivision Office: A building in a new subdivision may be used as a sales and management office for the sale of dwellings within said subdivision for a period of up to one (1) year. Temporary identification signs may be permitted as regulated by Section 11.
D. Basement/Cellar Dwellings: Basement/Cellar Dwellings intended for use and occupancy incidental to the construction of a permanent dwelling may be so used and occupied on any lot in the Agricultural District, provided an occupancy permit is secured from the Building Inspector upon compliance with such reasonable safety requirements as may be established and with sanitary regulations of the Central Michigan Health Department. Such permit shall not be granted for any period longer than one (1) year subject to renewal only upon evidence of reasonable progress toward completion in the construction of a permanent dwelling to be erected on the lot or land on which said cellar home is placed. Special considerations may be given for renewal where undue circumstances (e.g., ill health) has halted construction.
E. Other Requirements
1. Temporary dwellings must be self-contained for sewage disposal or valid permit must be obtained from the Central Michigan District Health Department for the disposal of sewage.
2. Setbacks shall be in accordance of said District in which the temporary permit is to be issued.
3. Access to temporary permit site shall not encroach surrounding landowners.
4. Temporary permits are nontransferable.
5. Temporary permits shall terminate within the time specified on the permit.
6. The use of travel trailers or mobile homes, when properly permitted for a temporary use, does not require skirting, pads, runners, or piers.
Union Township 6-3 Permits
Zoning Ordinance and Fees
6.5 APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY PERMIT
A written application shall include:
Statement of the anticipated duration of said temporary use.
Purpose of said temporary use.
Written permission from landowner, if other than applicant.
6.6 FEES
A fee, as set by the Township Board, subject to annual review, to defray the cost of administration and inspection, shall be paid prior to issuance of any permit. Except as provided in Section 6.2, no building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied and no building, or part thereof, or other structure shall be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, or enlarged without first obtaining a Zoning Permit from the Zoning Official. Nor shall any temporary use allowed commence prior to obtaining a temporary permit from the Zoning Official. Any person undertaking or commencing any of the aforementioned without first obtaining a Zoning Permit, may be charged a double fee, and shall be required to comply with this Zoning Ordinance.
Fees shall be established for the following:
A. Annual Zoning Permits
B. Special Use Permits
C. Rezoning Requests
D. Variance Application
E. Appeals
F. Temporary Permits
G. Site Plan Review
Additional fees for special public hearings or meetings of the Planning Commission that are requested by applicants of rezoning or special use requests, shall be charged to cover the costs of required notices and membership per diem for the meetings or hearings.
Union Township 7-1 Administration
Zoning Ordinance and Enforcement
SECTION 7 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
7.1 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
The Township Planning Commission is created in accordance with Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006 of the State of Michigan, as amended.
A. The Planning Commission shall make and adopt a basic plan as a guide for the development of the unincorporated portions of Union Township.
B. The Planning Commission shall assemble and analyze data and formulate plans for proper conservation and uses of all resources, including a determination of lands having various use potentials, and for services, facilities and utilities required to equip such lands.
C. All meetings will be conducted in accordance with Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, of the State of Michigan, known as the "open meeting act".
D. The latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order may govern the proceedings at the meetings of the Planning Commission.
7.2 ZONING OFFICIAL
Union Township shall employ a Zoning Official to act as its officer to effect proper administration of this Ordinance. The term of employment and rate of compensation and any other conditions of employment shall be established by the Township Board.
7.3 ENFORCEMENT
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Zoning Official or duly authorized representative may enter at all reasonable times in or upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting or investigating the condition and practices that may be a violation of this Ordinance. A written notice shall be sent to the person, firm, or corporation who is deemed to be in violation.
7.4 PENALTIES (ORD 1999-03)
For any and every violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, the owner, agent, contractor, lessees, or tenant of the premises, building, or part thereof, where such violation has been committed, shall be guilty of a civil infraction. The owner, agent, architect, builder, or any person who commits, takes part, or assists in such violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or any person who maintains any buildings or premises in which any such violation exists, shall be guilty of a civil infraction. Violations of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a civil infraction. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Civil infractions shall be administered per Charter Township of Union Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau Ordinance.
7.45 NUISANCE PER SE: ABATEMENT (ORD. 1998-1)
Union Township 7-2 Administration
Zoning Ordinance and Enforcement
Any building erected, altered, razed, converted, or moved onto, or any use carried on in violation of any provision of this ordinance, or in violation of any approved site plan is hereby declared a nuisance per se. Any court of competent jurisdiction may order such nuisance abated.
7.5 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES
In addition to the above remedies, the Township Board or Zoning Official may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any erection, construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, or use of any building or premises constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance; to restrain, correct, or abate such violation; to prevent any unlawful act, business activity, or other use in or about such premises.
7.6 SHOW CAUSE HEARING
Notwithstanding any provision contained within the Union Township Zoning Ordinance the Zoning Official may initiate a show cause hearing before the Union Township Planning Commission or Zoning board of Appeals, when said Official believes a violation of the Zoning Ordinance has occurred. The purpose of this hearing shall be to allow the violator or his/her agents an opportunity to show cause why the provisions of the Ordinance should not be enforced.
The show cause hearing shall be held under the following guidelines:
A. Notice shall be served by first class mail upon the violator not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. This notice shall contain the purpose of the hearing, time, date, and place to be held and the rights of the individuals involved.
B. At the hearing the Zoning Official or his/her agent shall present the case against the property involved. The Zoning Official or his/her agent has the right to present witnesses and/or evidence to support his/her case.
C. The person representing the violation may rebut the case and may present witnesses and/or evidence to support his/her case. He/she may cross-examine previous witnesses and may be represented by counsel.
D. Upon completion of the hearing the Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals my take whatever action it feels necessary and proper and within the scope of their powers to effect the regulations and intent of the regulations set down in the Zoning Ordinance.
E. In the case of a decision made by the Planning Commission, such decision is appealable to the Union Township Zoning Board of Appeals within fifteen (15) days of said decision.
F. In a decision made by the Zoning Board of Appeals, such decision is appealable to the Isabella County Circuit Court on questions of law or fact.
G. Appeals made to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in writing and in such form as shall be determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall have a fee set forth by the Union Township Board.
Union Township 7-3 Administration
Zoning Ordinance and Enforcement
7.7 APPEARANCE TICKETS
The Zoning Official is specifically authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets, based on probable cause, on any person, business, or organization in violation of any of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and for which a fine, imprisonment, or both may be levied as a result of such violation.
Appearance ticket means a complaint or notice upon which the Zoning Official shall record an occurrence involving one (1) or more violations of the Zoning Ordinance by the person cited.
Each citation shall consist of the following parts:
A. The original, which shall be a complaint or notice to appear by the Zoning Official and filed with the court.
B. The second copy, which shall be retained by the Zoning Official.
C. The third copy, which shall be delivered to the alleged violator. Such citation may be appropriately modified as to content or number of copies to accommodate Zoning Ordinance enforcement and local court procedures and practices.
7.8 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION (NEW ORD 2006-10)
All applications for development approval requiring a public hearing shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 and the other provisions of this Section with regard to public notification.
A. Responsibility: When the provisions of this Ordinance or the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act require that notice be published, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for preparing the content of the notice, having it published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Charter Township of Union and mailed or delivered as provided in this Section.
B. Content: All mail, personal and newspaper notices for public hearings shall:
1. Describe nature of the request: Identify whether the request is for a rezoning, text amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance, appeal, ordinance interpretation or other purpose.
2. Location: Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the subject property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used such as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross street, or including a map showing the location of the property. No street addresses must be listed when eleven (11) or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, or when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not involving a specific property.
3. When and where the request will be considered: Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing(s).
Union Township 7-4 Administration
Zoning Ordinance and Enforcement
4. Written comments: Include a statement describing when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. Include a statement that the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel.
5.Handicap access: Information concerning how handicap access will be accommodated if the meeting facility is not handicap accessible.
C. Personal and Mailed Notice
1. General: When the provisions of this Ordinance or state law require that personal or mailed notice be provided, notice shall be provided to:
a. The owners of property for which approval is being considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner(s) of the property.
b. Except for rezoning requests involving eleven (11) or more adjacent properties or an ordinance interpretation request that does not involve a specific property; to all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property subject to the request, regardless of whether the property or occupant is located within the boundaries of the Charter Township of Union. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.
c. All neighborhood organizations, public utility companies, railroads and other persons that have requested to receive notice pursuant to Section 7.9, Registration to Receive Notice by Mail.
d. Other governmental units or infrastructure agencies within 300 feet of the property involved in the application.
2. Notice by mail/affidavit: Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed, postage paid. The ZONING ADMINISTRATOR shall prepare a list of property owners and registrants to whom notice was mailed, as well as of anyone to whom personal notice was delivered.
D. Timing of Notice: Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, or this Ordinance where applicable, notice of a public hearing shall be provided as follows:
For a public hearing on an application for a rezoning, text amendment, special use permit, planned unit development, variance, appeal, or ordinance interpretation: not less than fifteen (15) days before the date the application will be considered for approval.
Union Township 7-6 Administration
Zoning Ordinance and Enforcement
7.9 REGISTRATION TO RECEIVE NOTIFICATIN BY MAIL (NEW ORD 2006-10)
A. General: Any neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person may register with the ZONING ADMINISTRATOR to receive written notice of all applications for development approval pursuant to Section 7.8.C.c., Personal and Mailed Notice, or written notice of all applications for development approval within the zoning district in which they are located. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing this notification. Fees may be assessed for the provision of this notice, as established by the legislative body.
B. Requirements: The requesting party must provide the Zoning Administrator information on an official form to ensure notification can be made. All registered persons must re-register annually to continue to receive notification pursuant to this Section.
Union Township 8-1 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
SECTION 8 GENERAL PROVISIONS
These General Provisions are applicable to all Districts.
8.1 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
A. An accessory building may be erected detached from the permitted use building or it may be erected as an integral part of the permitted use building.
B. An accessory building may not be allowed when there is no principal building.
C. The distance between detached accessory buildings or garages and the principal building or buildings shall not be less than ten (10) feet. Accessory buildings or garages shall be considered as attached to the principal building when the distance between structures is solidly covered by a breezeway, portico, covered colonnade or similar architectural device.
D. An accessory building shall not be located nearer than five (5) feet to any alley line or lot line.
E. A detached accessory building, when located nearer than sixty (60) feet to the front line, shall provide the same front and side lot lines as required for the principal building.
F. (New, Ord 1997-11) A maximum of one (1) detached accessory building not more than twelve (12) feet or one (1) story in height may be permitted in the R-1, R-2A, R-2B, and R-3 districts, unless the lot area exceeds four (4) acres, in which case more than one accessory building may be allowed with a special use permit.
8.2 ACCESSORY USE
Accessory uses, incidental only to permitted use, are permitted when located on the same property; provided, that such accessory uses shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry.
Gardening shall be considered customary to and commonly associated with the operation of the permitted uses in residential zones. (Ord. 1998-17)
Permanent swimming pools, exclusively for the use of residents, shall be permitted, provided it shall not be less than twenty (20) feet from the property line of the property on which it is located, shall be so walled, d or screened as to prevent uncontrolled access from the street or adjacent properties.
Private garages shall be permitted, provided said garage shall at no time be used as living quarters.
E. On-site Use Wind Energy Systems and Anemometer Tower: An On-site Use Wind Energy System is an accessory use by right in all zoning districts which shall meet the following standards:
Union Township 8-2 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
Designed to primarily serve the needs of a home, farm, or small business.
Shall have a tower height of 65 feet or less.
Property Set-back: The distance between an On-site Use wind energy system and the owner’s property lines, or Setback Boundary Agreement, shall be equal to the height of the wind energy system tower including the top of the blade in its vertical position. The distance between an anemometer tower and the owner’s property lines, or Setback Boundary Agreement, shall be equal to the height of the tower. No part of the wind energy system structure, including guy wire anchors, may extend closer than ten feet to the owner’s property lines, or the distance of the required setback in the respective zoning district, whichever results in the greater setback. Setback Boundary agreements shall not be required to approve an on site use which meets the required setback for a tower of less than the maximum height.
Sound Pressure Level: On-site Use wind energy systems shall not exceed 55 dB(A) at the property line closest to the wind energy system. This sound pressure level may be exceeded during short- term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms. If the ambient sound pressure level exceeds 55 dB(A), the standard shall be ambient dB(A) plus 5 d B (A).
Construction Codes, Towers, & Interconnection Standards: On-site Use wind energy systems including towers shall comply with all applicable state construction and electrical codes and local building permit requirements. On-site Use wind energy systems including towers shall comply with Federal Aviation Administration requirements, the Michigan Airport Zoning Act (Public Act 23 of 1950, MCL 259.431 et seq.), the Michigan Tall Structures Act (Public Act 259 of 1959, MCL 259.481 et seq.), and local jurisdiction airport overlay zone regulations. An interconnected On-site Use wind energy system shall comply with Michigan Public Service Commission and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission standards. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
Safety: An On-site Use wind energy system shall have automatic braking, governing, or a feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation or over speeding. All wind towers shall have lightning protection. If a tower is supported by guy wires, the wires shall be clearly visible to a height of at least six feet above the guy wire anchors. The minimum vertical blade tip clearance from grade shall be 20 feet for a wind energy system employing a horizontal axis rotor.
F. Accessory Special Use: On site wind energy system over 65 feet and any On Site Wind Energy System utilizing a Setback Boundary Agreement. See Section 30.4.AC
G. The medical use of marihuana, to the extent made lawful by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq, as amended, but only in One-Family Dwellings, Two-Family Dwellings and Multiple-Family Dwellings subject to the following conditions:
1. Marihuana plants shall be cultivated in an enclosed locked facility within a dwelling unit which is the legal and primary place of residence of the person cultivating those plants (See 3.24.1).
2. No more than the maximum number of marihuana plants one person may cultivate pursuant to the MMMA, up to a maximum of 72 shall be cultivated in any dwelling unit.
Union Township 8-3 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
3. Cultivation shall not be visible from the exterior of the dwelling unit.
4. No transfer or delivery of marihuana shall occur at a dwelling unless between Qualifying Patients residing in the same dwelling unit or between a Primary Caregiver and the Qualifying Patient to whom he or she is connected through the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (LARA) registration process. This subsection does not prohibit a Marihuana Dispensary from delivering marihuana to a Qualifying Patient at the Qualifying Patient’s home.
5. No marihuana plants shall be cultivated in any accessory building, including but not limited to, a detached garage, shed, greenhouse, kennel, or barn.
6. The cultivation of marihuana plants shall not exceed 400 square feet of a dwelling unit.
7. The medical use of marihuana as an accessory use to a dwelling shall not generate noise, vibration, odors or heat that is detectible beyond the dwelling unit.
8. Engaging in the medical use of marihuana as permitted as an accessory use to a dwelling shall not generate more than an additional five (5) visits to the dwelling unit per day.
9. Prior to cultivation of marihuana as an accessory use in a dwelling, an inspection by the Township is required to confirm that all necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits have been obtained for any portion of a dwelling in which electrical wiring, lighting, or watering devices that support the cultivation, growing, or harvesting of marihuana are located. In carrying out the provisions of this subsection, the Township shall not require the name and address of the patient. The intent of this subsection is to ensure the safety of residents of the premises and the public. The fees shall be established by resolution of the Township Board and published in the Township Schedule of Fees.
Union Township 8-4 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
8.3 ANIMALS, KEEPING OF (AMENDED, ORD 1998-17)
A. No livestock animals or fowl other than customary household pets may be housed in any residential district, except those specified in the R-1 District, or within 100 feet of any adjoining residential property line. The keeping of not more than four customary household pets may be permitted in all districts.
B. Predatory or wild animals shall not be kept in any district in the township.
C. Exceptions
1. The keeping of more than four dogs, six months or older may be permitted on any lot provided that all of the following conditions are met.
The size of the lot in question is at least 5 acres;
The animals are housed at least 100 feet from any adjoining property line;
A kennel permit is obtained from the office of the Isabella County Animal Control Department; and
The keeping of dogs must be for personal use only and not for commercial purposes.
2. Not more than four fowl or fur bearing animals may be kept in any district for educational purposes.
8.4 AUTOMOBILE OR VEHICLE STORAGE
Automobile and vehicle storage shall not be permitted in the front yard and shall be permitted in the rear or side yard if locked to prevent access by children. Outdoor storage of three (3) or more inoperable or dismantled motor vehicles is regulated under Subsection 3.39 of this ordinance.
8.5 BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATIONS (ADDITION, A-D, 1997-12 ORDINANCE)
Bed and Breakfast operations may be permitted in AG, R-1, R-2A, and R-2B Districts, provided the following conditions are met and a Bed and Breakfast Permit is first obtained from the Planning Commission. The application shall include a floor plan of the house which shall clearly indicate and describe any proposed remodeling, and a site plan which complies with Section 12. An application fee shall be required. An annual fee shall be required. The Bed and Breakfast Permit is subject to annual review with on site inspections.
A. Requirements
1. Not more than forty (40) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used for bed and breakfast sleeping rooms (based on a submitted floor plan of the proposed operation).
2. Bed and Breakfast dwellings shall be located at least six hundred-sixty (660) feet from another such establishment. In Historical Districts, the Planning Commission may reduce this requirement.
3. Interior design of the establishment must adhere to typical residential characteristics so that the dwelling unit retains its inherent single-family residential appearance.
4. The exterior design must conform to the predominant residential character of the neighborhood. (i.e. Historical District, Agricultural District, etc.)
Union Township 8-5 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
5. Signage must conform to Section 11.
6. Bed and Breakfast dwellings shall be permitted in structures constructed prior to 1987 or at least ten (10) years old at the time of application.
B. Parking and Screening
1. Parking shall be required in the rear yard, with two spaces for the dwelling and one space per sleeping room with a total hard surface area not to exceed 50% of the rear yard area. All parking shall be asphalt or concrete surface. No parking area shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to an adjacent property line. Parking spaces shall be configured so as not to disturb the appearance of the neighborhood.
2. The Planning Commission may require additional screening and/or landscaping to preserve the neighborhood appearance. A planting buffer shall be provided to screen the parking area. This buffer shall be a minimum of five feet in height at planting and shall be maintained in a healthy manner as to produce a minimum of 80% density within four years when viewed horizontally between ground level and five feet above the ground.
C. Operation
1. The dwelling unit in which the operation takes place shall be the principal residence of the owner. The owner/operator shall live on the premises while the operation is active.
2. There shall be no separate cooking facilities in guest quarters.
3. The maximum stay for any paying guest shall be fifteen (15) consecutive days.
4. Annual inspection and approval must be received from local fire and/or building inspectors for adequate exits, smoke alarms, general fire safety and health department code adherence.
5. Bed and Breakfast dwellings shall produce no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dust, odors or heat. Any detection of said offenses beyond property lines shall constitute a violation of the terms of this provision.
D. Revocation of Permit
1. Any violation of this Ordinance may be grounds for the revocation of this permit. The judgment of the Zoning Official shall be considered decisive and final.
2. The decision of the Zoning Official may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals within forty-five (45) days of the Zoning Official’s written determination.
8.6 BUILDING AND LAND USE RESTRICTIONS
When building and land use restrictions of a subdivision are more restrictive than this Ordinance, those building and land use restrictions shall apply.
Union Township 8-6 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
8.7 CONTROL OF HEAT, GLARE, FUMES, DUST, NOISE, VIBRATION, AND ODORS
Every use shall be so operated that it is not obnoxious or dangerous by reason of heat, glare, fumes, odors, dust, noise or vibration beyond any boundary line of the lot or parcel of land on which the use is located.
8.8 CORNER CLEARANCE
In all Districts where yards are required adjacent to the intersection of two (2) streets or of a street and public alley, no structure; planting, except deciduous trees; or fence shall be erected or maintained that is higher than three (3) feet above the curb grade; nor more than 10 percent solid within a triangle formed by the intersecting street or alley property lines and line between two (2) points located 20 feet from such intersecting lines.
8.9 CORNER LOTS
Where a side or rear yard of a corner lot abuts the side lot line of a lot behind it on a side street or a lot adjoining it on the same street, no building or structure within twenty-five (25) feet of said lot lines shall be built closer than the required front yard setback of the adjoining lots.
8.10 DIVISION OF PROPERTY
Single ownership property being divided shall follow the Subdivision Control Act of 1967.
8.11 DOUBLE-FRONTED LOTS
In any District where a lot runs through a block from street to street and where a front yard is required, such front yard shall be provided along each street lot line.
8.12 DWELLING UNITS
All dwelling units located outside of a mobile home park shall comply with the following conditions:
A. All dwelling units shall meet the requirements of the District in which it is located.
B. There shall be a minimum width throughout the entire length of the dwelling unit as required in the appropriate Zoning District as measured between the exterior of the outside walls having the greatest length.
C. All wheels, towing mechanisms, and tongues of mobile homes shall be removed and none of the undercarriage shall be visible from outside the mobile home.
D. Exterior building materials of all dwelling units shall extend to the foundation on all sides.
E. All dwellings shall be firmly attached to the foundation so as to be watertight as required by the construction code adopted by the Township, or if a mobile home shall be anchored to the foundation by an anchor system designed and constructed in compliance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Regulations entitled "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards".
F. All dwellings shall be connected to a public sewer system and water supply system and/or a well or septic system approved by the Central Michigan District Health Department.
Union Township 8-7 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
G. All dwellings shall provide adequate steps or porch areas, permanently attached to the foundation, where there exists an elevation differential of more than one (1) foot between any door and the surrounding grade. All dwellings shall provide a minimum of two (2) points of ingress and egress.
H. All additions to dwellings shall meet all of the requirements of this Ordinance.
I. All dwellings shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity. The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined by the Zoning Official upon review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour or relief from the common or standard designed home.
J. All mobile homes must meet standards for mobile home construction as contained in the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Regulations entitled "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards" effective June 15, 76, as amended. All other dwellings shall meet the requirements of the construction code adopted by the Township. [Editorial Note: Latest Amendment is July 16, 1998,]
8.13 EFFECT OF ZONING
Zoning affects every structure and use and extends vertically; except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure, or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building, or part thereof, or other structure shall be erected, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the Zoning district in which it is located.
8.14 ESSENTIAL SERVICES (AMENDED ORD 1999-04)
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments, Boards or Commissions of overhead or underground gas, electrical, steam or water, distribution or transmission systems, collection, communication (excluding towers and antennas), supply, or disposal systems including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers, poles, electrical substations, gas regulator stations, telephone exchange buildings, public utility buildings, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishings of adequate service by such public utility or municipal department or commission or for the public health or safety or general welfare shall be permitted as authorized or regulated by law and other Ordinances of the Township of Union in any District, it being the intention hereof except such erection, construction, alteration and maintenance from the application of the Ordinance.
Not withstanding the Preceding exceptions:
A. Electrical substations and/or gas regulator stations shall be provided with an enclosing fence or wall at least six (6) feet high and adequate to obstruct passage of persons or materials.
B. Public utility buildings when located in an R or AG District shall not include maintenance shops, repair garages or storage yards as a principal or accessory use.
C. Public utility facilities in any District are required to be constructed and maintained in a neat and orderly manner, and any buildings required shall conform with the general architecture of the neighborhood.
Union Township 8-8 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
8.15 EXISTING LOTS
Lots created and recorded prior to the effective date of this Ordinance that do not comply with one (1) or more or the minimum requirements of their zoned District, may be utilized by obtaining a variance as stipulated in Section 5. In granting any variance the Board of Appeals may prescribe appropriate requirements as stated in Section 5.
8.16 FENCES OR WALLS (AMENDED, 1991-16 ORDINANCE)
Fences or walls of not more than six (6) feet in height are permitted in all yards. All fences over six (6) feet must be authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals, unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance.
8.17 FRONT YARDS REQUIREMENTS
Exception may apply to front yard requirements of this Ordinance, provided approval of the Zoning Official and/or the Appeals Board is received.
A. Upon a lot that does not face a major street or thoroughfare:
1. The front yard requirement may be modified to conform to existing established front yard setbacks where both adjoining lots are built upon with a setback less than required by this Ordinance, provided that no new building shall be closer to the front property line than one-half (1/2) the District’s zone requirements.
2. The front yard requirements may be modified where the first vacant lot adjoining an existing developed lot with a front yard setback less than required by this Ordinance, provided the new building shall have a minimum front yard of not less than the computed average of the zone requirements and the front yard setback of the existing building.
B. On lots facing upon a major street or road, the required front yard shall be measured from the road right-of-way.
8.18 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
The height limitations elsewhere stipulated in this Ordinance shall not apply to church spires, elevated water tanks, elevator penthouses, fire towers, cooling towers, grain elevators, gas holders, smoke stacks, flagpoles, radio and television towers, masts and aerials, monuments and similar structures requiring a greater height. Notwithstanding these exceptions to height limits, the height of any structure within the Flight Hazard Zone of Mt. Pleasant Municipal Airport shall be governed by regulations as set forth in the Airport Zoning Ordinance.
8.19 HOME OCCUPATIONS (A-F ADDED, 1997-12 ORDINANCE)
A. Home occupations may be permitted in AG, R-1, R-2A, and R-2B Districts, provided the following conditions are met and a permit is first obtained from the Zoning Official, and approved by the Planning Commission. Property owners within 300’ shall be notified by mail of the Planning Commission meeting which will rule on the request. A fee for the permit shall be charged upon approval per section 6.
Union Township 8-9 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
1. The entire occupation is conducted wholly within a principal or accessory structure by the residents thereof.
2. There is not involved the keeping of a stock in trade and no article is sold or offered for sale, or rent, at the residence except as such as may be produced by and sold by the residents of the home. Sale of goods off the premises by means such as in home demonstration or mail order may be permitted. Display of items for sale on the property outside of the home is prohibited.
3. Home occupations shall not be carried on to an extent so as to require parking on or off the premises in excess of that allowed for the residential structure in which it is located.
4. The dwelling or residence complies with all the zoned district requirements in which it is located.
5. Home occupations shall not utilize more than forty (40) percent of the floor living area of one(1) story of the dwelling, or 100 percent of an accessory building and 10 percent of the living area of one (1) story.
6. No mechanical or electrical equipment and/or process or practice that will create a nuisance or health hazard to the adjacent landowners and neighborhood is permitted.
7. Home occupation activities shall be physically screened from the public view as required by the Zoning Official or Planning Commission.
8. Provide a plan of use indicating:
a. Who in your residence will be participating in the operation.
b. What is the nature of the operation and any materials required.
c. Set hours of operation (which must be harmonious to the neighborhood).
d. Parking provisions.
e. Storage requirements if any.
f. A sketch of your home and/or accessory buildings (floor plan).
g. A sketch of your property and the lots on all four (4) sides.
B. See 3.36.
C. No provision of this section shall allow non-conformity of the ordinance as a whole. (See section 11 for sign permits)
This permit shall be probational for a period of one (1) year, and shall be renewed every three (3) years thereafter.
D. This permit is not transferable as to location nor owner.
E. Failure to comply to any item shall be grounds to revoke the home occupation permit. The holder of this permit shall be responsible to carry adequate insurance and apply for any other licenses, permits or fees as may be required by any other local, state or federal agency.
F. Any expansion of the home occupation shall require a new permit.
Union Township 8-11 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
8.20 LIMITATIONS ON PUBLIC OR GROUP ORGANIZATIONS BUILDINGS
Fraternity or sorority houses, college owned dormitories, clubs and lodges may be established or erected after obtaining a permit from the Township Board upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The Board, in considering the application, shall consider whether the same would impede or congest traffic; create undue or unusual hazards; endanger pedestrians or other traffic in or upon streets or highways or otherwise endanger the public health, safety and general welfare. In connection with the application for a permit for clubs or lodges, the application shall be accompanied by a petition or a consent signed by seventy-five (75) percent of the owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of any part of the premises to be used for such club or lodge. In connection with the granting of said permits, the Board may require reasonable regulations and conditions, including setback and area requirements, to properly and adequately protect the public health, safety and general welfare with the following minimum requirements:
A. Clubs or Lodges: Provided any principal building and/or activity area shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any other lot.
B. Fraternity or Sorority Houses and College-Owned Dormitories: Provided any building in which such uses are housed shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any other lot.
8.21 MOVED BUILDINGS AND TEMPORARY BUILDINGS
Buildings or structures moved into or within Union Township shall comply with all provisions of this Ordinance and all provisions of the Uniform Building Section Code 109 concerning moved buildings, temporary buildings, and new buildings or structures.
8.22 OIL, GAS, AND OTHER DRILLING ACTIVITY
Operations of oil, gas, or brine wells, including drilling completion, storage or any other type of related on-site operations, and any other well drilled for oil or gas exploration purposes shall be controlled exclusively by the supervisor of wells of the State of Michigan, as provided in Act 61 of the Public Acts of 1939, as amended, being Sections 319.1 to 319.27 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
8.23 OUTDOOR STORAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL
All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by a fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent property.
A. All materials or wastes that might cause fumes, odors or dust or that constitute a fire hazard or that may be edible by rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers and screened from the street or adjacent property.
B. No material or wastes shall be deposited on the premises in such form or manner that they may be moved off the premised by natural causes or force.
C. Waste materials shall not be allowed to accumulate on the premises in such manner as to be unsightly, constitute a fire hazard or contribute to unsanitary conditions.
D. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products for every use, as enumerated and limited herein located less than one hundred (100) feet from any other District shall be enclosed by a solid fence or wall no less than six (6) nor more than ten (10) feet in height.
Union Township 8-13 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
8.24 PRINCIPAL USE
No lot may contain more than one (1) principal use unless groups of apartment buildings, condominiums, business or industrial buildings shall be deemed a principal use collectively.
8.25 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL (D, AMENDED, 1991-16 ORDINANCE)
Private swimming pools are permitted in all AG and R Districts, provided all of the following regulations are complied with.
A. The pool shall be equipped with filtration, circulation, and chlorination systems adequate to maintain the water in a clean and healthful condition in accordance with the health requirements of the County.
B. Discharge pipe leading from any private swimming pool shall be composed of a durable material and size as approved by the Zoning Official. No private swimming pool shall be wholly or partially emptied on another property, unless written permission is first obtained from the adjacent property owner.
C. A proper plumbing permit is obtained when the system is to be connected to a potable water supply.
D. Every private swimming pool shall be completely enclosed with a permanent substantial fence with gate or gates no less than four (4) feet in height above the ground level. No opening in such fence or gate shall be so designed or maintained as to permit access to the pool except under the supervision of the possessor or by his permission.
E. The swimming pool shall not be closer than twenty (20) feet to any side or rear lot line of the premises, provided on corner lots no part of any pool shall be constructed within the front yard of either street.
F. No lighting or electrical wiring shall overhang the surface of the water or be so located as to present the possibility of falling into the water. All lighting of the pool or the surrounding area shall not be so located as to reflect on adjacent property or upon adjacent buildings.
G. The provisions of this section shall apply to any basin or structure for the holding of water for swimming, diving, and other aquatic recreation, provided, however, that these regulations do not apply to any plastic, canvas, or rubber pools temporarily erected upon the ground holding less than three hundred (300) gallons of water.
8.26 RAZING OF BUILDINGS
No building, excluding farm structures, shall be razed until a permit has been obtained from the Zoning Official who shall be authorized to require a performance bond in any amount not to exceed one thousand ($1000) for each one thousand (1,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area of the building to be razed. Said bond shall be conditioned on the applicant completing the razing within such reasonable period as shall be prescribed in the permit and complying with such regulations as to health and safety as the Zoning Official or the Township Board may, from time to time prescribe, including filling of excavations and proper termination of utility connections.
8.27 REAR DWELLINGS
Union Township 8-14 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
No detached building on the same lot of a principal building shall be used as a dwelling with the exception of second living quarters as regulated in Section 30.4 and excluding groups of multiple-family dwellings as regulated in Planned Unit Developments.
8.28 REQUIRED SPACES OR AREAS
No lot shall be divided or reduced so as to make the required area or dimensions less than the minimum required by this Ordinance.
8.29 REQUIRED WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY SEWERAGE FACILITIES
After the effective date of this Ordinance, no structure for human occupancy shall be erected, altered, or moved upon any lot or premises and used in whole, or in part, for dwelling, business, industrial, or recreational purposes unless it shall be provided with a safe and potable water supply; and treatment and disposal of human excrete and other domestic, commercial, and industrial wastes. All such installations and facilities shall conform with the minimum requirements of the Central Michigan District Health Department and the Michigan Department of Public Health.
8.30 RESTORATION OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the Zoning Official, except that the provision of Section 9 must be complied with.
8.31 SCREENING PROVISIONS
All required screening shall meet the following provisions:
A. Screening shall not extend into or be located within any portion of an existing street right-of- way.
B. Existing plant materials, fences, or walls, meeting the requirements of this section, may be counted as contributing to the screening requirement. Screening shall be provided on each lot or parcel independent of adjoining uses or adjoining vegetative matter.
C. Plant materials other than ground cover (up to three (3) feet in height) shall not be placed closer than four (4) feet from the property line. Where plant materials are placed in two (2) or more rows, planting shall be staggered in rows.
D. The following table indicates the minimum height or minimum caliper for each plant unit Category, at the time of planting, as well as recommended plant materials for each category:
Plant Unit Category Minimum Size
Evergreen Trees 6 feet in height
Juniper
Fir
Spruce
Hemlock
Union Township 8-15 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
Pine
Douglas-Fir
Narrow Evergreens 4 feet in height
Column Hinoki Cypress
Blue Columnar Chinese Juniper
Pyramidal Red Cedar
Swiss Stone Pine
Pyramidal White Pine
Irish Yew
Columnar Giant Arbor-Vitae
Shrubs 4 feet in height
Honeysuckle
Mock-Orange
Lilac
Cottoneaster
Euonymus
Buckthorn
Viburnum
Forsythia
Ninebark
Hazelnut
Privet
Sumac
Small Trees 2 inch caliper
Flowering Crab
Mountain Ash
Redbud
Hornbeam
Magnolia
Russian Olive
Dogwood
Rose of Sharon
Hawthorn
Union Township 8-16 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
Deciduous Trees 2-1/2 inch caliper
Oak
Hackberry
Planetree (Sycamore)
Ginko (Male)
Sweetgum
Linden
Hard Maple, Red Maple
Birch
Beech
Honeylocust
Hop Hornbeam
All required plant units shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition. Any required plant units that are destroyed, removed, diseased, or that die, shall be replaced within six (6) months with plant units that meet the requirements of this section. Failure to maintain repaired plant units in such a manner, including the removal and replacement of dead or diseased plant materials, shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
F. The following trees are not permitted for new planting for required screening:
Box Elder
Soft Maples (Red-Silver)
Elms
Aspen
Cottonwood
Willows
Horse Chestnut (Nut Bearing)
Tree of Heaven
Catalpa
Female Ginko
G. The plantings shall be maintained in a neat and attractive manner commensurate with the adjoining areas and shall maintain their density and screening effect throughout the calendar year.
H. Walls or fences for screening purposes shall be at least five (5) feet in height, but in no case shall the fence or wall be lower than the installation, structure or activity to be screened, unless said installation, structure or activity exceeds eight (8) feet in height.
I. If required by the Planning Commission, additional screening shall be provided along walls or fences to protect adjacent property.
Union Township 8-17 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
J. All walls herein required shall be constructed of weather resistant, rust proof and easily maintained materials.
8.32 SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Septic tanks, drain fields, and similar buried water disposal facilities are permitted with the Central Michigan District Health Department approval where a public waste water collection system is not reasonably available. All other systems must be approved by the Planning Commission and the Central Michigan District Health Department.
8.325 SIDEWALKS
All new construction or additions requiring Site Plan Review per Section 12 of this ordinance shall provide sidewalks in accordance with the Charter Township of Union Township Sidewalk Ordinance. Where a change of use of a structure or property occurs, or substantial remodeling meeting Level 3 of the Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings section 405 as amended, said changes shall require a site plan be approved by the planning commission showing sidewalks. The planning commission shall have the power to amend or waive the standards of the Union Township Sidewalk Ordinance.
8.33 SITE CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS
Pursuant to the authority of Section 141 of the Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, all site condominium subdivisions shall meet the following requirements and procedures:
A. All site condominium subdivisions shall require site plan approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 12 of this Ordinance, the following information shall also be included for site plan review:
1. A condominium subdivision plan as required in Section 66 of the Condominium Act.
2. All information as required in the Union Township Subdivision Regulations, as amended.
3. Documented proof of review by the Isabella County Road Commission, Drain Commissioner, Health Department, Michigan Department of Transportation, and the Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
B. All site condominium subdivisions shall meet the requirements of the Zoning District in which it is located, including minimum lot size, minimum setbacks, and minimum floor area.
C. All site condominium subdivisions shall meet the Subdivision Design Standards and Subdivision Improvement Requirements of the Union Township Subdivision Regulations, as amended.
D. The Union Township Clerk shall be furnished with a copy of the recorded master deed, as defined in Section 8 of the Condominium Act. The master deed must ensure that Union Township will not be responsible for maintenance or liability of the nondedicated portions of the subdivision, that all private roads will be properly maintained, that snow removal will be provided, and that there is adequate access and turnaround for emergency vehicles. Responsibility for the maintenance of storm water retention areas, drainage easements, drainage structures, lawn cutting, and other general maintenance of common areas must be clearly stated.
Union Township 8-18 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
E. The Union Township Clerk shall be furnished with two (2) copies of all "as-built" drawings for review by the Township Engineer for compliance with all Township Ordinances prior to the issuance of any building permits. Fees for this review shall be established by the Township Board.
8.34 STATE-LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES
A. A state-licensed residential facility as defined and properly licensed by Act 218 of the Public Acts of 1979 and Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1973 as amended, which provides resident services for six (6) or less persons under twenty-four (24) hour supervision shall be permitted in all Agricultural and Residential Districts.
B. A State-licensed residential facility for seven (7) or more persons requires a special use permit in AG Districts and shall be in accordance with Acts listed in A., above.
8.35 SUBDIVISION RESTRICTIONS
Subdivision restrictions documented and filed with the Register of Deeds by the proprietor or subdivision committee that supersedes the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be enforced by that proprietor or committee.
8.36 SURFACE WATER
The construction of more than one (1) two-family dwelling shall have a site plan approved by the Planning Commission for removal of surface waters from roofs, parking lots, and all hard surfaced areas.
8.37 TRANSITION AREA (AMENDED, 1992-6 ORDINANCE)
The following transitional uses are permitted upon any property residentially zoned that has a side yard adjoining a B or I District or that is located directly across the street from a B or I District, except that on large parcels of land only the first one hundred fifty (150) feet extending continuously from a B or I District may be used.
A. Any special use permitted in the residential District and neighborhood businesses may be used, provided that the structure or building used has a residential appearance keeping in conformity with the character of the adjacent neighborhood and further, that a special use permit is obtained.
B. Off street parking in accordance with Section 10.
8.38 YARDS ALONG ZONE BOUNDARIES
A lot having a side yard line along any Zoning boundary line of a less restricted District shall have a side yard of the more restricted District.
8.385 YARD SALES (NEW ORD 2011-06)
Yard Sales shall be permitted provided the following conditions are met:
Sales shall not operate more three consecutive days, unless a national holiday falls on a Monday in which case sales may take place for four (4) consecutive days including the holiday Monday.
Union Township 8-19 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
All material and displays shall not be set out prior to the sale or remain after the evening of the last day of the sale.
Sales shall not occur more than 3 times per calendar year.
Sales are conducted entirely on the owner’s property. Multiple-family sales are permitted if they are held on the property of one of the participants.
No goods purchased for resale may be offered for sale.
Signs in accordance with Section 11.
No portion of the sale shall be located in the Road Right of Way or conducted in such a manner as to impede the flow of traffic and or access to other property in the vicinity.
A permit shall be obtained from the township prior to or during the course of the sale. The permit fee shall be established by the Board of Trustees in the Schedule of Fees.
8.39 USES NOT DESIGNATED(ADDITION, 1996-16 ORDINANCE)
Throughout this Ordinance, those uses not designated as being permitted are prohibited.
8.40 URBAN OVERLAY ZONE
A. This section is designed to protect current development from the impacts of future road widening, and maintain appropriate setbacks under certain conditions. Several local master planning documents have been relied upon to adjust setbacks along roadways designated by these plans for potential expansion of road widths and or rights-of-way (ROW). These plans are the Union Township Master Plan, The Mt. Pleasant Urban Area Traffic Master Plan of October 2000, and the Central Michigan University (CMU) Campus Master Plan of 2000.
B. The setbacks for structures shall be increased to 50 feet along the following roads, providing that the ROW width is 66 feet or less. Roadways with ROWs in excess of 66’ at the time of this ordinance are not included in this list. Portions of these roadways that increase the total ROW to 100 feet or more after the effective date of this ordinance shall be considered as removed from this list. If the ROW on one side of any roadway is increased to 50 feet or more, that side of the roadway shall be considered as removed from this list. Removal from this list under these circumstances shall be automatic, and effective at the time the ROW is increased, regardless of amendment to this list. Portions of the Incorporated areas of the township are not governed by this ordinance.
1. Lincoln Road from Pickard Road to Broomfield Road.
Union Township 8-20 General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
2. That portion of Bradley Street in the township from Remus Road north to the city boundary.
3. That portion of Crawford Road in the township from Millbrook Road to the city boundary.
4. Isabella Road; from the US 27 Overpass to its termination at Business 27.
5. Pickard Road from Lincoln Road to Bamber Road (Bradley Street).
6. Broadway Street Extension from the city boundary to Lincoln Road.
7. Broomfield Road from Lincoln Rd to the US 27 overpass.
8. Bluegrass Road from Isabella road to Mission Road
9. Deerfield Road from Meridian Road to Mission Road.
C. Non Conforming Structures:
1. Structures in existence at the effective date of this ordinance which do not conform to the additional requirements of this overlay zone, but do conform to the underlying setbacks of the zone they occupy, may enlarge the structures without a variance, providing the front yard is not decreased.
2. Proposed and existing structures not able to comply with these provisions may seek relief from these requirements by obtaining a variance from the Union Township Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with section 5, Board of Appeals.
Union Township 9-1 Non-conforming
Zoning Ordinance Uses
SECTION 9 NON-CONFORMING USES
9.1 CONTINUANCE OF EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USES
A non-conforming use of a premise or structure established prior to this Ordinance may be continued even though such use or structure does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance, provided that there is no increase or enlargement of the degree or manner of nonconformance. Utilization of existing lots that are nonconforming with dimensional requirements of the zoned District may be permitted, provided Section 5 is complied with.
9.2 CHANGE OF USE
A non-conforming use may be changed to a new non-conforming use if the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that the new use would markedly decrease the degree of nonconformance and would enhance the desirability of adjacent conforming uses. This shall not be construed to prohibit the conversion of non-conforming use to another use of the same basic character and intensity where no structural alterations are involved.
9.3 REPLACEMENT OF NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, RESIDENCE
Residence and accessory building may be replaced that has been destroyed by reason of windstorm, fire, explosion, or any act of God or the public enemy. All construction codes shall be complied with.
9.4 REPLACEMENT OF NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, BUSINESS
Business may be replaced that has been destroyed by reason of windstorm, fire, explosion, or any act of God or public enemy; providing they do not enlarge the scope and activities of the preexisting structure. All construction codes shall be complied with.
9.5 NON-CONFORMING USES DISCONTINUED
Where a non-conforming use is discontinued for a period of one (1) year any subsequent use shall conform to the provision of this Ordinance; provided that the Zoning Board of Appeals may permit a new non-conforming use of the structure or land if said new use represents a marked decrease in the degree of nonconformance, improves the character of the neighborhood, and is of decided benefit to adjacent conforming uses. The Board may impose such structural changes, building or side modifications, or other requirements it deems necessary to meet the above requirements.
9.6 RESTORATION AND REPAIRS
Repairs and restoration may be permitted for non-conforming structures provided they do not violate Sections 9.3 and 9.4 or any other section in this Ordinance.
9.7 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS
No non-conforming sign or billboard shall be reerected, reconstructed, rebuilt, relocated, or structurally modified unless made to conform with all provisions of this Ordinance. Painting, re-lettering, or a change that does not modify or change the size of the sign shall be permitted. Non-conforming signs shall meet the provisions of Section 11.
Union Township 9-2 Non-conforming
Zoning Ordinance Uses
9.8 PLANS ALREADY FILED
Any use for which a Zoning Permit has been issued prior to the effective date of any subsequent amendment to this Ordinance may be completed and used in accordance with the plans and specifications for which such permit was issued, subject to the conditions of this Section, if construction is commenced within sixty (60) days after the issuance of such permit and diligently pursued to completion.
9.9 UTILIZATION OF NONCONFORMING EXISTING LOTS
Utilization of an existing lot not conforming to area, width, or other provisions of this Ordinance may be permitted, provided a variance is obtained.
Union Township 10-1 Parking and
Zoning Ordinance Loading Spaces
SECTION 10 PARKING AND LOADING SPACES
10.1 GENERAL
In all Districts, there shall be provided, at the time any building is erected, or is enlarged or increased in capacity, off street parking spaces for automobiles.
10.2 NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
In all Districts in connection with every residential, business, industrial, institutional, recreational and similar uses, space for off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule.
A. Residential and Institutional Uses
1. One and Two Family Dwellings: Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit. (Ord 2006-05)
2. Condominiums: Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit (Ord 2006-05)
3. Apartments: 1.25 spaces for each bedroom. (Ord 2006-05)
4. Private Clubs and Lodges: One (1) for each five (5) active members and one (1) for each employee with a minimum of one (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
5. Hospitals, Institutions and Clinics: One (1) for each patient bed.
6. Convalescent or Nursing Homes: One (1) for each two (2) beds.
7. Private. Elementary and Junior High Schools: Two (2) for each three (3) employees normally engaged in or about the buildings and grounds, plus one (1) for each eight (8) auditorium seats.
8. Senior High Schools and Institutions of Higher Learning: Two (2) for each three (3) employees normally engaged in or about the buildings and grounds, and one (1) additional for each four (4) students enrolled in the institution.
9. Churches: One (1) for each four (4) seats or six (6) feet of pews in the main worship unit.
10. Libraries, Museums and Post Offices: One (1) for each hundred square feet of floor area.
B. Commercial Uses
1. Hotels: One (1) for each two (2) guest rooms.
2. Motels, Bed and Breakfast, and Tourist Homes: One (1) for each sleeping rooms.
3. Theaters, Auditoriums, Stadiums: One (1) for each four (4) seats.
4. Dance Halls, Studio, Skating Rink, Assembly Halls and Convention Halls, Community Centers, Civic or Social Clubs, and Public Meeting Halls: Two (2) for each hundred square feet of floor area open to the public.
5. Bowling Alleys: Eight (8) for each alley.
6. Restaurants and Night Clubs, Grills, Taverns, Bars, Dining Rooms, Dairy Bar, Soda Fountain: One (1) for each three (3) seats.
Union Township 10-2 Parking and
Zoning Ordinance Loading Spaces
7. Mortuaries or Funeral Homes: One (1) for each four (4) seats.
8. Drive-in" Establishments: Eight (8) for each one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet of gross floor area.
9. Retail Stores, Super Markets, Department Stores, Billiard or Pool Rooms, Personal Service Shops, General Business: one (1) for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area.
10. Barber/Beauty Parlor: Two (2) per each chair.
11. Auto Sales Rooms: One (1) per each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of usable floor area, plus one (1) per service stall.
12. Auto Wash Establishment (Automatic): One (1) per employee plus five (5) additional spaces. (Ord 2001-04) There will be one (1) stacking space per ten (10) lineal feet of washing structure measured in the direction of travel.
13. Auto Wash Establishment (Self-Service): Three (3) per washing stall.
14. Instant Oil Change: One (1) per employee plus one (1) per service stall.
15. Filling Stations: One (1) per employee plus two (2) per service stall.
16. The following retail uses: general furniture, appliance, household equipment, floor covering, hardware, paint and wallpaper, lumber yards and home improvements: one parking space per 500 gross square feet of building area.
17. Large chain stores which draw customers from outside the community, such as Walmart, Meijers, or Home Depot: one parking space per 250 gross square feet of building area.
C. Office Buildings
1. Profession and Business Offices and Buildings: One (1) for each two hundred (200) square feet of usable floor area.
2. Medical Doctor's Offices or Dental Clinics: Eight (8) spaces for each Doctor.
3. Bank and Loan Companies: One (1) for each hundred (100) square feet of usable floor area.
D. Manufacturing, Processing and/or Fabricating, Manufacturing Buildings and/or Business Offices and/or Other Facilities Related But Not Necessarily Connected to a Manufacturing or Industrial Building: One (1) for each three (3) employees on the maximum shift or peak employment period.
E. Other Uses Not Specifically Mentioned: In the case of buildings that are used for uses not specifically mentioned, those provisions for off street parking facilities for a use that is so mentioned and to which said use is similar in terms of parking demand shall apply.
F. Mixed Uses in the Same Building: In the case of mixed uses in the same building, the amount of parking space for each use specified shall be provided and the space for one (1) use shall not be considered as providing required spaces for any other use except as to churches and auditoriums incidental to public and parochial schools permitted herein.
Union Township 10-3 Parking and
Zoning Ordinance Loading Spaces
10.3 JOINT USE OF FACILITIES
Provisions of common parking facilities for several uses in the same vicinity is encouraged. In such cases, the total space requirement is the sum of the individual requirements at the same time of day.
10.4 LOCATION OF FACILITIES
Off street parking facilities shall be located as hereafter specified; when a distance is specified, it shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to nearest normal entrance to the building or use that such facility is require to serve. Property owners shall be responsible to have at all times maintained the minimum standards herein set forth.
A. For all residential buildings and for all nonresidential buildings and uses in residential zones, required parking shall be provided on the premises with the building or use they are required to serve.
B. For commercial and all nonresidential buildings and uses in business zones, required parking shall be provided within three hundred (300) feet of the building or use they are require to serve.
C. For industrial buildings or uses, required parking shall be provided within one thousand (1,000) feet of the buildings or uses they are required to serve.
10.5 SIZE OF PARKING SPACE
Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width.
10.6 REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING AREAS (B, AMENDED, 1992-6 ORDINANCE)
Every parcel of land hereafter established as an off street public or private parking area for more than five (5) vehicles, including a municipal parking lot, commercial parking lot, automotive sales and/or service lot, and accessory parking areas for multiple dwellings, businesses, industries, public assembly and institutions shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements.
A. All parking areas in business or industrial Districts and special uses allowed where required, shall be effectively screened from any residentially zoned property. Screening may be by solid fence, wall, shrubs, hedges or natural landscaping, as required in Section 8.31 and as approved by the Planning Commission.
B. It shall be properly graded for drainage, surfaced with a material that shall provide a durable, smooth and dustless surface. Customer parking areas shall be paved.
C. It shall not be used for repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles.
D. It shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic congestions.
E. It shall be provided with wheel or bumper guards so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the parking area.
F. Lighting facilities shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining properties.
Union Township 10-4 Parking and
Zoning Ordinance Loading Spaces
G. No part of any public or private parking area regardless of the number of spaces provided shall be closer than five (5) feet to the public street or highway right-of way line.
Union Township 10-5 Parking and
Zoning Ordinance Loading Spaces
10.7 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
For every building or addition to an existing building hereafter erected to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, display or goods, retail store or block of stores, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other similar uses requiring the receipt or distribution in vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same premises with such building or addition off street loading spaces in relation to floor areas as follows, plus an area or means adequate for maneuvering, ingress or egress.
A. Up to 20,000 Square Feet: 1 space.
B. 20,000 to 50,000 Square Feet: 2 spaces
C. 50,000 to 100,000 Square Feet: 3 spaces.
D. One (1) additional space for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or fraction thereof.
E. Each such loading space shall be at least ten (10) feet in width, thirty-five (35) feet in length, fourteen (14) feet in height. No such space shall be located than fifty (50) feet to any to in any residence District.
Union Township 11-1 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
SECTION 11 /BILLBOARDS AND SIGNS
(Amended Ordinances 1996-8, 1998-3)
11.1 GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS
A. All signs erected, altered, or maintained in the Township shall conform to the building code of the Charter Township of Union and to provisions of this ordinance, whichever imposes the greater restrictions.
B. Signs in all districts permitted only if they:
Identify the business conducted on the property; or
Identify a product sold by the business conducted on the property; or;
Identify a service of the business conducted on the property; or
Identify a product made by the business conducted on the property; or
Identify the name, address, and telephone number of the occupant of the premises; and
Do not extend into or over, private or public right-of-ways or restrict sight lines on public right-of-ways.
C. Illuminated signs shall be permitted in agricultural over ten (10) acres, Business Districts, and Industrial Districts. Exception: Church, Public and Institutional signage in all Districts may be illuminated.
11.2 SIGNAGE DISPLAY AREA COMPUTATION
A. Sign Area Computation
1. The area of a sign regulated herein shall be the total computed area of the extreme limits upon which lettering, logo, symbols, insignia or other devices are placed, directly painted or applied.
2. Multiple Faces
a. For signs having two (2) parallel sides not separated by more than twelve (12) inches, the maximum display area shall be permitted on both sides, and the total area of one side shall be deemed to be the total sign area.
b. For signs having three (3) or four (4) faces (triangular or cubic), the area shall be the sum of two adjacent faces.
3. The supporting structures shall not be included in the area computation unless utilized as part of the total signage display area.
4. Buildings on a corner lot shall be considered to have two (2) front faces. An additional fifty (50%) percent of the attached address frontage wall sign allotment shall be permitted for the non-address side of the building. Signage allotments are not transferable.
Union Township 11-2 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
5. Any building or portion of a building which is proposed to be erected and which is classified as a sign shall be permitted only upon application for approval of a special exception. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether or not such proposed building or portion thereof will be classified as a sign prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall notify the owner or builder of the proposed building of such findings. Any decoration which implies the business name shall be considered part of the business insignia. In making his or her determination, the Administrator may refer such plans and details to the Planning Commission for recommendation.
B. Building Frontage and Height Computation
1. The width, height, or length of a building, whichever is greater, shall be used to determine the signage allowed for the building.
2. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower.
3. A business parcel located completely within five hundred (500) feet of the nearest edge of the intersection of an expressway and local street (not including ramps) shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed fifteen (15) feet above the highest point of the expressway roadbed at the intersection.
11.3 MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL
A. Maintenance
1. Maintenance. Every sign, including those specifically exempt from this section with respect to permits and permit fees, shall be maintained in a good structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not galvanized or of rust resistant metals. The Zoning Administrator or his/her authorized representative shall inspect and may order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which constitutes a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence. A permit is not required for normal maintenance and repair of a sign structure, such as painting, repainting and cleaning.
2. Continued Maintenance. The replacing or repairing of a sign or sign structure which has been damaged to an extent less than fifty (50%) percent of the appraised replacement cost, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall be considered as maintenance. Only when such sign conforms to all applicable provisions of the Ordinance and when damage exceeding fifty (50%) percent of the appraised replacement cost, has been caused by an act of God or a violent accident the owner/lessee of the sign or property owner shall be permitted to repair said sign.
B. Removal
Union Township 11-3 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
A sign in violation of one (1) or more of the following conditions shall be removed by the owner/lessee of the sign or property owner, at their expense, as specified by these conditions:
1. Safety. A sign which endangers public/private property or public safety shall be altered or removed.
2. Maintenance. Any sign maintained in violation of this section shall be removed.
3. Obsolete Signs. A sign shall be removed when the business which it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises.
4. Abandoned Signs. Abandoned non-conforming signs shall be removed. A new sign permit at the same address shall not be issued until the abandoned non-conforming sign is removed. Where a new business fails to remove signs from the premises, the property owner shall be responsible for their removal.
5. Non-conforming Signs. Non-conforming signs in use on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be permitted to remain, provided they are properly maintained. Such maintenance is restricted to painting and minor repairs that cannot be considered a rebuilding of the sign. Refer to Section 11.4A, Non-conforming Signs.
11.4 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS
A. Legal Non-conforming Signs - Continuation of. A legal non-conforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition by painting and minor repairs, but it shall not be:
1. Converted to another non-conforming sign by changing permanent copy;
2. Expanded or altered so as to increase the degree of non-conformity of the sign;
3. Re-established after the business, or usage to which it refers to has been discontinued.
4. Continued in use after cessation or change of the business or activity to which the sign pertains;
5. Re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the appraised replacement cost, as determined by the Zoning Administrator; or
6. Continued if the seller of said property, or business/franchise lessee does not retain fifty (50%) percent or more of the title to said property.
B. Legal Non-conforming Signs - Erection of New Signs Where Legal Non-conforming Signs Exist:
On lots where an existing on-premises sign exceeds the sign area allowed by this section, and in that respect is a legal non-conforming sign, no new on-premises sign, either freestanding or attached to a building, shall be erected until such existing legal non-conforming on-premises sign is brought into compliance with this section.
11.5 RIGHTS OF APPEAL
A. Rights of Appeal:
Special circumstances or conditions for sign variances may be petitioned to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Union Township 11-4 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
B. Variance to Standards Which May Cause Denial of a Variance Request:
1. Convenience or economic hardship to the applicant;
2. Inclusion of signs otherwise prohibited by these regulations;
3. Lack of exposure on a primary sign frontage;
4. Limitations on visibility resulting from required landscaping;
5. Location of buildings or other structures;
6. Size of a proposed sign.
11.6 PROHIBITED SIGNS
The following types of signs are specifically prohibited:
A. Signs that obstruct the vision clearance area of a street or driveway intersection and result in a traffic hazard;
B. Signs that obstruct ingress or egress through any door, window, fire escape, or like facility, required or designated for safety or emergency use;
C. Signs that may be confused with public traffic signs or highway identification signs, such as signs that use words like “STOP”, “SLOW”, “CAUTION”, “LOOK”, “DANGER”, or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character that may mislead or confuse vehicle operators;
D. Signs or sign structures determined by the Building Official or Zoning Administrator to constitute a hazard to the public safety or health by reason of poor structural design or construction, inadequate maintenance, lack of repair, or dilapidation or obsolete and abandoned signs;
E. Illuminated flashing signs which flash, blink, fluctuate, or have chaser, or scintillating ability.
F. Strings of light bulbs used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes, other than in season traditional holiday decorations;
G. Signs that are moving or have any moving part. This includes movement in mechanical, electrical, or kinetic means, wind currents or any other means except a Message Center;
H. Roof Signs;
I. Signs with visible A-frames, trusses, or guide wires as part of the sign or sign structure;
J. Billboard Trailer signs not attached to a licensed and insured motorized vehicle carrying the logo or name of the primary business.
K. Signs placed on, affixed to, or painted on any motor vehicle, trailer, or other mobile structure not registered, licensed, and insured for use on public highways;
Union Township 11-5 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
L. Illuminated signs in the Agricultural Districts under ten (10) acres, and Residential Districts;
M. Signs on fences, trees, rocks or utility poles.
Union Township 11-6 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
11.7 SIGN REGULATIONS - REFER TO EACH DISTRICT CHART FOR AREA, HEIGHT AND SETBACK REGULATIONS.
No person shall erect, install, maintain, alter, repair, remove, or use (or cause or allow the same to be done) any sign unless specifically authorized by these regulations. No permit shall be issued for the erection, display, or maintenance of any sign in violation of these regulations.
A. Permanent Signage Types - Permit Required
1. Awning/Canopy Sign:
a. Except for suspended signs, all signs displayed on canopies or awnings shall be parallel to the face of the canopy or awning upon which subject signs are displayed.
b. Signage printed on the awning/canopy shall be included in the total square feet of allowed wall signage.
2. Billboards:
a. Billboards shall only be permitted in I-1 Light Industrial Districts and I-2 General Industrial Districts.
b. No billboard shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any lot line in any R District.
c. No billboard shall be constructed or erected on a lot so as to obstruct the view of adjacent buildings or signs.
d. All billboards shall conform to any applicable building front, side, or rear yard setback requirement of the District in which they are located, except that, at the intersection of any state or federal highway, with a major or minor street there shall be a setback of not less than one hundred (100) feet from the established right-of-way of each such highway or street.
e. Maximum height of billboards in all Districts shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
f. Minimum spacing between billboards shall be one thousand (1,000) linear feet.
g. Maximum billboard size shall be three hundred (300) square feet in area.
h. A billboard shall not be placed on any lot that does not have a minimum lot width of five hundred (500) feet.
3. Freestanding (Elevated/Ground):
a. Freestanding signs are permitted in all districts.
b. Freestanding signs located on property which abuts both a controlled access highway or a major street and a state or federal numbered highway may not be erected where the total height of said sign is greater than sixteen (16) feet above the plane of the pavement of the highest road at the intersection.
c. Only one (1) freestanding, elevated or ground, shall be permitted per lot/parcel or integrated business regardless of the total number of individual lots/parcels or multiple users sharing the business parcel. The sign shall provide for shared or common usage.
Union Township 11-7 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
d. Tenant listings on the freestanding integrated sign shall be uniform in size and type. Style of lettering may vary.
4. Marquee Sign:
a. Marquee signs are prohibited except when used in conjunction with an indoor movie theater.
b. No sign shall project beyond the corner of a building.
5. Message Center Sign/Time-Temperature-Date-Moving Signage:
a. Any identification or advertising which is attached to or made part of a Time-Temperature-Date-Message Center sign structure shall be included in the allowable sign area for the premises.
b. Illumination shall be by internal means only.
6. Sub-division / Apartment / Condominium Identification:
a. Sub-divisions, apartment complexes and condominiums, shall be permitted one (1) freestanding ground/elevated sign.
b. Computation of square feet shall be based on the signage and not the decorative structure.
7. Suspended Signs:
a. Suspended sign shall not project over sidewalk, public or private right-of-way.
b. Suspended signs shall not project beyond the outside limits of the permanent sign structure to which they are attached.
c. Shall be included in the total signage allotment.
8. Wall, Wall Projected and Projected Signs: Wall signs shall be permitted only on the front address side of the building except:
a. Where a building is located on a corner lot, the building is considered to have two (2) building fronts. An additional fifty (50%) percent of the attached front address wall sign allotment shall be permitted for the non-address side of the building. The allotments are not transferable.
b. Where a public entrance to a business establishment is also provided at the rear or side, from an adjoining off street parking lot, one (1) additional attached wall sign shall be permitted. The additional signage shall be included in the total allowable square feet permitted for attached wall and projected wall signage for the front address side.
Union Township 11-8 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
9. Service and Religious Organizations Signs (Ord 2002-07)
a. Signs enumerating local service clubs, fraternal and veterans’ organizations and religious organizations by name or logo and address only shall be permitted in any B or I zone.
b. Maximum sign area shall be 100 square feet and not more than 10 feet over all height, excluding supporting structures.
c. Any service club or religious organization may apply for this sign. The applicant shall notify, in writing, any and all service clubs and religious organizations within the area bounded by Union Township, including any incorporated areas, to extend the opportunity to have their name and or logo placed upon the sign. After 60 days of such notification, the applicant shall provide the zoning administrator with a drawing of the proposed sign and a copy of the names and addresses of all organizations notified.
d. The sign may be composed of individual elements provided by each organization. Lettering shall be uniform.
e. Space should be set aside for future organizations.
f. No slogans, mottos, or products shall be placed on the sign.
g. The agency applying for the sign must be responsible for maintenance of the sign, allowing future organizations space on the sign, and administration of any leases and or fees.
B. Permanent Signs - No Permit Required - Identification and Informational Signs:
1. All categories of identification and informational signs shall be permitted as accessory signs and are not included in any computation of the sign area.
2. Directional Vehicular/Pedestrian Signs - Both Public and Private:
a. Directional signs may be used to provide direction regarding the location of parking areas, access drives, loading, unloading and/or receiving areas and specific buildings or facilities.
b. Horizontal signs on and flush with paved areas are exempt from these standards.
3. Identification Signs:
a. Sign may establish the identity of a building or building complex by name and/or symbol only;
b. Sign may indicate street address or combine name plate and street address.
c. One sign per building, business, occupant.
Union Township 11-9 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
C. Temporary Sign Types - Permit Required
1. Temporary (permit required) signage shall:
a. Comply to all regulations of permanent signage;
b. Have a maximum of two (2) permits issued in each calendar year, three (3) days must elapse between each permit;
c. Be used in conjunction with a bona fide grand opening, new owner, or special event;
d. Be stored in a building or concealed from public view at the rear of the property;
e. Have no time extensions.
2. A-Frame/Sandwich Board, Banner, Trailer, Cart and Wind Sign: A-frame/sandwich board, banner, trailer, cart with or without wheels, and wind sign permits shall not exceed thirty (30) days.
3. Air/Gas Filled Inflatable and Beacon/Search Sign: shall be permitted for a maximum of two (2) times per year and for a maximum of three (3) consecutive days. Thirty (30) days shall elapse between the two (2) permits.
D. Temporary Signage Types - No Permit Required
1. Commodities - Off Premise: Advertising of home produced agricultural products in an agricultural or residential districts shall be permitted:
a. Maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days per calendar year.
b. A maximum of four (4) square feet per sign.
c. Maximum number of signs permitted per parcel shall be two (2).
2. Construction:
a. Construction signs which identify the architects, engineers, contractors, or other individuals or firms involved with the construction of a building or facility, but exclude any advertisement of any product or purpose for which the building is intended.
b. Signs shall be limited to twelve (12) months.
c. Signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the initial occupancy.
d. The sign shall be confined to the site of the construction.
e. The maximum size of a sign shall be sixteen (16) square feet per individual firm, or thirty-two (32) square feet when listing two (2) or more firms.
3. Construction Development Identification:
a. Signs advertising residential or commercial development of six (6) or more units may display recorded plat information.
b. Such signs shall be removed at the time seventy-five (75%) percent of the lots in the development are sold or leased.
Union Township 11-10 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
4. Garage - Yard Sale Sign: Signs may be placed twenty-four (24) hours prior to the sale and must be removed twenty-four (24) hours after the sale. Sign usage shall be limited to four (4) time per year with a limit of four (4) days per usage.
5. Model Home: Shall be permitted in AG and R Districts.
6. New Business/Owner or Grand Opening: Shall be permitted a maximum of thirty (30) days.
7. Political:
a. Political signs may be placed only with the permission of the property owner or occupier.
b. A political sign may be erected no sooner than sixty (60) days before said election.
Removal: (Amended, Ord 2002-03)
Signs shall be removed seven (7) days following such referendum or election.
Candidates remaining in a November general election following an August primary election in the same year are not required to remove signs until seven (7) days after the general election.
d. Candidate/property owner is responsible for the removal of sign.
8. Real Estate - Rental/Lease:
a. One (1) non-illuminated sign shall be permitted per lot or premises, and two (2) non-illuminated signs shall be permitted on a corner lot.
b. Signs shall be removed fourteen (14) days after the completion of the sale/lease agreement or occupancy.
9. Window Signs:
a. A sign inside a window shall not exceed ten (10%) percent of the total window area on address side only.
b. Window signs are permitted on the ground floor window address side only.
E. Exceptions to Permit Requirements: The following signs or operations shall be exempt from regulation under this Ordinance:
1. Copy changing or replacing of the advertising copy or message of conforming signs.
2. Maintenance of signs, including repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance repair which does not include structural changes.
3. Flags of official nations, state or local governments may be flown and maintained with respect due to these symbols of honor and authority, as specified by the U.S. Flag Code. The American Flag shall not be used for advertising purposes in any manner.
Union Township 11-11 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
11.8 SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT OVER 10 ACRES
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS:
1. Total maximum sign area not to exceed twelve (12) square feet of permanent signage - permit only. (See chart).
2. Total number of signs permitted for address side of permanent signage - permit only - Two (2): Wall- One (1) Freestanding - One (1).
3. Side Setback - minimum 30’; Front Setback - minimum of 10’ to the road right-of-way.
4. Illumination: direct and internal permitted.
5. Additional signs permitted: Identification- one (1) per building, Courtesy and Directional - aggregate signs not to exceed twelve (12) square feet. Public Agency, No Trespassing/Hunting, Garage/Yard Sale no limit.
6. Sign area exceptions: Building on a corner lot shall be considered to have two (2) front faces. An additional fifty (50%) of the attached address frontage wall sign allotment shall be permitted for the non-address side of the building. Sign allotment is not transferable.
Union Township 11-12 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
CHART 11.8a - SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT OVER TEN (10) ACRES
PERMANENT SIGNAGE PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT
(LINEAR FT.)
MAX.
PROJECTION
(INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT
(LINEAR FT.)
ATTACHED WALL
8
?
3
N/R
PROJECTED WALL
AWNING/CANOPY
MARQUEE
SUSPENDED
4
?
8
SUBDIVISION / APARTMENTS / CONDOMINIUM I.D.
12
6
3
N/R
FREESTANDING ELEVATED
* 12
6
3
N/R
FREESTANDING GROUND
* 12
6
3
Ground
MESSAGE CENTER
BILLBOARD
PERMANENT SIGNAGE NO PERMIT
IDENTIFICATION/INFORMAL SIGNAGE
COURTESY
2
6
3
N/R
DIRECTIONAL
2
6
3
N/R
IDENTIFICATION
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC AGENCY
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC INTEREST
4
6
3
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
* = churches, institutional, and public buildings are permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area nor more than six (6) feet in height, and not more than (2) wall signs, the sum of which is not to exceed 50 SF. Religious symbols are exempt.
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 11-13 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
Chart 11.8b SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT OVER TEN (10) ACRES
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE
PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT
(LINEAR FT.)
MAXIMUM PROJECTION (INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
A-FRAME SANDWICH BOARD
6
4
N/R
AIR/GAS INFLATABLE
BANNER
40
WALL HEIGHT
N/R
N/R
BEACON/SEARCH
TRAILERS/CART W/WO WHEELS
32
4
3
N/R
WIND SIGNS - PERMITTED
40
15
N/R
N/R
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE - NO PERMIT
COMMODITY PREMISES GROWN
16
6
N/R
N/R
CONSTRUCTION
16
6
N/R
N/R
CONSTRUCTION DEVELOP. I.D.
GARAGE/YARD SALE
2
6
N/R
N/R
GRAND OPENING
16
6
N/R
N/R
MODEL HOME
16
6
N/R
N/R
NEW BUSINESS/OWNER
16
6
N/R
N/R
NO TRESPASSING/HUNTING
2
6
N/R
N/R
POLITICAL
16
6
N/R
N/R
REAL ESTATE
16
6
N/R
N/R
RENTAL/LEASE
16
6
N/R
N/R
WINDOW SIGNS
10% of Address Window
Window
N/R
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
* = churches, institutional, and public buildings are permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area nor more than six (6) feet in height, and not more than (2) wall signs, the sum of which is not to exceed 50 SF. Religious symbols are exempt. (Ord. 2005-01)
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 11-14 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
11.9 SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT UNDER TEN (10) ACRES
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS:
1. Total maximum sign area not to exceed 8 square feet of permanent signage - permit only. (See preceding charts).
2. Total number of signs permitted for address side of permanent signage-permit only - Two (2): wall- one (1) freestanding- one (1).
3. Side setback - minimum 30’, front setback - minimum of 10’ to the road right-of-way.
4. Illumination: NOT PERMITTED except for Churches, Public and Institutional uses.
5. Additional signs permitted: Identification- one (1) per building, Courtesy and Directional - aggregate signs not to exceed twelve (12) square feet. Public Agency, No Trespassing/Hunting, Garage/Yard Sale no limit.
6. Sign area exceptions: Building on corner lots shall be considered to have two (2) front faces. An additional fifty (50%) percent of the attached address frontage wall sign allotment shall be permitted for the non-address side of the building. Sign allotment is not transferable.
Union Township 11-15 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
Chart 11.9a SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT UNDER TEN (10) ACRES
PERMANENT SIGNAGE
PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT
(LINEAR FT.)
MAXIMUM
PROJECTION
(INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
ATTACHED WALL
4
?
3
N/R
PROJECTED WALL
PROJECTED
AWNING/CANOPY
MARQUEE
SUSPENDED
SUBDIVISION / APARTMENTS / CONDOMINIUM I.D.
12
6
3
N/R
FREESTANDING ELEVATED
* 4
4
3
N/R
FREESTANDING GROUND
* 4
4
3
Ground
MESSAGE CENTER
BILLBOARD
PERMANENT SIGNAGE NO PERMIT
IDENTIFICATION/INFORMAL SIGNAGE
COURTESY
2
6
3
N/R
DIRECTIONAL
2
6
3
N/R
IDENTIFICATION
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC AGENCY
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC INTEREST
4
6
3
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
* = churches, institutional, and public buildings are permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area nor more than six (6) feet in height, and not more than (2) wall signs, the sum of which is not to exceed 50 SF. Religious symbols are exempt. (Ord. 2005-01)
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 11-16 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
11.9b SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT UNDER TEN (10) ACRES
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
MAX. PROJECTION (INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
A-FRAME SANDWICH BOARD
6 PER SIDE
4
N/R
AIR/GAS INFLATABLE
BANNER
BEACON/SEARCH
TRAILERS/CART W/WO WHEELS
WIND SIGNS
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE - NO PERMIT
COMMODITY PREMISES GROWN
8
6
N/R
N/R
CONSTRUCTION
8
6
N/R
N/R
CONSTRUCTION DEVELOP. I.D.
GARAGE/YARD SALE
2
6
N/R
N/R
GRAND OPENING
8
6
N/R
N/R
MODEL HOME
8
6
N/R
N/R
NEW BUSINESS/OWNER
8
6
N/R
N/R
NO TRESPASSING/HUNTING
2
6
N/R
N/R
POLITICAL
8
6
N/R
N/R
REAL ESTATE
8
6
N/R
N/R
RENTAL/LEASE
8
6
N/R
N/R
WINDOW SIGNS
10% of Address Window
Window
N/R
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
* = churches, institutional, and public buildings are permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area nor more than six (6) feet in height, and not more than (2) wall signs, the sum of which is not to exceed 50 SF. Religious symbols are exempt. (Ord. 2005-01)
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 11-17 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
11.10 SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - ALL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
R-1 One Family R-3 Multiple Family
R-2A One and Two Family Low Density R-4 Mobile Home Park
R-2B One and Two Family Medium Density R-5 Mobile or Modular Home
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS:
1. Total maximum sign area not to exceed twelve (12) square feet of permanent signage - permit only. (See chart).
2. Total number of signs permitted for address side of permanent signage - permit only - one (1): wall one (1) or freestanding one (1).
3. Side setback - minimum 30, front setback - minimum of 10’ to the road right-of-way.
4. Illumination: Not permitted except for Churches, Public and Institutional uses.
5. Additional signs permitted: Identification- one (1) per building, Courtesy and Directional - aggregate signs not to exceed twelve (12) square feet. Public Agency, No Trespassing/Hunting, Garage/Yard Sale no limit.
6. Sign Area Exceptions:
Buildings on a corner lot shall be considered to have two (2) front faces. An additional fifty (50%) percent of the attached address frontage wall sign allotment shall be permitted for the non-address side of the building.
In R-3 Districts (apartment complexes) the identification signage, per building, shall be limited to four (4) square foot of signage per building.
Churches, Public and Institutional use are permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed 24 square feet.
Union Township 11-18 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
Chart 11.10a SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - RESIDENTIAL
PERMANENT SIGNAGE PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN
( SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
MAXIMUM PROJECTION (INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
ATTACHED WALL
2
?
3
N/R
PROJECTED WALL
PROJECTED
AWNING/CANOPY
MARQUEE
SUSPENDED
SUBDIVISION / APARTMENTS / CONDOMINIUM I.D.
12
6
3
N/R
FREESTANDING ELEVATED
* 2
4
3
N/R
FREESTANDING GROUND
* 2
4
3
Ground
MESSAGE CENTER
BILLBOARD
PERMANENT SIGNAGE NO PERMIT
IDENTIFICATION/INFORMAL SIGNAGE
COURTESY
•2
6
3
N/R
DIRECTIONAL
2
6
3
N/R
IDENTIFICATION
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC AGENCY
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC INTEREST
4
6
3
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
* = churches, institutional, and public buildings are permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area nor more than six (6) feet in height, and not more than (2) wall signs, the sum of which is not to exceed 50 SF. Religious symbols are exempt. (Ord. 2005-01).
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
• = R3 apartments are permitted 4 square feet of Identification signage per building
Union Township 11-19 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
Chart 11.10b SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - RESIDENTIAL
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
MAXIMUM PROJECTION (INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
A-FRAME SANDWICH BOARD
AIR/GAS INFLATABLE
BANNER
BEACON/SEARCH
TRAILERS/CART W/WO WHEELS
WIND SIGNS - PERMITTED
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE - NO PERMIT
COMMODITY PREMISES GROWN
CONSTRUCTION
8
6
N/R
N/R
CONSTRUCTION DEVELOP. I.D.
32
8
N/R
N/R
GARAGE/YARD SALE
2
4
N/R
N/R
GRAND OPENING
8
4
N/R
N/R
MODEL HOME
4
4
N/R
N/R
NEW BUSINESS/OWNER
NO TRESPASSING/HUNTING
2
4
N/R
N/R
POLITICAL
8
4
N/R
N/R
REAL ESTATE
8
4
N/R
N/R
RENTAL/LEASE
8
4
N/R
N/R
WINDOW SIGNS
10% of Address Window
Window
N/R
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
* = churches, institutional, and public buildings are permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area nor more than six (6) feet in height, and not more than (2) wall signs, the sum of which is not to exceed 50 SF. Religious symbols are exempt. (Ord. 2005-01)
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 11-20 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
11.11 SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - BUSINESS DISTRICTS
B-4 General Business B-6 Auto Related Highway Business
B-5 Highway Business B-7 Related and Service Highway Business
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS:
A. Total maximum sign area not to exceed 200 square feet permanent signage - permit only. (See chart).
B. Total number of signs permitted for address wall of permanent signage - permit only -Three (3):
Wall - Two (2)
Freestanding - One (1).
C. Side Setback - minimum 20’; Front Setback - minimum of 10’ to road right-of-way.
D. Illumination: direct and internal permitted.
E. Additional signs permitted: Identification- one (1) per building, Courtesy and Directional - aggregate signs not to exceed twelve (12) square feet. Public Agency, No Trespassing/Hunting, Garage/Yard Sale no limit.
F. Sign area exceptions:
1. Building on a corner lot shall be considered to have two (2) front faces. An additional fifty (50%) of the attached address frontage wall sign allotment shall be permitted for the non-address side of the building. Sign allotment is not transferable.
2. Where a public entrance to the business establishment is also provided at the rear or side of the building from an adjoining off street parking area, one (1) additional attached wall sign will be permitted. The additional signage shall be included in the total allowable square feet for attached wall signs for the frontage address side.
3. Sign allotments, in SINGLE BUSINESS located on one (1) parcel
a. Single Business - Wall Signage: Wall signage is permitted at the rate of one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building width, length, or height, which ever is greater on the address side. Total signage not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
b. Single Business - Freestanding Signage
1. Freestanding signage is permitted at the rate of one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage on address side, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
2. Building with forty (40) lineal feet or less of front footage, address side, are permitted a maximum of forty (40) square feet.
Union Township 11-21 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
c. Buildings over 100,000 square feet are allowed 150 square feet of freestanding signage, and one (1) or two (2) wall signs not to exceed 200 square feet total.
4 Sign Allotment - (In Integrated Groups of Stores/Businesses).
a. Integrated Groups - Wall Signage: Wall signage is permitted at the rate of one (1) square foot of signage for each lineal foot of building frontage, depth or height, whichever is greater each user occupies on the address side. Signage not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
b. Integrated Groups - Freestanding
1. Freestanding signage is permitted at the rate of one (1) square foot of signage for each lineal foot of the TOTAL building frontage, on the address side, not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
2. Maximum permitted height 18 feet.
5. Gasoline Filling Station - Signage -
a. Wall/Canopy Signage
1. Wall/Canopy Signage permitted at the rate of one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage, on the address side, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet.
2. Total number of signs permitted shall not exceed 6 signs or emblems.
b. Freestanding Signage:
1. Freestanding signage is permitted at the rate of one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage on address side, not to exceed one hundred (100) square foot.
2. Signage permitted shall include the changeable copy signs.
Freestanding Elevated Height Exceptions: A business building located totally within five hundred (500) feet of the nearest edge of the intersection of an expressway and local street (not including ramps) shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed sixteen (16) feet above the highest point of the expressway roadbed at the intersection.
Where a ground sign is installed in lieu of an elevated sign, the applicant shall be entitled to an additional 32 SF of signage as follows (Ord 2002-03):
a. One additional wall sign up to 32 SF.
b. 32 SF may be distributed among any or all permitted permanent wall signs, no wall sign shall exceed 82 SF.
c. Total aggregate for permanent signs as allowed in 11.11.A may be increased to 232 SF.
Union Township 11-22 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
Chart 11.11a SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - BUSINESS
PERMANENT SIGNAGE
PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
MAXIMUM PROJECTION (INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
ATTACHED WALL
50
?
3
N/R
PROJECTED WALL
50
?
15
8
PROJECTED
50
?
48
8
AWNING/CANOPY
25
?
48
8
MARQUEE (BOTH SIDES)
12
?
48
8
SUSPENDED
15
?
N/R
8
SUBDIVISION / APARTMENTS / CONDOMINIUM I.D.
FREESTANDING ELEVATED
100
16
3
N/R
FREESTANDING GROUND
100
6
3
Ground
MESSAGE CENTER
100
18
3
N/R
BILLBOARD
PERMANENT SIGNAGE NO PERMIT
IDENTIFICATION/INFORMAL SIGNAGE
COURTESY
4
6
3
N/R
DIRECTIONAL
4
6
3
N/R
IDENTIFICATION
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC AGENCY
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC INTEREST
4
6
3
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 11-23 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
Chart 11.11b SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - BUSINESS
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE
PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
MAX. PROJECTION (INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
A-FRAME SANDWICH BOARD
6
4
N/R
N/R
AIR/GAS INFLATABLE
BANNER
40
WALL HEIGHT
N/R
8
BEACON/SEARCH (PERMITTED)
N/R
10
N/R
N/R
TRAILERS/CART W/WO WHEELS
32
4
3
N/R
WIND SIGNS
40
15
N/R
N/R
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE - NO PERMIT
COMMODITY PREMISES GROWN
CONSTRUCTION
16
6
N/R
N/R
CONSTRUCTION DEVELOP. I.D.
32
8
N/R
N/R
GARAGE/YARD SALE
4
6
N/R
N/R
GRAND OPENING
16
6
N/R
N/R
MODEL HOME
NEW BUSINESS/OWNER
16
6
N/R
N/R
NO TRESPASSING/HUNTING
2
6
N/R
N/R
POLITICAL
16
6
N/R
N/R
REAL ESTATE
16
6
N/R
N/R
RENTAL/LEASE
16
6
N/R
N/R
WINDOW SIGNS
10% of Address Window
Window
N/R
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 11-24 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
11.12 SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
I-1 Light Industrial I-2 General Industrial
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS:
A. Total maximum sign area not to exceed 100 square feet of permanent signage - permit only. (See chart).
B. Total number of signs permitted address side of permanent signage - permit only - two (2):
1.. Wall - two (2) or
2. Freestanding - one (1) and one (1) Wall.
C. Side setback - minimum 30; front setback - minimum of 10’ to road right-of-way.
D. Illumination: Direct and Internal permitted.
E. Additional signs permitted: Identification- one (1) per building, Courtesy and Directional - aggregate signs not to exceed twelve (12) square feet. Public Agency, No Trespassing/Hunting, Garage/Yard Sale no limit.
F. Sign Allotments
1. Wall signs: Attached and projected signs, for single industries will be permitted the rate of one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage on address side, not to exceed forty (40) square feet.
2. Freestanding ground sign for a single business and integrated businesses will be permitted signage at the rate of one (1) square foot of building frontage, address side, not to exceed forty (40) square feet.
G. Sign Area Exceptions:
1. Corner lots shall be considered to have two front faces. An additional fifty (50%) percent of the attached address frontage wall sign allotment will be permitted for the non-address side of the business. Sign allotment is not transferable.
2. Where a public entrance to the building establishment is also provided at the rear or side of the building from an adjoining off street parking area, one (1) additional attached wall sign will be permitted. The additional signage shall be included in the total allowable square feet for attached wall signs for the frontage address.
3. Industrial Park Identification Sign: Industrial Park shall be permitted one (1) freestanding ground sign. Maximum of sixty (60) square feet shall include the name of the Industrial Park. The sign shall be located at or near the entrance to the park.
Union Township 11-25 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
Chart 11.12a SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - INDUSTRIAL
PERMANENT SIGNAGE
PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
MAXIMUM PROJECTION (INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
ATTACHED WALL
60
?
3
N/R
PROJECTED WALL
60
?
3
8
PROJECTED
AWNING/CANOPY
0
?
48
8
MARQUEE
SUSPENDED
SUBDIVISION / APARTMENTS / CONDOMINIUM I.D.
FREESTANDING ELEVATED
FREESTANDING GROUND
60
6
3
Ground
MESSAGE CENTER
BILLBOARD
300
25
3
10
PERMANENT SIGNAGE NO PERMIT
IDENTIFICATION/INFORMAL SIGNAGE
COURTESY
2
6
3
N/R
DIRECTIONAL
2
6
3
N/R
IDENTIFICATION
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC AGENCY
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC INTEREST
4
6
3
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 11-26 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
Chart 11.12b SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT - INDUSTRIAL
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
MAXIMUM PROJECTION (INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
A-FRAME SANDWICH BOARD
AIR/GAS INFLATABLE
BANNER
BEACON/SEARCH (PERMITTED)
TRAILERS/CART W/WO WHEELS
WIND SIGNS - PERMITTED
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE - NO PERMIT
COMMODITY PREMISES GROWN
CONSTRUCTION
16
6
N/R
N/R
SUBDIVISION / APARTMENTS / CONDOMINIUM I.D.
32
6
N/R
N/R
GARAGE/YARD SALE
GRAND OPENING
16
6
N/R
N/R
MODEL HOME
N/R
N/R
NEW BUSINESS/OWNER
16
6
N/R
N/R
NO TRESPASSING/HUNTING
2
6
N/R
N/R
POLITICAL
16
6
N/R
N/R
REAL ESTATE
16
6
N/R
N/R
RENTAL/LEASE
16
6
N/R
N/R
WINDOW SIGNS
10% of Address Window
Window
N/R
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 11-27 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
11.13 SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT – OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS
OS-Office Service
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS:
A. Total maximum aggregate sign area not to exceed 100 square feet permanent signage - permit only. (See chart).
B. Total number of wall and freestanding signs -Three (3):
1. Wall - Two (2) on address side of building only
2. Freestanding ground sign - One (1).
A. Side Setback - minimum 20’; Front Setback - minimum of 10’ to road right-of-way.
B. Illumination: Internal permitted for free standing ground sign only, wall sign illumination not permitted.
C. Additional signs permitted: Identification- one (1) per building, Courtesy and Directional - aggregate signs not to exceed twelve (12) square feet. Public Agency, No Trespassing/Hunting, Garage/Yard Sale no limit.
D. Sign area exceptions:
1. Building on a corner lot shall be considered to have two (2) front faces. An additional fifty percent (50%) of the attached address frontage wall sign allotment shall be permitted for the non-address side of the building. Sign allotment is not transferable.
2. Where a public entrance to the office building is also provided at the rear or side of the building from an adjoining off street parking area, one (1) additional attached wall sign will be permitted indicating the public entrance.
Sign allotments
1. in a Single tenant office building
a. Wall Signage: Wall signage is permitted at the rate of one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building width, length, or height, which ever is greater on the address side, not to exceed 25 square feet per wall sign. Total signage not to exceed one fifty (50) square feet.
b. Freestanding Signage
1. Freestanding signage is permitted at the rate of one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage on address side, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet.
2. Building with forty (40) lineal feet or less of front footage, address side, are permitted a maximum of forty (40) square feet.
2 Sign Allotment - (Multiple Tennant office buildings).
Union Township 11-28 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
a. Integrated Groups - Wall Signage: Wall signage is permitted at the rate of one (1) square foot of signage for each lineal foot of building frontage, width or height, whichever is greater each user occupies on the address side. Signage not to exceed one twenty five (25) square feet per tenant. Square footage is not transferable from one tenant to another, or from unoccupied to occupied suits.
b. Integrated Groups - Freestanding
1. Freestanding signage is permitted at the rate of one (1) square foot of signage for each lineal foot of the TOTAL building frontage, on the address side, not to exceed seventy five (75) square feet.
2. Ground signs only.
Union Township 11-29 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
Chart 11.13a SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT – OFFICE SERVICE
PERMANENT SIGNAGE
PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
MAXIMUM PROJECTION (INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
ATTACHED WALL
25
?
3
N/R
PROJECTED WALL
25
?
15
8
PROJECTED
25
?
48
8
AWNING/CANOPY
25
?
48
8
MARQUEE (BOTH SIDES)
SUSPENDED
SUBDIVISION / APARTMENTS / CONDOMINIUM I.D.
FREESTANDING ELEVATED
FREESTANDING GROUND
50
6
3
Ground
MESSAGE CENTER
BILLBOARD
PERMANENT SIGNAGE NO PERMIT
IDENTIFICATION/INFORMAL SIGNAGE
COURTESY
4
6
3
N/R
DIRECTIONAL
4
6
3
N/R
IDENTIFICATION
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC AGENCY
2
6
3
N/R
PUBLIC INTEREST
4
6
3
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 11-30 Billboards
Zoning Ordinance and Signs
Chart 11.13b SIGNAGE ALLOTMENT – OFFICE SERVICE
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE
PERMIT REQUIRED
MAX. AREA PER SIGN (SQ. FT.)
MAX. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
MAX. PROJECTION (INCHES)
MIN. HEIGHT (LINEAR FT.)
A-FRAME SANDWICH BOARD
6
4
N/R
N/R
AIR/GAS INFLATABLE
BANNER
BEACON/SEARCH (PERMITTED)
TRAILERS/CART W/WO WHEELS
32
4
3
N/R
WIND SIGNS
40
15
N/R
N/R
TEMPORARY SIGNAGE - NO PERMIT
COMMODITY PREMISES GROWN
CONSTRUCTION
16
6
N/R
N/R
CONSTRUCTION DEVELOP. I.D.
32
8
N/R
N/R
GARAGE/YARD SALE
4
6
N/R
N/R
GRAND OPENING
16
6
N/R
N/R
MODEL HOME
NEW BUSINESS/OWNER
16
6
N/R
N/R
NO TRESPASSING/HUNTING
2
6
N/R
N/R
POLITICAL
16
6
N/R
N/R
REAL ESTATE
16
6
N/R
N/R
RENTAL/LEASE
16
6
N/R
N/R
WINDOW SIGNS
10% of Address Window
Window
N/R
N/R
Shaded = Not Permitted
N/R = Not Regulated
? = Height of wall or 5’ below eave, maximum 25’.
Union Township 12-1 Site Plan
Zoning Ordinance Review
SECTION 12 SITE PLAN REVIEW
12.1 USES REQUIRING SITE PLAN APPROVAL
The following uses require site plan approval by the Planning Commission:
A. All special land uses.
B. All commercial or industrial uses.
C. Multiple-family housing and mobile home parks.
D. Parking areas containing twenty (20) or more parking spaces.
E. Parks and recreational areas (non-municipal).
F. Site condominium subdivisions.
G. Any road, drive ally, curb opening, or other such permanent site improvement. (ORD 1998-1)
H: Additional Site Plan Review standards for Utility Grid Wind Energy System, On-site Use Wind Energy System over 65 feet high, and Anemometer Towers over 65 feet high. See Section 30.4.AC
12.2 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS (AMENDED, 1996-6 ORDINANCE)
Each site plan submitted shall contain the following information, unless specifically waived by the Planning Commission, in whole or in part:
A. The date, north arrow and scale. The scale shall be not less than 1”=20’ for property under three (3) acres and not more than 1”=40’ for property greater than three acres.
B. All lot and/or property lines are to be shown and dimensioned, including building setback lines on corner lots.
C. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed drives, sidewalks, curb openings, acceleration/deceleration lanes, signs, exterior lighting on buildings and parking lots, parking areas, handicapped parking spaces, barrier-free building access, unloading areas, recreation areas, common use areas, and areas to be conveyed for public use and purpose.
D. Elevation of building front, side, and back. Sign size, height, and design.
E. Storm water management plan approval prior to application.
F. Source of utilities approval by Union Township Utility Committee prior to application.
Union Township 12-2 Site Plan
Zoning Ordinance Review
G. All curb cuts, acceleration/deceleration lanes, additional drives, and other matters pertaining to roads to be approved by MDOT or Isabella County Road Commission prior to application.
H. All dumpsters shall be screened from public view with an opaque fence or wall no less than six feet in height.
I. The location and right-of-way width of all abutting roads, streets, alleys and easements.
J. The name and address of the property owner and petitioner.
K. A locational sketch drawn to scale giving the section number and the nearest crossroads.
L. The zoning of the subject property and the abutting properties.
M. The location, height and type of fences and walls.
N. The location and detailed description of landscaping.
O. For multiple family and mobile home parks, contour intervals shall be shown (two foot intervals for average slopes ten percent and under and five foot intervals for slopes over ten percent). Topography, however, is encouraged to be shown on all site plans.
P. The location of all existing and proposed structures on and within one hundred feet of the subject property’s boundary.
Q For apartments, provide a count of bedrooms per building and total count of bedrooms for the project. (Ord 2006-05)
12.3 REVIEW PROCEDURE (AMENDED, 1996-16 ORDINANCE)
The proposed site plan shall be submitted in ten copies to the Zoning Official at least fourteen (14) days ,(Ord. 2004-01) before the regular scheduled meeting. The Zoning Official shall keep one copy of the proposed site plan and deliver nine copies of the proposed site plan to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall study the site plan and shall, within sixty days of its submittal to the Zoning Official, either approve or disapprove the proposed site plan. If the site plan is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval shall be stated. Upon approval of a site plan, at least two copies of the site plan as finally approved shall be signed and dated by the Secretary of the Planning Commission. One copy of the signed site plan shall be kept on file with the Zoning Official and the other returned to the applicant.
12.4 STANDARDS FOR REVIEW
In reviewing a site plan, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the applicant has established that the site plan is consistent with this Ordinance, all other Township Ordinances, and in accordance with the adopted plan of the Township and more specifically:
A. That the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the site and in relation to access streets will be safe and convenient.
Union Township 12-3 Site Plan
Zoning Ordinance Review
B. That the site plan is harmonious with, and not injurious or objectionable to, existing and projected uses in the immediate area.
C. That the site plan shows the use and will be adequately served by necessary improvements, including but not limited to sewage collection and treatment, potable water supply, storm drainage, lighting, roads and parking. All new commercial construction shall connect to and use the Township potable water supply where such supply is available to the premises. Available means within two hundred (200) feet of the property line.
D. That the site plan is adequate to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the persons and property on the site and in the neighboring community.
E. The planning commission may authorize the Secretary of the Planning Commission to approve site plans if it is determined that the development meets all established criteria and is recommended for approval by the Zoning Administrator. Site plans for use which require a special use permit must be approved by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall establish guidelines by which this authorization may be granted. The Secretary shall provide subsequent reports to the Planning Commission on these approvals. (Ord. 1998-1)
12.5 REGULATIONS
A. No grading, removal of trees or other vegetation, land filling, or construction of improvements shall commence for any development that requires a site plan approval until an approved site plan has been signed by the Secretary of the Planning Commission.
B. The Zoning Official shall not issue a Zoning Permit for any use requiring site plan approval until an approved site plan has been signed by the Secretary of the Planning Commission.
C. The building Inspector shall not issue a Building Permit for any use requiring site plan approval until an approved site plan has been signed by the Secretary of the Planning Commission
D. Approval for site plans shall expire after one year from the date of approval, unless a building permit has been issued and construction has commenced.
Union Township 13-1 AG. Agricultural
Zoning Ordinance District
SECTION 13 AGRICULTURAL (AG) DISTRICT
13.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This Zoning Ordinance is intended for large lots or tracts of land used as a farm as defined in Section 3.29. It is not intended for any use except agricultural, low density single-family residential use, and other specialized rural uses requiring large tracts of land. This restriction is necessary to prevent development from proceeding without planning. If development and subdividing are to occur, they should be preceded by appropriate planning and rezoning.
13.2 PERMITTED USES (F, NO. 16, NEW; 1992-6 ORDINANCE)
A. Land in the AG District may be used for the following purposes only.
B. A one-family dwelling on a farm, as defined in Section 3.29
C. A one-family dwelling on a lot not defined as a farm.
D. Family Day Care
E. Customary agricultural operations.
F. Family day-care homes.
G. Roadside stands selling products by the owner of the property upon which the stand is located.
H. (New Or 2011-03) Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section 8 that are customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or storage activities.
I. Special uses: The following uses may be permitted in AG Districts when all requirements, condition and procedures of Section 30 of this Ordinance are complied with:
1. Airports, public or private.
2. Campgrounds or recreation grounds.
3. Cemeteries, public or private, including mausoleums.
4. Communication towers.
5. Conservation areas, public or private.
6. Country clubs and golf courses.
7. Filling stations.
8. Group day-care homes.
9. Hunting clubs or gun clubs.
10. Public and institutional uses.
Union Township 13-2 AG. Agricultural
Zoning Ordinance District
11. Race tracks.
12. Sand and gravel pits.
13. Second living quarters on a farm.
14. State licensed residential facilities.
15. Veterinarian services.
16. Landscaping services.
17. Utility Grid Wind Energy Systems. See Section 30.4.AC
18. Boarding Kennels. (New Ord 98-11)
19. Rooming or Boarding Dwelling, Single Unit. See Section 30.4.AE. (New Ord 13-04)
13.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
Lot, Yard, and area Requirements: Except as elsewhere specified herein, the requirements shall be as specified in Section 21.
Union Township 14-1 R-1. Rural-
Zoning Ordinance Residential District
SECTION 14 R-1 RURAL-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
14.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This District is intended for rural residential homes and customary farming activities. The intent of this District is to maintain the rural residential atmosphere of the community with large lots and low-density uses. It is designed for a mix of low-density residential uses and agricultural areas.
14.2 USE REGULATIONS
Land and/or buildings in the R-1 Zone may be used for the following purposes only:
A. A one-family dwelling on a farm, as defined in Section 3.29, associated with farming or the farming activity.
B. A one-family dwelling on each lot not defined as a farm.
C. Customary agricultural operations.
D. Family day-care.
E. (New Or 2011-03) Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section 8 that are customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or storage activities.
F. Special Uses: The following special uses may be permitted in this District when all requirements, condition, and procedures of Section 30 are complied with:
1. Country clubs and golf courses.
2. Group day-care homes.
3. Public and institutional uses.
4. Utility Grid Wind Energy Systems. See Section 30.4.AC
5. Rooming or Boarding Dwelling, Single Unit. See Section 30.4.AE. (New Ord 13-04)
14.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
Lot, Yard, and Area Requirements: Except as elsewhere specified herein, the requirements shall be as specified in Section 21.
Union Township 15-1 R-2A. One and Two Family
Zoning Ordinance Low Density Residential District
SECTION 15 R-2A ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY, LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
15.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This District is intended for single- and two-family residential homes together with required recreational, religious and educational facilities. The intent is to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density residential dwellings along with related facilities that serve the residents of the District. This District is intended to be served by public sewer and water.
15.2 PERMITTED USES
Land or building within all R-2 Districts may be used for the following purposes only.
A. One-family dwellings.
B. Two-family dwellings.
C. Family day-care homes.
D. (New Or 2011-03) Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section 8 that are customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or storage activities.
E. Special Uses: The following special uses may be permitted in this District when all requirements, conditions and procedures of Section 30 are complied with:
1. Country clubs and golf courses.
2. Group day-care homes.
3. Planned unit developments.
4. Public and institutional uses.
5. Rooming Dwelling, One or Two Unit. See Section 30.4.AE. (New Ord 13-04)
15.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
Lot, Yard, and Area Requirements: Except as elsewhere specified herein, the requirements shall be as specified in Section 21.
Union Township 16-1 R-2B. One and Two Family
Zoning Ordinance Medium Density Residential District
SECTION 16 R-2B ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY, MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
16.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This District is intended for single- and two-family residential homes together with required recreational, religious and educational facilities. The intent is to provide for an environment of predominantly medium-density residential dwellings on smaller lot sizes than are required in the Low Density Residential District. This District is required to be served by public sewer and water.
16.2 PERMITTED USES
Land or building within all R-2B Districts may be used for the following purposes only:
A. One-family dwellings.
B. Two-family dwellings.
C. Family day-care homes.
D. (New Or 2011-03) Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section 8 that are customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or storage activities.
E. Special Uses: The following special uses may be permitted in this District when all requirements, conditions and procedures of Section 30 are complied with:
1. Country clubs and golf courses.
2. Group day-care homes.
3. Planned unit developments.
4. Public and institutional uses.
5. Rooming Dwelling, One or Two Unit. See Section 30.4.AE. (New Ord 13-04)
16.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
A. All dwellings shall be served by public sewers.
B. Lot, Yard, and Area Requirements: Except as elsewhere specified herein, the requirements shall be as specified in Section 21.
Union Township 17-1 R-3A. Multi-Family
Zoning Ordinance Residential District
SECTION 17 R-3AMULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
17.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This District is designed to provide well located and properly developed areas to accommodate those residents who desire to reside in multiple-family dwellings such as apartments. It is designed for high density use of land in areas where municipal utilities are available.
17.2 PERMITTED USES (A, AMENDED; C, NO. 5, NEW; C, NO. 6, NEW; 1995-6 ORDINANCE)
Land or buildings in the R-3 District may be used for the following purposes only:
A. Multiple-family dwellings of four or less units.
B. Family day-care homes.
C. (New Or 2011-03) Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section 8 that are customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or storage activities.
D. Special Uses: The following special uses may be permitted in this District when all requirements, conditions and procedures of Section 30 are complied with:
1. Country clubs and golf courses.
2. Group day-care homes.
3. Planned unit developments.
4. Public and institutional uses.
5. Society, fraternity, sorority, association, federation lodge, organization, or any other group whose domestic relationships is of a transitional or seasonal nature or for an anticipated limited duration of three (3) or more unrelated persons.
6. Multiple-family dwellings of five or more units.
7. (New Or 2011-03)Marihuana Club
17.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
A. All multiple-family dwellings shall be served by public sewers.
B. Lot, Yard, and Area Requirements: Except as elsewhere specified herein, the requirements shall be as specified in Section 21.
Union Township 18-1 R-3B. Multi-Family
Zoning Ordinance Residential District
SECTION 18 R-3B MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (Addition Ordinance 2004-01)
18.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This District is designed to provide well-located and properly developed areas to accommodate those residents who desire to reside in multiple-family dwellings, such as condominiums. It is designed for medium density use of land in areas where municipal utilities are available.
18.2 PERMITTED USES
Land or buildings in the R-3 District may be used for the following purposes only:
A. Multiple-family dwellings of four or less units.
B. Family day-care homes.
C. (New Or 2011-03) Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section 8 that are customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or storage activities.
D. Special Uses: The following special uses may be permitted in this District when all requirements, conditions and procedures of Section 30 are complied with:
1. Country clubs and golf courses.
2. Group day-care homes.
3. Planned unit developments.
4. Public and institutional uses.
5. Society, fraternity, sorority, association, federation lodge, organization, or any other group whose domestic relationships is of a transitional or seasonal nature or for an anticipated limited duration of three (3) or more unrelated persons.
6. Multiple-family dwellings of five or more units.
7. Marihuana Club
18.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
All multiple-family dwellings shall be served by public utilities.
A. Lot, Yard, and Area Requirements: Except as elsewhere specified herein, the requirements shall be as specified in Section 21.
Union Township 19-1 R-4. Mobile Home
Zoning Ordinance Park District
SECTION 19 R-4 MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
19.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
A. This District is designed to provide well located and properly developed areas to accommodate those residents who desire to reside in less conventional type dwellings such as mobile homes. It is designed for high density residential use of land in areas where municipal type sewers are available.
B. The area zoned for this purpose should be able to accommodate the increased traffic generated from the development, be suitable for residential use and be located so as not to impede other more conventional residential developments in the vicinity.
19.2 PERMITTED USES
Land or buildings in the R-4 zone shall be used for the following purposes only:
A. Mobile home parks, provided that the following conditions are met.
1. All mobile home parks shall conform to the standards specified in Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, as amended; the Mobile Home Commission Rules, March 1987, as amended; and the Department of Public Health, Bureau of Environmental and Occupational Health, Mobile Home Parks and Seasonal Mobile Home Parks Health Standards May 26, 1984, as amended.
2. All mobile home shall be skirted within ninety (90) days of placement within the mobile home park and must meet the standards of Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, as amended.
3. All mobile homes shall be anchored when installed in a mobile home park with only those systems that are approved by Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, as amended.
4. Mobile homes, permanent buildings and facilities, and other structures shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet from the property boundary line. If said structures abut a public right-of-way, they shall not be closer than fifty (50) feet from the boundary line, except that if the boundary line runs through the center of the public road, the fifty (50) feet shall be measured from the road right-of-way.
5. Mobile home parks shall be landscaped as follows:
a) If the Mobile home park abuts an existing residential development, the park shall be required to provide screening along the park boundary abutting the residential development.
b) If the park abuts a nonresidential development, the park need not provide screening.
c) In all cases, however, a park shall provide screening along the park boundary abutting a public right-of-way.
6. The landscaping shall consists of evergreen trees or shrubs of a minimum three (3) feet in height that are spaced so they provide a continuous screen within three (3) years. Alternative screening devices may be utilized if they conceal the mobile home park as effectively as the required landscaping described above.
Union Township 19-2 R-4. Mobile Home
Zoning Ordinance Park District
7. The sales of new or used mobile homes are only permitted within the mobile home park on sites approved for permanent occupancy and accessory to the use of the park for dwelling purposes.
8. All public and private utilities shall be stored underground.
9. A preliminary plan shall be submitted to the Township for preliminary approval. The preliminary plan shall include the location, layout, general design, and a general description of the project.
B. (New Or 2011-03) Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section 8 that are customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or storage activities.
Union Township 20-1 R-5. Mobile or
Zoning Ordinance Modular Home District
SECTION 20 R-5 MOBILE OR MODULAR HOME DISTRICT
20.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This zone is designed to provide areas to meet the needs of single wide mobile homes. It is intended to provide areas that are economical to both the developer and owner but still meet the physical needs of the residents who are required to have private ownership of both their land and trailer. It is designed for high-density residential use of land in areas where municipal type sewers are available and there is a minimum of twenty-five (25) lots.
20.2 PERMITTED USES
Land or buildings in the R-5 zone shall be used for the following purposes only:
A. Single-wide and double-wide one-family mobile or modular dwellings.
B. Those uses and requirements stipulated within Section 8, General Provisions.
C. No dwelling may be erected or occupied unless it is located in a platted subdivision containing at least twenty-five (25) lots, and is provided with municipal sewer.
D. (New Or 2011-03) Accessory buildings and uses in conformity with Section 8 that are customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, provided accessory buildings and uses shall not be used for commercial or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, retail, manufacture or storage activities.
E. Special Uses Permitted: None.
20.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
A. All dwellings shall be served by public sewers.
B. Lot, Yard, and Area Requirements: Except as elsewhere specified herein, the requirements shall be as specified in Section 21.
Union Township 21-1 Residential
Zoning Ordinance Schedule of Lot Requirements
SECTION 21 REQUIRED CONDITIONS FOR AG, R-1, R-2A, R-2B, R-3A, R3B, R-4, AND R-5 DISTRICTS
(Amended, 1993-8 Ordinance, 2004-01 Ordinance added R3B)
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES
AG
R-1
R-2A
R-2B
R-3A
R-3B
R-4
R-5
Minimum Lot Width
Single Family
Two Family
165
150
100 (A)
120 (A)
70
90
N/A
55
Maximum Lot Depth
(H)
Minimum Lot Depth
165
Minimum Lot Area
Single Family
Two Family
43,560
43,560
14,000 (A)
17,000 (A)
8,400
10,800
(G)
(G)
N/A
6,000
N/A
N/A
Maximum Building Height (Feet)
35
(C)
35
(C)
35
35
35
(F)
35
(F)
N/A
35
Minimum Floor Area
Per Dwelling (Unit Square Feet) (B)
Single Family
Two Family
800
1,000
600
750
500
650
500
500
500
500
Minimum Dwelling
Width (Feet)
14
18
18
18
N/A
N/A
N/A
12
Minimum Front Yard
Setback (Feet) (I)
50
50
35
30
35
35
N/A
25
Minimum Side Yard
(Feet) (E)
(D)
(D)
10
6
30
30
N/A
6
Minimum Rear Yard
(Feet)
50
50
35
30
25
25
N/A
15
Municipal Sewer Required
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Union Township 21-2 Residential
Zoning Ordinance Schedule of Lot Requirements
FOOTNOTES - SECTION 21
A. The minimum lot frontage and lot area for lots having municipal sewer may be reduced to the following requirements:
1. One-Family Unit
Lot Frontage width: 80 feet.
Lot Area: 12,000 square feet.
2. Two-Family Unit
Lot Frontage Width: 100 feet.
Lot Area: 15,000 square feet.
B. Minimum floor area excludes porches, garages, basements, or utility areas. For each additional bedroom add one hundred (100) square feet.
C. No building or structure shall exceed a height of two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, except that silos, elevators, barns, and other structures customarily necessary to farming may be increased not to exceed a maximum height of ninety-nine (99) feet; provided that any required yard shall be increased by one (1) foot for each foot in height the structure exceeds thirty-five (35) feet.
D. For one-family dwellings there shall be two (2) side yards. No side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the required lot width. For all other uses there shall be two (2) side yards with no side yard less than thirty (30) feet.
E. Side yards on a street shall meet front yard requirements.
F. No building or structure shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet, except apartments may be increased not to exceed a maximum height of seventy (70) feet; provided that any required yard shall be increased by one (1) foot for each in height the structure exceeds thirty-five (35) feet.
G. Multi Family
Required Ground Area (SF) Per Unit, Multi-Family No. of Units
R3A
R3B
3 and 4
4,000
9,400
5 and 6
3,600
9,000
7 to 24
3,200
8,600
25 or more
2,900
8,300
H. The depth of the lot shall not exceed four (4) times the lot width as measured at the front building.
I. See Section 8.40, Urban Overlay Zone for areas with increased setbacks.
Union Township 22-1 B-4 (General Business District)
Zoning Ordinance
SECTION 22 B-4 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
22.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This District is composed of certain land and structures used to provide the widest variety and highest concentration of retail and service establishments within the Township. When any of these types of enterprises are permitted, they are to be regulated in a manner that will protect the abutting residential Districts.
22.2 PERMITTED USES (R, NO. 7, NEW; 1991-16 ORDINANCE)
A. Generally recognized retail businesses that supply commodities on the premises such as but not limited to groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods, and rugs, dry goods, clothing and notions, hardware, furniture and household furnishings, radio and television sales, shoe sales and repair, variety store, antiques, automotive supply parts and accessories, jewelry stores, florist and gift shops, fruit and vegetable markets, garden and lawn supply stores, camera and photo supplies, luggage, camping supplies and equipment, musical instruments, office supplies, paint, wallpaper, and floor coverings.
B. Personal service establishments that perform services on the premises such as but not limited to repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe), tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, photographic studios, self-service laundries, dry cleaners, locksmiths, office machines sales and service, and travel agencies.
C. Office buildings for any of the following occupations or services such as but not limited to executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, drafting, printing and publishing, employment agency, government offices.
D. Establishments that perform services on the premises such as but not limited to banks, loan companies, insurance offices, and real estate offices.
E. Professional services such as but not limited to offices of doctors, dentists, osteopaths, optometrists, and similar or allied professions, including clinics.
F. Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage, excluding drive-ins.
G. Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within closed buildings.
H. Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor tennis courts, indoor skating rink, or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation when located at least one hundred (100) feet from any front, rear, or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential District.
I. Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.
J. Business schools, colleges, and private schools operated for profit.
K. Auto wash when completely or partially enclosed in a building.
Union Township 22-2 B-4 (General Business District)
Zoning Ordinance
L. Bus, train, and other forms of transportation systems, passenger stations.
M. Automobile repair shop or garage if all operations are conducted in an enclosed building.
N. Hotels and motels.
O. Churches.
P. Child-care centers.
Q. Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building, requiring a license.
R. Marihuana Club, provided the following requirements are met. (New Or 2011-03)
1. The Marihuana Clubs are located only in R3-A, R3-B districts by special use permit and in B-4, B-5, B-6, or B-7 Districts by zoning permit.
2. State Law. A Marihuana Club shall at all times comply with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq and the Administrative Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time.
3. Zoning Permit Required. A zoning permit must be obtained for a specific site before a Marihuana Club is operated in the Charter Township of Union.
4. Inspections. Quarterly inspections shall be made by the Township to confirm the Marihuana Club is operating in accordance with applicable laws.
5. Standards and Review of Zoning Permit. The Zoning Official shall review each application for a zoning permit for a Marihuana Club and shall grant or deny the permit based on the Zoning Ordinance requirements for Marihuana Clubs. A denial can be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall hear and decide the appeal or request for a variance within 45 days, and thereafter the applicant can appeal to the circuit court.
6. Not Transferable. Permits are not transferrable and shall only apply to the specific site approved.
7. Activity on Site. There shall be no transfer, deliver, acquisition, sale, cultivation, manufacture or ingestion, smoking or other consumption, of controlled substances, including marihuana, on the site.
8. Dwelling Units. A Marihuana Club shall not be located on the same parcel as a dwelling unit.
9. Drive thru. Drive thru facilities are prohibited on a Marihuana Club site.
10. Dispersal and Spacing. The parcel on which a Marihuana Club is located shall be situated at least one thousand (1000) feet from the parcel on which another Marihuana Club is located, as measured between property lines.
Union Township 22-3 B-4 (General Business District)
Zoning Ordinance
A Marihuana Club shall be situated at least five hundred (500) feet from a parcel on which a church, house of worship, school, licensed day care, community center or public park is located as measured between property lines. For purposes of this section a school shall be any public or private institution of learning, elementary through secondary (k-12) and any preschool.
11. Site Requirements.
a. Driveways and parking areas shall be as specified in 30.4.B.2.
b. Entrances and exits shall be as specified in 30.4.B.2.
c. Signage consistent with the Township’s signage provisions of the zoning ordinance shall be allowed on the site.
12. Enforcement. Violations of the Marihuana Club requirements shall be subject to prosecution by the Charter Township of Union, and more than two (2) violations in any twelve (12) month period shall be cause for the revocation of the zoning permit, but only after prior written notice of each violation and thirty (30) days prior written notice of a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals on the question of revoking the zoning permit.
S. Marihuana Dispensary, provided the following requirements are met: (New Or 2011-03)
1. State Law. A Marihuana Dispensary shall at all times comply with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq and the Administrative Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time.
2. Zoning Permit and Marihuana Dispensary License Required. Both a zoning permit and a Marihuana Dispensary License must be obtained for a specific site before a Marihuana Dispensary is operated in the Charter Township of Union.
3. Inspections. Quarterly inspections shall be made by the Township to confirm the Marihuana Dispensary is operating in accordance with applicable laws.
4. Standards and Review of Zoning Permit. The Zoning Official shall review each application for a zoning permit for a Marihuana Dispensary and shall grant or deny the permit based on the Zoning Ordinance requirements for Medical Marihuana Dispensaries. A denial can be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall hear and decide the appeal or request for a variance within 45 days, and thereafter the applicant can appeal to the circuit court.
5. Not Transferable. Permits are not transferrable and shall only apply to the specific site approved.
6. Dwelling Units. A Marihuana Dispensary shall not be located on the same parcel as a dwelling unit.
7. Drive thru. Drive thru facilities are prohibited on a Marihuana Dispensary site.
8. Dispersal and Spacing. The parcel on which a Marihuana Dispensary is located shall be situated at least one thousand (1000) feet from the parcel on which another Marihuana Dispensary, a Medical Marihuana Grow Facility, or a Marihuana Club is located, as measured between property lines.
The parcel on which a Marihuana Dispensary is located shall be situated at least five hundred (500) feet from a residential zoning district or a parcel on which a church, house of worship, school, licensed day care, community center or public park is located as measured between property lines or a property line and zoning district boundary when applicable. For purposes of this section a school shall be any public or private institution of learning, elementary through secondary (K-12) and any preschool.
9. Site Requirements. Marihuana Dispensaries must be located on a site that provides:
a. off street parking shall be in accordance with Section 10, Parking and Loading Spaces, with one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross
Union Township 22-4 B-4 (General Business District)
Zoning Ordinance
floor area;
b. illuminated and unscreened off street parking;
c. a front and side setback from any public sidewalk of 50 feet, measured from the face of the building to the sidewalk;
d. driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2;
e. entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2;
f. not more than one (1) sign announcing the service, shall be permitted as regulated in Section 11.7;
g. greenbelt planting and screening will be required so as to obscure view from any adjacent residential district. Screening shall consist of non-deciduous trees, not less than three (3) feet in height, planted and maintained in live condition not less than fifteen (15) feet on centers;
h. no storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers, or explosive materials, as defined in the fire prevention code, or toxic materials shall be permitted upon the premises.
10. Operational Requirements. A Marihuana Dispensary shall:
a. prohibit persons under the age of 18 from entering the business, unless they are in the possession of a Registry Identification Card or the equivalent, and are accompanied by their Primary Caregiver;
b. operate only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., including deliveries to and from the premises;
c. keep all marihuana, in any form, within an enclosed locked facility, so that the marihuana is not visible from any location outside of the building;
d. prohibit the cultivation, manufacture, ingestion, smoking or other consumption, of controlled substances, including marihuana, on the site;
e. allow the acquisition, delivery, transferring, transporting, supplying or dispensing of marihuana solely for the purpose of assisting a Qualifying Patient directly, or through a Qualifying Patient’s Primary Caregiver, in the medical use of marihuana pursuant to the MMMA;
f. refrain from emitting odors emanating from marihuana, beyond the building;
g. have a single secure entrance and implement security measures to deter and prevent theft of marihuana, diversion of marihuana to illicit markets and unauthorized entrance into the Marihuana Dispensary;
h. prohibit any person on the premises of a Dispensary unless they:
i. Possess a Registry Identification Card or the equivalent;
ii. Assist a Qualifying Patient in the use or administration of marihuana;
iii. Are an owner of the premises or an employee of the Marihuana Dispensary; or
iv. Are a service worker engaged in maintenance activities, postal delivery or law enforcement, emergency personnel and/or zoning personnel.
Union Township 22-5 B-4 (General Business District)
Zoning Ordinance
i. prohibit the sale or rental of goods on the premises except as secondary and incidental to the primary purpose of a Marihuana Dispensary.
11. Enforcement. Violations of the Marihuana Dispensary requirements shall be subject to prosecution by the Charter Township of Union, and more than two (2) violations in any twelve (12) month period shall be cause for the revocation of the zoning permit, but only after prior written notice of each violation and thirty (30) days prior written notice of a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals on the question of revoking the zoning permit.
22.3 SPECIAL USES (AMENDED ORD 2005-03)
The following Special Uses may be permitted in this district when all requirements, conditions and procedures of section 30 are complied with:
A Amusement parks.
B Filling stations.
C Miniature golf and/or driving ranges.
D Mortuary establishments.
E Multi-use Structures
F Planned shopping centers.
G Planned unit developments.
H Retail sales of new or used cars, trucks, boats, farm equipment, mobile homes, travel trailers, and motor homes. Outside areas for display purposes are allowed, providing all servicing, repair, or conditioning of such vehicles or equipment shall be in a fully enclosed building.
I Self-storage buildings.
22.4 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
A. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on premises where produced.
B. All businesses, servicing, or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
C. All outside storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence not less than five (5) feet high, or with a chain link type fence. Greenbelt planting may be required so as to obscure all view from any adjacent residential or business District or from a public street.
D. Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incidental to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited. (See Section 8.2, Accessory Uses.)
E. Barrier: All development shall be physically separated from the local road by a curb and/or, planting strip or other suitable barrier. Such barrier shall effectively eliminate unchanneled vehicle ingress or egress, except for authorized access ways.
Union Township 22-6 B-4 (General Business District)
Zoning Ordinance
F. Access Ways: Distance to such access way from an intersecting roadway shall be at the discretion of the Isabella County Road Commission and in no case less than (eighty) 80 feet from the centerline of an intersecting roadway.
G. Review of Plans: Site plans for the general business District shall be submitted to and shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission, with respect to the above required conditions and such other site related problems as it deems necessary to assure maximum traffic safety and to assure maximum protection to abutting properties.
H. See Section 29 for lot area, side yards, front yards, rear yards, etc.
I. No principal or accessory building shall be closer than forty (40) feet to the property line of any residential use or District. A planted landscaped area of at least ten (10) feet in width, meeting the screening standards specified in Section 8.31, shall be provided in the required setback.
Union Township 23-1 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
SECTION 23 B-5 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
23.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This District is composed of certain lands and structures located principally along major highways. In this District the major uses are those freestanding uses that cater to the traveling public. It is the intent to develop attractive and efficient group business areas that are convenient and have buildings of harmonious design.
23.2 PERMITTED USES
A. Any retail business or service establishment permitted in the B-4 District.
B. Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants.
C. Bar, grill, and cocktail lounges.
D. Retail sales of new or used cars, trucks, boats, farm equipment, mobile homes, travel trailers, and motor homes. Outside area for display purposes are allowed, provided all servicing, repair, or conditioning of such vehicles or equipment shall be in a fully enclosed building.
1. Surfacing and other requirements of Section 10 shall be adhered to.
2. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential Districts.
E. Amusement enterprises.
F. Plumbing, heating, and electrical shops.
G. Tire and battery shops.
H. Sign painting and servicing shops.
I Adult Book Stores, Providing the following conditions are met: (Added, Ord 2005-03)
Union Township 23-2 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
History and findings. Charter Township of Union was sued by a sexually oriented business in Intimate Ideas v Charter Township of Union, Eastern District Case No. 03-10085, and the sexually oriented business opened for business in the Charter Township of Union. Thereafter the Charter Township of Union Board directed the Charter Township of Union Planning Commission to research and develop zoning ordinance provisions defining and regulating sexually oriented businesses. The Charter Township of Union Planning Commission received and reviewed 601 studies and reports about the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, and focused on studies from the cities of Indianapolis, Austin, Garden Grove, Whittier, Minneapolis, St. Mary, and St. Paul. The Charter Township of Union Planning Commission made several preliminary findings based on their review of the studies and reports. Based on the findings and recommendations of the Charter Township of Union Planning Commission, and the selected studies and reports considered by both the Planning Commission and the Charter Township of Union Board, as well as several court decisions,2 the Charter Township of Union Board finds that: 1) sexually oriented businesses featuring nudity and sexual activities produce negative secondary effects of increased crime rates, declining or depressed
1 The list includes studies and reports from
AZ Phoenix, AZ Phoenix Factual Record Cabarets, AZ Phoenix Factual Record Incall & Nudes, AZ Tucson, CA San Bernadino Affidavit Murphy, CA Garden, CA LA, CA San Diego, CA Whittier, COAdam, Copy of MN Minneapolis, FL Manatee, Co A 12/10/02, FL Manatee, Co B 12/10/02, FL Manatee Co C 12/10/02, FL Manatee Co D 12/10/02, FL Manatee Co E 12/10/02, FL Manatee Co I 12/10/02, FL Manatee Co M 12/10/02, FL Manatee Co, GA St. Mary’s 1996, GA Warner Robins Teasers Spec Mtg 01/13/00, GA Warner Robins Teasers Spec Mtg 01/18/00, GA Warner Robins Teasers Spec Mtg 02/22/00, GA Warner Robins Teasers Testimony J Meeker, GA Warner Robins Teasers Testimony R McCleary, IA DeMoines, IN Indianapolis, MN St. Paul, MO Kansas City, Indianapolis and Los Angeles, McCleary, MN Minneapolis, MN State, MN St. Cloud, NC New Hanover, NV Vegas, NY Ellicottville, NY Islip, NY New York City, NY Times Square, OH Cleveland, OK Oklahoma City 1, OK Oklahoma City 2, Organized Crime Ch 19 AGROP McManus, Sherman David Testimony, Strip Club Study, Summaries Key Secondary Effects report, TX Amarillo, TX Austin, TX Beaumont, TX Cleburne, TX Dallas, TX El Paso, TX Houston, VA New Port News, WA Bellevue, WA Des Moines, WA Seattle, WI St. Croix.
2 Young v American Mini Theatres Inc, 427 US 50 (1976); City of Renton v Playtime Theatres, 475 US 41 (1986); City of Los Angeles v Alameda Books, 535 US 425 (2004); Barnes v Glen Theatre Inc., 501 US 560 (1991); City of Erie v Pap’s AM, 529 US 277 (2000); Charter Township of Van Buren v Garter Belt Inc, 258 Mich App 594 (2003), Ben’s Bar Inc v Village of Sommerset, 316 F3d 702 (7th Cir 2003); Wayne County Prosecutor v Dizzy Duck, 449 Mich 353 (1995).
Union Township 23-3 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
property values, and a diminished sense of safety and security in members of the general public when walking in the vicinity of these businesses; 2) the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses can be reduced or minimized by dispersing the sexually oriented businesses and requiring minimum distances between the sexually oriented businesses; 3) the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses are exacerbated by close proximity to bars serving alcoholic beverages by the glass; 4) to minimize the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses on residential areas and the community at large, the sexually oriented businesses should be located a minimum distance away from any residential zoning district, school, church, or public park; 5) the zoning regulations allow for the location of sexually oriented businesses within specified zoning districts of the Charter Township of Union, and a reasonable number of sites legally are available to be acquired and used by sexually oriented businesses; 6) the negative secondary effects of public nudity, live nude performances, and the combination of nudity and businesses serving alcoholic beverages by the glass, can be minimized or eradicated by a local ordinance prohibiting public nudity as authorized by MCL 41.181, and the decisions of the United States Supreme Court;3 7) requiring dancers and other performers to wear a minimal amount of clothing, such as pasties and a g-string, in order to comply with the ordinance will have little or no effect on the expressive element of the performances; 8) the ordinance provisions prohibiting public nudity, live nude performances, and the combination of nudity and businesses serving alcoholic beverages by the glass are narrowly drawn to apply to businesses and performers that offer nude performances on a regular basis, excluding occasional nude performances from the purview of the ordinance.
1. Purpose. The purpose of these ordinance provisions is to define and regulate sexually oriented businesses, and to prohibit public nudity, in order to minimize or eradicate the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses and public nudity. The zoning regulations are intended to define and disperse sexually oriented businesses, primarily regulating the location and site requirements of these businesses, but without any restriction on the content of communication protected by the First Amendment.
2. Conflict. The definitions and descriptions of sexually oriented businesses as permitted uses in the zoning ordinance provisions are subject to and limited by the prohibitions against public nudity and nudity in businesses licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
3 City of Erie v Pap’s AM, 529 US 302 (2000); Barnes v Glen Theatre Inc, 501 US 560 (1991); New York State Liquor Authority v Vellanca, 452 US 714 (1981); City of Newport, KY v Iacobucci, 479 US 92 (1986).
Union Township 23-4 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
3. Definitions General Definitions are contained in Section 3, the following definitions relate specifically to this section
a. Regularly as used in this section means once per month or more.
b. Separation, spacing, or dispersal as used in this section shall be measured from property line to property line, or property line to zoning district boundary.
c. Bar shall mean any establishment serving alcohol by the glass. Exception: Restaurants that serve alcohol by the glass and do not have a separate bar dedicated to serving alcohol.
d. Schools For the purpose of this ordinance, Schools shall be any public or private institution of learning for elementary or secondary levels (K-12).
4. Permitted uses. For purposes of the Charter Township of Union Zoning Ordinance, sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted uses in the B-5, B-6, and B-7 zoning districts only.
5. Application and permit required. Any sexually oriented business must apply for and obtain a zoning permit prior to opening and operating a sexually oriented business in the Charter Township of Union.
6. Dispersal and spacing. No sexually oriented business shall be located within 1,500 feet of another sexually oriented business, or within 500 feet of a bar. No sexually oriented business shall be located within 600 feet of a church, school, residential zoning district, public park, or licensed day care center.
7. Site requirements. Any sexually oriented business must be located on a site that provides:
a. off street parking in the front or on the side of the business structure, but not in the rear, with the front being the side closest to the public road by which access is obtained;
b. illuminated and unscreened off street parking;
c. signs and window displays without any example or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
Union Township 23-5 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
d. a front and side setback from any public sidewalk of 50 feet; measured from the face of the building to the sidewalk
8. Standards and time to approve or deny. The Zoning Administrator shall review each application for a zoning permit for a sexually oriented business and shall grant or deny the permit within twenty one (21) days based on the district, spacing, and site requirements for sexually oriented businesses. A denial can be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall hear and decide the appeal or request for a variance within 45 days, and thereafter the applicant can appeal to the circuit court.
9. Operational requirements. A sexually oriented business shall
a. prohibit persons under the age of 18 from entering the business,
b. close between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
c. not allow customers or employees to engage in specified sexual activities on site,
d. not allow prostitution or the soliciting of acts of prostitution on site,
e. not allow the distribution or use of controlled substances on site.
Enforcement: Violations of these operational requirements shall be subject to prosecution by the Charter Township of Union, and more than two violations in any 12 month period shall be cause for the revocation of the zoning permit, but only after prior written notice of each violation and 30 days prior written notice of a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals on the question of revoking the zoning permit. Revocation of the zoning permit can be for a period up to 6 months, and subsequent revocations can be for a period up to 12 months
J. Marihuana Club provided the requirements of Section 22.2.R are met. (New Or 2011-03)
K. Marihuana Dispensary provided the requirements of Section 22.2.S are met. (New Or 2011-03)
Union Township 23-6 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
23.3 SPECIAL USES: (AMENDED, ORD 2005-03)
The following special uses may be permitted in this District when all requirements, conditions, and procedures of Section 30 are complied with:
A. Filling stations.
B. Multi-use Structures
C. Planned shopping centers.
D. Planned unit developments.
E. Self-storage buildings.
23.4 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
A. Barrier: All development shall be physically separated from the local road by a curb and/or planting strip or other suitable barrier. Such barrier shall effectively eliminate un-channeled vehicle ingress or egress, except for unauthorized access ways.
B. Access Ways: Each separate use, grouping of buildings or grouping of uses as part of a single planned development, shall have at least two (2) access ways from a local road. Such access way shall not be located closer than eighty (80) feet to the point of an intersecting roadway of the local road centerline.
C. Review of Plans: Site plans for the highway service facilities shall be submitted to and shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission, with respect to the above required conditions, and such other site related problems as it deems necessary to assure maximum traffic safety and to assure maximum protection to abutting properties.
D. All outdoor storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than five (5) feet high, or with a chain link type fence. Greenbelt planting may be required so as to obscure all view from an adjacent residential or business District or from a public street.
E. See Section 29 for lot area, side yards, front yards, rear yards, etc.
No principal or accessory building shall be closer than forty (40) feet to the property line of any residential use or District. A planted landscape area of at least ten (10) feet in width, meeting the screening standards specified in Section 8.31, shall be provided in the required setback.
Union Township 24-1 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
SECTION 24 B-6 AUTO-RELATED HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
24.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
In recognition of the unique character of the M-20/Pickard Corridor, this District establishes requirements and incentives to improve vehicular and pedestrian safety, to decrease traffic congestion, and to improve the visual appearance of the corridor through proper landscaping, buffering, and screening.
24.2 PERMITTED USES (I, NEW, 1992-6 ORDINANCE)
A. Generally recognized retail businesses that supply commodities on the premises such as but not limited to groceries, baked goods, or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions, hardware and automotive supply parts.
B. Personal service establishments that perform services on the premises such as but not limited to repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe), tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, photographic studios, self-service laundries, dry cleaners and travel agencies.
C. Restaurants, including drive-throughs.
D. Bars, grills, and cocktail lounges.
E. Retail sales of new or used automobiles (outside areas for display purposes are allowed, providing all servicing, repair or conditioning of such vehicles shall be in a fully enclosed building).
F. Auto wash establishments, when completely or partially enclosed with a building.
G. Instant oil change establishments.
H. Bus passenger stations and bus storage buildings.
I. I Private clubs, Fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.
J. Business schools, colleges, and private schools operated for profit. (New, Ord. 1993-11)
K. Adult Bookstores See Section 23.2.I (Amended, Ord 2005-03)
L. Marihuana Club provided the requirements of Section 22.2.R are met. (New Or 2011-03)
M. Marihuana Dispensary provided the requirements of Section 22.2.S are met. (New Or 2011-03)
24.3 SPECIAL USES
The following special uses may be permitted in this District when all requirements, conditions, and procedures of Section 30 are complied with:
A. Filling stations.
B. Planned unit developments.
C. Mobile and Modular Home Sales (Ord. 1998-21)
D. Multi-use Structures
24.4 DISTRICT STANDARDS
The following standards and regulations shall apply to all new or expanded uses in the B-6 and B-7 Districts:
A. Parking Area Design Standards: In addition to the parking regulations in Section 10, the following design standards shall apply to parking areas in the B-6 and B-7 Districts:
Union Township 24-2 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
1. Parking Setback and Landscaping: Parking areas containing ten (10) or more spaces shall be screened from view of the roadway. Screening shall be in the form of shrubs or a masonry or wood wall not exceeding thirty (30) inches in height as approved by the Planning Commission. The number of shrubs required shall be dependent of the distance between the parking area and the right-of-way line, measured at the shortest distance between the two (2) as determined by the following chart. Earth berms shall be required if the parking area is located less than forty (40) feet from the right-of-way. Parking areas shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet to the road right-of-way or a residential District. The number of shrubs required per one hundred (100) linear feet is shown below:
Distance From Right-of-way
Berm Required
No. of Shrubs Per 100 Linear Feet
20 to 29 feet
Yes
20
30 to 39 feet
Yes
15
40 to 49 feet
No
10
50+ feet
No
6
In the case of parcels having a lot depth of one hundred fifty (150) feet or less measured from the road right-of-way, the parking area setback requirements shall be reduced to ten (10) feet from the road right-of-way, provided a minimum of twenty-five (25) shrubs are provided for each one hundred (100) linear feet.
2. Interior Parking Landscaping: Within every parking area containing ten (10) or more spaces, interior landscaping shall be provided. The landscaped areas shall be designed and located to improve the appearance of the parking area, to guide traffic movement, and to improve traffic circulation and safety. The amount of interior landscaping required shall be based on the distance between the parking area and the right-of-way line measured at the shortest distance between the two. The following table shows the interior landscaping requirements:
Distance From Right-of-way
Square Feet of Landscaping Per Parking Space
20 to 29 feet
30
30 to 39 feet
25
40 to 49 feet
20
50+ feet
15
Interior parking area landscaping shall be no less than five (5) feet in any single dimension and no less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in any single area and shall be protected from parking areas with curbing or other permanent means to prevent vehicular encroachment onto the landscaped areas.
A minimum of one (1) deciduous tree shall be planted for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of required interior parking area landscaping. The interior parking area landscaping shall be grass covered or shall utilize other appropriate vegetative ground cover.
Union Township 24-3 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
3. Parking areas shall be properly graded for drainage and surfaced with concrete or asphalt.
B. Setback and Landscaping Requirements: The setback and landscaping requirements for the B-6 and B-7 Districts are inter-dependent, and therefore, both sets of regulations are included in this section.
The following setback distances for the principal structure shall be required along with the appropriate number of plant units. One (1) plant unit shall be the equivalent of one (1) evergreen or deciduous tree, or three (3) shrubs. The setback area shall be grass covered or shall utilize other appropriate vegetative ground cover. Other landscaping features such as wood chips, brick, stones, and boulders may be used to accentuate the grass or ground cover but shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total setback area. The principal building shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to the road right-of-way or twenty (20) feet to a residential District.
Front Yard
No. of Plant Units* Per 100 Linear Feet
15 to 24 feet
5
25 to 34 feet
4
35 to 49 feet
3
50+ feet
2
Side and Rear Yards
No. of Plant Units* Per 100 Linear Feet
10 to 14 feet
5
15 to 19 feet
4
20 to 24 feet
3
25+ feet
0
*1 Plant Unit = 1 Tree or 3 Shrubs.
Union Township 24-4 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
C. Landscape Requirements
1. All required landscaping, buffering, and screening shall meet the provisions in Section 8.31.
2. If a unit of measurement used in determining the number of required plant units results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one- half (1/2) shall be disregarded, and fractions over one-half (1/2) shall require one (1) additional plant unit.
3. Earth berms shall comprise at least two and one-half (2-1/2) vertical feet, shall have a maximum slope of 3:1, and shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in length. The berm shall be grass covered or shall utilize other appropriate vegetative ground cover.
4. Right-of-Way Landscaping: Public rights-of-way adjacent to required landscaped areas shall be planted with grass or other suitable vegetative cover and maintained by the owner of the adjacent property as if they were part of the required landscaped area.
D. Screening From Residential Uses: All permitted uses in the B-6 and B-7 Districts, including parking, loading, and outdoor storage areas, that are adjacent to a lot line in an R-1 or R-2 District and located within one hundred (100) feet of a principal residential structure shall provide a wall for screening purposes. Such walls shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes except as necessary for public safety. All required walls shall be constructed of common or face brick, poured or precast masonry, or decorative block. Required walls shall not be less than five (5) feet in height or more than eight (8) feet in height.
E. Site Access Alternatives: If one (1) of the following site access alternatives is provided, the minimum lot frontage requirement shall be reduced to one hundred (100) linear feet and the maximum percent of lot area permitted to be covered by buildings shall be increased to fifty (50) percent:
1. A service road paralleling M-20 is provided across the entire parcel and primary ingress and egress to the parcel is via such service road.
2. Alternative ingress and egress to the parcel is available such as a rear access road or access to a street intersecting M-20.
3. Ingress and egress to the parcel from M-20 is via common driveway(s) shared with adjoining property(ies).
4. Ingress and egress to the parcel is through inter-connected parking areas with adjacent property(ies) if approved by the Planning Commission in consideration of safe and efficient vehicle and pedestrian circulation.
F. Ingress/Egress Points: The center line of all ingress and egress points shall be located no closer than one hundred (100) feet to the centerline of any intersecting roadway.
G. Screening of Trash Receptacles: Trash receptacles shall be screened from view by a masonry wall not less than five (5) feet in height or more than eight (8) feet in height.
H. Outdoor Storage Areas: All outdoor storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence not less then five (5) feet in height.
I. Outdoor Lighting: No outdoor lighting shall be directed off the lot on which it is located; and no light shall be so bright or otherwise obnoxious as to adversely affect adjacent land uses, especially adjacent residential land. In no case, except municipal street lighting, shall more than (1) foot candle power of light cross a lot line five (5) feet above the ground into a residential District.
Union Township 24-5 B-6. Auto-Related
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
J. Outdoor Display of Products: The outdoor display of products shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from all property lines, twenty (20) feet from the road right- of-way, and fifty (50) feet from an adjacent residential structure located within an R-1 or R-2 residential District .
K. Schedule of Requirements: See Section 29 for all lot area, side yards, front yards, rear yards, etc.
Union Township 25-1 B-7. Retail and Service
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
SECTION 25 B-7 RETAIL AND SERVICE HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
25.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
In recognition of the unique character of the M-20/Pickard Corridor this District establishes requirements and incentives to improve vehicular and pedestrian safety, to decrease traffic congestion, and to improve the visual appearance of the corridor through proper regulation, landscaping, buffering, and screening. (Ord 2010-02)
The B-7 District is intended as a high quality and attractive retail, service, and office District.
25.2 PERMITTED USES (H, NEW, 1992-6 ORDINANCE; I, NEW, 1993-11 ORDINANCE)
Generally recognized retail businesses that supply commodities on the premises such as but not limited to groceries, baked goods, or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing, notions, hardware, and automotive supply parts.
Personal service establishments that perform services on the premises such as but not limited to repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe), tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, photographic studios, self-service laundries, dry cleaners, and travel agencies.
Bank and loan companies.
Bars, grills, and cocktail lounges.
Hotels and motels.
Office buildings.
Restaurants, including drive-through.
Private clubs, Fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.
Business schools, colleges, and private schools operated for profit. (New, Ord. 1993-11)
Adult Bookstores, See Section 23.2.I (Amended, Ord 2005-03)
Marihuana Club provided the requirements of Section 22.2.R are met. (New Or 2011-03)
Marihuana Dispensary provided the requirements of Section 22.2.S are met. (New Or 2011-03)
25.3 SPECIAL USES (C, NEW, 1993-6 ORDINANCE)
The following special uses may be permitted in this District when all requirements, conditions, and procedures of Section 30 are complied with:
Union Township 25-2 B-7. Retail and Service
Zoning Ordinance Highway Business District
A. Filling stations.
B. Planned unit developments.
C. Mobile and Modular Home Sales (Ord. 1998-21)
D. Multi-use Structures
E. Auto wash establishments when completely enclosed in a building. (Ord 2001-04)
F. Retail sales of new or used cars, trucks, boats, farm equipment, mobile homes, travel trailers, and motor homes. Outside area for display purposes are allowed, provided all servicing, repair, or conditioning of such vehicles or equipment shall be in a fully enclosed building. (Ord 2010-02)
1. Surfacing and other requirements of Section 10 shall be adhered to.
2. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential Districts.
25.4 DISTRICT STANDARDS (AMENDED, 1991-16 ORDINANCE)
All uses permitted in this District shall also meet the standards in Section 24.4.
Union Township 26-1 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
SECTION 26 I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
26.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This District is designed to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and light industrial operations whose external and physical effects are restricted to the area of the District and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding Districts. It is intended to permit the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly and/or treatment of finished or semi finished products from previously prepared material. It is not intended for the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location. The general goals of this District include the following specific purposes:
To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the Township's expected future economy for light industrial and related uses.
To Protect abutting residential Districts by separating them from industrial activities and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development.
To prohibit industrial uses that are prone to fire, explosions, toxic hazards, offensive noise, vibrations, smoke, odor, and other objectionable influences.
To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development. In each area, to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures and to protect the Township's tax revenues.
26.2 PERMITTED USES (B, NO. 11, NEW; 1992-6 ORDINANCE)
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
A. Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building.
B. Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding, or processing is wholly within an enclosed building:
1. Warehousing and wholesale establishments and trucking facilities.
2. The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of products such as but not limited to bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, food products, hardware, cutlery, tool, die, gauge, and machine shops.
3. The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials; bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork elastomers, feathers, plastics, rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metals, shell textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood, and yarns.
4. The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
5. Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, metal or rubber stamps, and molded rubber products.
Union Township 26-2 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
6. Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios, and phonographs.
7. Laboratories--experimental, film, or testing.
8. Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like.
9. Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, provided that such plants shall not deal directly with consumer uses.
10. All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards, and other related uses.
11. All aspects of automobile repair including but not limited to auto engine and body repair and undercoating shops when conducted in a completely enclosed building.
C. Warehousing and wholesale establishments and trucking facilities.
D. The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of products such as but not limited to bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, food products, hardware, cutlery, tool, die, gauge, and machine shops.
E. The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials; bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork elastomers, feathers, plastics, rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metals, shell textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood, and yarns.
F. The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
G. Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, metal or rubber stamps, and molded rubber products.
H. Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices
I. Laboratories--experimental, film, or testing.
J. Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like.
K. Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, provided that such plants shall not deal directly with consumer uses.
L. All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards, and other related uses.
M. All aspects of automobile repair including but not limited to auto engine and body repair and undercoating shops when conducted in a completely enclosed building.
N. Warehouse, storage, transfer, electric, and gas service buildings and yards, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations, water and gas tank holders, railroad transfer and storage tracks and freight terminals.
Union Township 26-3 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
O. Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or with an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all residential or business Districts and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. The extent of such fence or wall may be determined by the Planning Commission on the basis of usage. Such fence or wall shall not be less than five (5) feet in height and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight (8) feet in height. A chain link type fence, with heavy evergreen shrubbery inside of said fence, shall be considered to be an obscuring fence.
P. Trade or industrial schools.
Q. Self-storage Facilities (Mini-Warehouse, Mini-Storage), Provided That:
1. No storage outside of the self-storage building shall be permitted.
2. Maximum length of any self-storage building shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet.
3. No storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers or explosive materials, as defined in the fire prevention code, or toxic materials shall be permitted within the self-storage building or upon premises.
4. The use of the premises shall be limited to storage only and shall not be used or operating any other business, for maintaining or repairing for any vehicles, recreational equipment or other items, or for any recreational activity, hobby or purpose other than the storage of personal items and business items as herein before set forth.
R. Commercial and Boarding Kennels, Veterinarian Services and Clinics (Ord. 1998-21)
S. (New Or 2011-03) Marihuana Growing Facility, when conducted within a completely enclosed building, provided the following requirements are met:
1. State Law. A Marihuana Growing Facility shall at all times comply with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq and the Administrative Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time.
2. Zoning Permit and Marihuana Growing Facility License Required. Both a zoning permit and a Marihuana Growing Facility License must be obtained for a specific site before a Marihuana Growing Facility is operated in the Charter Township of Union.
3. Codes. Prior to cultivation of marihuana an inspection by the Township is required to confirm that all necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits have been obtained for any portion of a building in which electrical wiring, lighting, or watering devices that support the cultivation, growing, or harvesting of marihuana are located. The intent of this subsection is to ensure the safety of the public.
Union Township 26-4 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
4. Inspections. Quarterly inspections shall be made by the Township to confirm the Marihuana Growing Facility is operating in accordance with applicable laws.
5. Standards and Review of Zoning Permit. The Zoning Official shall review each application for a zoning permit for a Marihuana Growing Facility and shall grant or deny the permit based on the Zoning Ordinance requirements for Medical Marihuana Growing Facilities. A denial can be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall hear and decide the appeal or request for a variance within 45 days, and thereafter the applicant can appeal to the circuit court.
6. Not Transferable. Permits are not transferrable and shall only apply to the specific site approved.
7. Dwelling Units. A Marihuana Growing Facility shall not be located on the same parcel as a dwelling unit.
8. Drive thru. Drive thru facilities are prohibited on a Marihuana Growing Facility site.
9. Dispersal and Spacing. The parcel on which a Marihuana Growing Facility is located shall be situated at least one-thousand (1000) feet from the parcel on which another Marihuana Growing Facility, a Marihuana Dispensary, or a Marihuana Club is located, as measured between property lines.
The parcel on which a Marihuana Growing Facility is located shall be situated at least one-thousand (1000) feet from a residential zoning district or a parcel on which a church, house of worship, school, licensed day care, community center or public park is located as measured between property lines or a property line and zoning district boundary when applicable. For purposes of this section a school shall be any public or private institution of learning, elementary through secondary (K-12) and any preschool.
10. Site Requirements. Marihuana Growing Facilities must be located on a site that provides:
a. off street parking located shall be in accordance with Section 10, Parking and Loading Spaces, and 10.2.D;
b. illuminated and unscreened off street parking;
c. a front and side setback from any public sidewalk of 50 feet, measured from the face of the building to the sidewalk;
d. driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2;
e. entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2;
f. not more than one (1) sign announcing the service, shall be permitted as regulated in Section 11.7;
g. greenbelt planting and screening will be required so as to obscure view from any adjacent residential district. Screening shall consist of non-deciduous trees, not less than three (3) feet in height, planted and maintained in live condition not less than fifteen (15) feet on centers;
h. no storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers, or explosive materials, as defined in the fire prevention code, or toxic materials shall be permitted upon the premises.
11. Operational Requirements. A Marihuana Growing Facility shall:
a. prohibit persons under the age of 18 from entering the business, unless they are in the possession of a Registry Identification Card or the equivalent, and are accompanied by their Primary Caregiver;
b. keep all marihuana, in any form, within an enclosed locked facility, so that the marihuana is not visible from any location outside of the
Union Township 26-5 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
building;
c. prohibit the transfer, delivery, acquisition, sale, ingestion, smoking or other consumption, of controlled substances, including marihuana, on the site;
d. refrain from emitting odors emanating from the marihuana, beyond the building;
e. have a single secure entrance and shall implement security measures to deter and prevent theft of marihuana, diversion of marihuana to illicit markets and unauthorized entrance into the Marihuana Dispensary;
f. prohibit any person on the premises of a Dispensary or Growing Facility unless they:
i. Possess a Registry Identification Card or the equivalent;
ii. Assist a Qualifying Patient in the use or administration of marihuana;
iii. Are an owner of the premises or an employee of the Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility; or
iv. Are a service worker engaged in maintenance activities, postal delivery or law enforcement, emergency personnel and/or zoning personnel.
g. prohibit the sale or rental of goods on the premises except as secondary and incidental to the primary purpose of a Marihuana Growing Facility.
9. Enforcement. Violations of the Marihuana Growing Facility requirements shall be subject to prosecution by the Charter Township of Union, and more than two (2) violations in any twelve (12) month period shall be cause for the revocation of the zoning permit, but only after prior written notice of each violation and thirty (30) days prior written notice of a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals on the question of revoking the zoning permit.
Union Township 27-6 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
T. Special Use; Utility Grid Wind Energy Systems. See Section 30.4.AC
26.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
A. Off-street parking in accordance with Section 10 and signs under Section 11.
B. All outdoor storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than five (5) feet high, or with a chain link type fence. Greenbelt planting may be required so as to obscure all view from any adjacent Residential or Business District or from a public street.
C. See Section 29 for schedule of lot area, side yards, front yards, rear yards, etc.
D. Review of Plans: Site plans for the I-1 District shall be submitted to and shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission, with respect to the required conditions, and such other site related problems as it deems necessary to assure maximum traffic safety and to assure maximum protection to abutting properties.
E. All activities shall be carried on in such a manner and with such precaution against fire and explosion hazards as to produce no explosion hazards as determined by the Michigan Department of Labor to use on an adjacent property. The storage of flammable liquids other than fuels used for heating shall not be permitted.
F. There shall be no emission of any smoke, atomic radiation, fumes, gas, dust, odors, or any other atmospheric pollutant that will disseminate beyond the boundaries of the lot occupied by such use in such a manner as to create a public nuisance.
G. The discharge of any industrial waste onto the ground or into any surface water is prohibited.
H. There shall be no vibration that is discernible to the human senses beyond the property line of the site on which such use is conducted.
I. There shall be no noise emanating from the operation that will be more audible beyond the boundaries of the site than the volume of traffic noise on the nearest adjacent street.
J. There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2) foot-candles or that would be damaging to the human eye measured at the property line of the lot occupied by such use. This regulation shall not apply to a parking lot. Exterior lighting sources shall be directed away from any neighboring residential District.
K. No principal or accessory building shall be closer than sixty (60) feet to the property line of any residential use or District. A planted landscaped area of at least ten (10) feet in width, meeting the screening standards specified in Section 8.31, shall be provided in the required setback.
SECTION 27 I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Union Township 27-7 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
27.1 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE
This District is designed to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external and physical effects are restricted to the area of the District and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding Districts, It is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material. It is further intended that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, not be permitted. The general goals of this District include the following specific purposes:
A. To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the Township's expected future economy for all types of manufacturing and related uses.
B. To protect abutting residential Districts by separating them from manufacturing activities and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development.
C. To promote manufacturing development that is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic hazards; from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, and other objectionable influences.
D. To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development. In each area, to conserve value of land and buildings and other structures and to protect the Township's tax revenues.
27.2 PERMITTED USES (B, NO. 11, NEW; 1991-16 ORDINANCE; J, AMENDED, 1992-6 ORDINANCE)
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
A. Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design, and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building.
B. Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding, or processing is wholly within an enclosed building:
1. Warehousing and wholesale establishments and trucking facilities.
2. The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of products such as, but not limited to, bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, food products, hardware, cutlery, tool, die, gauge, and machine shops.
3. The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials; bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fiber, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood, and yarns.
4. The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
5. Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, metal or rubber stamps, and molded rubber products.
Union Township 27-8 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
6. Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios, and phonographs.
7. Laboratories--experimental, film, or testing.
8. Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like.
9. Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, provided that such plants shall not deal directly with consumer at retail.
10. All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards, and other related uses.
11. Facilities producing products utilized for asphalt paving.
C. Warehouse, storage, transfer, electric, and gas service buildings and yards, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations, water and gas tank holders, railroad transfer and storage tracks and freight terminals.
D. Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or with an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all residential or business Districts and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. The extent of such fence or wall may be determined by the Planning Commission on the basis of usage. Such fence or wall shall not be less than five (5) feet in height and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight (8) feet in height. A chain link type fence, with heavy evergreen shrubbery inside of said fence, shall be considered to be an obscuring fence.
E. Municipal uses such as water treatment plants and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other municipal buildings and uses, including outdoor storage.
F. Commercial and Boarding Kennels, Veterinarian Services and Clinics (Amended Ord. 1998-21).
G. Greenhouses.
H. Trade or industrial schools.
I. Self-storage Facilities (Mini-Warehouse, Mini-Storage), Provided That:
1. No storage outside of the self-storage building shall be permitted.
2. Maximum length of any self-storage building shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet.
3. No storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers or explosive materials, as defined in the fire prevention code, or toxic materials shall be permitted within the self-storage building or upon premises.
4. The use of the premises shall be limited to storage only and shall not be used for operating any other business, for maintaining or repairing of any vehicles, recreational equipment or other items, or for any recreational activity, hobby or purpose other than the storage of personal items and business items as herein before set forth.
Union Township 27-9 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
J. All aspects of automobile repair including but not limited to auto engine and body repair and undercoating shops when conducted in a completely enclosed building. Retail sales of new and used trucks. Outside area for display purposes are allowed, providing all servicing, repair, or conditioning of such vehicles shall be done in a fully enclosed building.
K. Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the District so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-2 District.
L. Metal plating, buffing, and polishing subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances.
M. Heating and electric power generating plants and all necessary uses.
N. Any of the following uses, provided that they are located not less than eight hundred (800) feet from any residential District and not less than three hundred (300) feet from any other District:
1. Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an approved and enclosed incinerator plant.
2. Blast furnace, steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill.
3. Manufacturing of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris.
4. Petroleum or other inflammable liquids, production, refining or storage.
5. Smelting of copper, iron, or zinc ore.
O. Marihuana Growing Facility, when conducted within a completely enclosed building, provided the following requirements are met (New Or 2011-03):
1. State Law. A Marihuana Growing Facility shall at all times comply with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq and the Administrative Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time.
2. Zoning Permit and Marihuana Growing Facility License Required. Both a zoning permit and a Marihuana Growing Facility License must be obtained for a specific site before a Marihuana Growing Facility is operated in the Charter Township of Union.
3. Codes. Prior to cultivation of marihuana an inspection by the Township is required to confirm that all necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits have been obtained for any portion of a building in which electrical wiring, lighting, or watering devices that support the cultivation, growing, or harvesting of marihuana are located. The intent of this subsection is to ensure the safety of the public.
Union Township 27-10 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
4. Inspections. Quarterly inspections shall be made by the Township to confirm the Marihuana Growing Facility is operating in accordance with applicable laws.
5. Standards and Review of Zoning Permit. The Zoning Official shall review each application for a zoning permit for a Marihuana Growing Facility and shall grant or deny the permit based on the Zoning Ordinance requirements for Medical Marihuana Growing Facilities. A denial can be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall hear and decide the appeal or request for a variance within 45 days, and thereafter the applicant can appeal to the circuit court.
6. Not Transferable. Permits are not transferrable and shall only apply to the specific site approved.
7. Dwelling Units. A Marihuana Growing Facility shall not be located on the same parcel as a dwelling unit.
8. Drive thru. Drive thru facilities are prohibited on a Marihuana Growing Facility site.
9. Dispersal and Spacing. The parcel on which a Marihuana Growing Facility is located shall be situated at least one-thousand (1000) feet from the parcel on which another Marihuana Growing Facility, a Marihuana Dispensary, or a Marihuana Club is located, as measured between property lines.
The parcel on which a Marihuana Growing Facility is located shall be situated at least one-thousand (1000) feet from a residential zoning district or a parcel on which a church, house of worship, school, licensed day care, community center or public park is located as measured between property lines or a property line and zoning district boundary when applicable. For purposes of this section a school shall be any public or private institution of learning, elementary through secondary (K-12) and any preschool.
10. Site Requirements. Marihuana Growing Facilities must be located on a site that provides:
a. off street parking located shall be in accordance with Section 10, Parking and Loading Spaces, and 10.2.D;
b. illuminated and unscreened off street parking;
c. a front and side setback from any public sidewalk of 50 feet, measured from the face of the building to the sidewalk;
d. driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2;
e. entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2;
f. not more than one (1) sign announcing the service, shall be permitted as regulated in Section 11.7;
g. greenbelt planting and screening will be required so as to obscure view from any adjacent residential district. Screening shall consist of non-deciduous trees, not less than three (3) feet in height, planted and maintained in live condition not less than fifteen (15) feet on centers;
h. no storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers, or explosive materials, as defined in the fire prevention code, or toxic materials shall be permitted upon the premises.
11. Operational Requirements. A Marihuana Growing Facility shall:
a. prohibit persons under the age of 18 from entering the business, unless they are in the possession of a Registry Identification Card or the equivalent, and are accompanied by their Primary Caregiver;
b. keep all marihuana, in any form, within an enclosed locked facility, so that the marihuana is not visible from any location outside of the building;
c. prohibit the transfer, delivery, acquisition, sale, ingestion, smoking or other consumption, of controlled substances, including marihuana, on the site;
Union Township 27-11 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
d. refrain from emitting odors emanating from the marihuana, beyond the building;
e. have a single secure entrance and shall implement security measures to deter and prevent theft of marihuana, diversion of marihuana to illicit markets and unauthorized entrance into the Marihuana Dispensary;
f. prohibit any person on the premises of a Dispensary or Growing Facility unless they:
i. Possess a Registry Identification Card or the equivalent;
ii. Assist a Qualifying Patient in the use or administration of marihuana;
iii. Are an owner of the premises or an employee of the Marihuana Dispensary or Marihuana Growing Facility; or
iv. Are a service worker engaged in maintenance activities, postal delivery or law enforcement, emergency personnel and/or zoning personnel.
g. prohibit the sale or rental of goods on the premises except as secondary and incidental to the primary purpose of a Marihuana Growing Facility.
9. Enforcement. Violations of the Marihuana Growing Facility requirements shall be subject to prosecution by the Charter Township of Union, and more than two (2) violations in any twelve (12) month period shall be cause for the revocation of the zoning permit, but only after prior written notice of each violation and thirty (30) days prior written notice of a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals on the question of revoking the zoning permit.
Union Township 27-12 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
O. Marihuana Growing Facility provided the requirements of Section 26.2.S are met.
P. Special Uses: The following special uses may be permitted in this District when all requirements, conditions, and procedures of Section 30 are complied with:
1. Junk yards.
2. Planned unit development.
3. Utility Grid Wind Energy Systems. See Section 30.4.AC
27.3 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
A. Off-street parking in accordance with Section 10 and signs under Section 11.
B. All outdoor storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than five (5) feet high, or with a chain link type fence. Greenbelt planting may be required so as to obscure all view from any adjacent residential or business District or from a public street.
C. See Section 29 for schedule of lot area, side yards, front yards, rear yards, etc.
D. Review of Plans: Site plans for the I-2 District shall be submitted to and shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission, with respect to the required conditions, and such other site related problems as it deems necessary to assure maximum traffic safety and to assure maximum protection to abutting properties.
E. All activities shall be carried on in such a manner and with such precaution against fire and explosion hazards as to produce no explosion hazards as determined by the Michigan Department of Labor to use on an adjacent property. Flammable liquids other than fuels used for heating shall be used for no other purpose, or in underground tanks, provided, said storage building is not closer than one hundred (100) feet to any building occupied by one (1) or more persons.
F. There shall be no emission of any smoke, atomic radiation, fumes, gas, dust, odors, or any other atmospheric pollutant that will disseminate beyond the boundaries of the lot occupied by such use in such a manner as to create a public nuisance.
G. The discharge of any industrial waste onto the ground or into any surface water is prohibited.
H. There shall be no vibration that is discernible to the human senses beyond the property line of the site on which such use is conducted.
I. There shall be no noise emanating from the operation that will be more audible beyond the boundaries of the site than the volume of traffic noise on the nearest adjacent street.
J. There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2) foot-candles or that would be damaging to the human eye measured at the property line of the lot occupied by such use. This regulation shall not apply to a parking lot. Exterior lighting sources shall be directed away from any neighboring residential District.
Union Township 27-13 I-2. General
Zoning Ordinance Industrial District
K. No principal or accessory building shall be closer than sixty (60) feet to the property line of any residential use or District. A planted landscaped area of at least ten (10) feet in width, meeting the screening standards specified in Section 8.31, shall be provided in the required setback..
Union Township 28-1 OS
Zoning Ordinance Office Service District
SECTION 28 OS OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS
(Addition, 1997-12 Ordinance)
28.1 INTENT
The OS Office Service Districts are designed to accommodate uses such as offices, and business services which shall serve as transitional areas between residential and business districts and to provide a transition between major thoroughfares and residential districts. The exterior of buildings accommodating such permitted uses must conform to the adjacent residential character of the neighborhood.
28.2 PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED
In an Office Service District buildings and land shall be used for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance:
A. Executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic and drafting office buildings.
B. Medical and Dental Offices, not including clinic emergency room services. Veterinarian Clinics, providing no boarding services are provided beyond the term necessary for the care of animals, and in no case shall any animal be left unattended out of doors.
C. Offices of non-profit professional, civic and religious organizations.
D. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
28.3 SPECIAL USES
The following special uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the Planning Commission:
A. Specialized retail activities such as: a pharmacy or apothecary shop, corrective garments, optical, prosthesis, provided the following conditions are met:
1. Any such use shall be accessory to a permitted use and located within the same building.
2. The floor space set aside for the interior display and sale of such merchandise shall not exceed 25 percent of the usable floor area of the building.
B. One and two family dwellings.
C. Banks, credit unions, or savings and loan associations, with drive-in facilities as an accessory use only.
Union Township 28-2 OS
Zoning Ordinance Office Service District
D. Mortuary establishments, including a caretakers residence, provided the following conditions are met: (a) Adequate vehicular assembly area for a funeral procession shall be provided off street in addition to required parking areas. (b) The service and loading area shall be screened form adjacent residential uses. (c) The minimum size shall be 2 acres. (d) All structures on the property shall be set back at least 40 feet from all lot lines. (e) All drives shall be on streets designated as collectors or arterials according to the Isabella County Road Commission or MDOT designations.
28.4 REQUIRED CONDITIONS
A. Before a building permit is issued, all site plans shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and approval.
B. The storage of goods and materials for sale or distribution is permitted as long as they are stored within the building. Such storage is to be accessory in nature and is not intended to include warehousing or storage other than that normally incidental to the above uses.
C. No display of any merchandise or products or signs advertising such merchandise or products shall be visible from the exterior of the building.
D. Parking:
1. Parking and drives shall be hard surface, concrete or asphalt.
2. Parking area shall be in rear yard.
3. The parking of any commercially used or licensed vehicle with a rated capacity of one ton or more is not permitted other than for normal deliveries of short duration.
E. If abutting to residential property, evergreen screening shall be provided with a minimum of 6 feet in height spaced to provide solid screening within three (3) years with not more than 10 foot centers. Two rows with alternate planting may be required as specified in 8.32-G.
F. Municipal sewer/water are required.
Lot requirements must be met as provided by section 29.
Union Township 29-1 Schedule of Lot Requirements
Zoning Ordinance Business, Office Service District and Industrial
SECTION 29 SCHEDULE OF LOT, YARD, AND AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
(Amended, 1991-16 Ordinance; Amended, 1997-7 Ordinance; Amended, 1997-12 Ordinance)
PRINCIPAL
STRUCTURE
B-4
B-5
B-6
B-7
I-1
I-2
OS
Minimum Lot Frontage, Lot Width (Feet)
80
100
130 (D)
130 (D)
100
100
90
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)
12,000
16,000
20,000
20,000
43,560
50,000
15,000
Maximum Building Height (Feet)
35
35
35
35
35
35
35
Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet)
50 (A)
50 (A,B)
15 (E)
15 (E)
75 (A)
75 (A)
30 (F)
Minimum Side Yard Setback (Feet)
20 (B)
20 (B)
10 (E)
10 (E)
30 (C)
20 (C)
20
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet)
25 (B)
25 (A,B)
10 (E)
10 (E)
50 (C)
50 (C)
50
Maximum Lot Coverage (By All Buildings)
30%
30%
30% (D)
30% (D)
40%
---
30%
Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard, provided that there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of ten (10) feet between the nearest point of the off street parking areas, exclusive of access driveways and the nearest right-of-way line as indicated on the Major Thoroughfare Plan.
A lot in the B-4 and B-5 District will provide a side and rear yard of at least forty (40) feet when abutting a residential District.
A lot in the I-1 or I-2 District will provide a side and rear yard of at least sixty (60) feet in depth when abutting a residential use or District.
See Section 24.4, E.
See Section 24.4, B.
Front yards shall be no less than the adjacent front yards. If the adjacent front yards are unequal, the minimum front yard shall be the average of the two adjacent lots. In no case shall the thirty (30) foot be reduced.
Union Township 29-2 Schedule of Lot Requirements
Zoning Ordinance Business, Office Service District and Industrial
See Section 8.40, Urban Overlay Zone for areas with increased setbacks.
Union Township 30-1 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
SECTION 30 SPECIAL USE PERMITS
30.1 PURPOSE
Special Uses are those uses of land that are not essentially incompatible with the uses permitted in a Zoning District but possess characteristics or locational qualities that require individual review and restriction in order to avoid incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area, public services and facilities, and adjacent uses of land. The purpose of this section is to establish equitable procedures and criteria that shall be applied in the determination of requests to establish Special Uses. The criteria for discussion and requirements, provided for under the provisions of this section, shall be in addition to those required elsewhere in this Ordinance that are applicable to the special use under consideration.
30.2 APPLICATION PROCEDURES
An application for permission to establish a special use shall be submitted and acted upon in accordance with the following procedures:
A. Application: Applications for a special use permit shall be submitted through the Zoning Official to the Planning Commission. Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted by the Township Board to cover the cost of processing the application. No part of any fee shall be refundable.
B. Required Information: An application for a special use permit shall be accompanied by the following documents and information:
1. A special use application form, supplied by the Zoning Official, that has been completed in full by the applicant.
2. A site plan in accordance with Section 12.
C. Hearing: The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing or hearings on the special use request per section 7.8.
D. Review: Within a reasonable time following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application for the special use permit, testimony received at the public hearing, and other materials submitted in relation to the request and make a recommendation to the Township Board. Approving or denying the special use application shall be in accord with the criteria for approval stated in Section 30.3 and such other standards contained in this Ordinance that relate to the special uses under consideration. The Planning Commission may request a report on any special use application from the Zoning Official for the purpose of evaluating conformance of the special use request with the requirements of this Ordinance and the development objectives of the Township.
E. Issuance of a Special Use Permit: Upon the approval by the Township Board, there will be a special use permit issued, signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission and the Zoning Official. The permit shall include any restrictions that the Township Board or the Planning Commission deems necessary. Implementation of the special use shall be consistent with the use applied for and approved. The permit shall become valid twenty-one (21) days after the date of decision. It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Official to ensure compliance with the terms, conditions, and restrictions of any special use permit.
Union Township 30-2 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
F. Appeal: Within twenty-one (21) days following the date of decision on any special use permit, an applicant or an aggrieved party, including any governmental body or agency, may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court.
G. Decisions All decisions of the Township Board, and Planning Commission relating to special use applications, including the findings supporting any decision, shall be recorded in written form and retained as permanent record.
30.3 BASIS OF DETERMINATIONS
Prior to recommending to the Township Board approval or disapproval of a special use application, the Planning Commission shall ensure that the requirements specified in this section, as well as requirements of the District it is located in and applicable requirements established elsewhere in this Ordinance, shall be satisfied by the completion and operation of the special use under consideration.
Union Township 30-3 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
A. General Requirements for Special Uses: The applicant shall follow these requirements and recommendations made by the Planning Commission after their review. The general requirements for all special uses are as follows:
1. The special use shall be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in a manner harmonious with the character of adjacent property and the surrounding area.
2. The special use shall not change the essential character of the surrounding area.
3. The special use shall not interfere with the general enjoyment of adjacent property.
4. The special use shall not be hazardous to adjacent property or involve uses, activities, materials, or equipment that will be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons or property through the excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, odor, fumes, or glare.
5. The special use shall be adequately served by essential public facilities and services; or it shall be demonstrated that the person responsible for the proposed special use shall be able to continually provide adequate services and facilities deemed essential to the special use under consideration. The said facilities or services shall be approved by the Central Michigan District Health Department.
6. When deemed necessary by the Township Board or Planning Commission, the use shall be adequately screened by distance and landscaping to protect the rights of all adjoining property.
7. The Township Board or Planning Commission, in connection with approval of any application, may require reasonable undertaking by the applicant to guarantee and assure by agreement, including a performance bond to be posted by the applicant or by some other reasonable surety arrangement at appropriate stages of the planned development, that the development will be executed in accordance with the approved plan.
8. That such use will be an asset to the Township.
9. Requirements and conditions of each individual special use permitted shall be complied with, unless otherwise mentioned within this Section.
10. Any special use permit may be revoked by the Union Township Board upon recommendation of the Union Township Planning Commission whenever the operation fails to comply with any of the required conditions or may be subject to the penalties of this Ordinance.
a) Approval of a special use permit shall be valid regardless of change of ownership, provided that all terms and conditions of the permit are met by any subsequent owner.
b) In instances where development authorized by a special use permit has not commenced within one (1) year from the date of issuance, the permit maybe reconsidered and/or voided at a regularly called meeting of the Planning Commission.
30.4 SPECIAL USES PERMITTED (X, NEW, 1993-6 ORDINANCE; Y, NEW, 1995-6 ORDINANCE)
The following special uses may be permitted within the specified Districts:
A. Adult Entertainment Activities: (Deleted as Special Use Permit, Ord 2005-03)
B. Airports, Public or Private, Provided:
Union Township 30-4 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
1. They shall only be located within AG Districts.
2. All entrances and exits shall be designed in accordance with the Isabella County Road Commission's requirements. It is further required that:
a) All sites shall provide points of ingress and egress that are located upon a major thoroughfare or upon a public road, Local traffic movement shall be accommodated within the site so the entering and exiting vehicles will make normal and uncomplicated movements into or out of the thoroughfare.
b) All points of entrance or exit should be located no closer than two hundred (200) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets or highways.
c) All vehicles should have clear vision approaching a public street within one hundred (100) feet of the street for a sight distance of five hundred (500) feet in either direction along the street.
d) Where points of ingress and egress are located upon a major street or thoroughfare, deceleration lanes should be provided at points of ingress and egress.
3. They shall follow the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations and recommendations.
4. Driveways and parking areas shall comply with the provisions of Section 10, except that they shall be at least fifty (50) feet from adjacent property lines and in any event shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any existing residential dwelling located on abutting property. The Planning Commission shall have the prerogative of reducing these dimensional setback requirements in the event that all the effected property owners mutually agree, in writing, to a reduction and further that the occupants of any residential dwellings affected agree in writing.
C. Amusement Parks, Provided:
1. They are only located within B-4 Districts.
2. Entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
3. No principal or accessory building shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from any abutting residentially zoned boundary line or in any event within two hundred (200) feet of any existing residential dwelling located on abutting property.
4. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
D. Campgrounds and Recreation Grounds, Private, Provided:
1. They are located within AG Districts.
2. Entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
3. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
4. A greenbelt area of at least twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be maintained around the periphery. Landscaping and/or structural screens, as approved by the Planning Commission, shall be installed as required to serve as an obscuring screen for existing residential dwellings within one hundred (100) feet of the property line on abutting agricultural zoned property. Screening shall also be installed along abutting residential zoned property.
Union Township 30-5 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
5. No principal or accessory building shall be erected, nor any entertainment or display activity be conducted, within one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
6. Proper arrangements shall be made and the required approvals obtained from the Central Michigan District Health Department to provide necessary sanitation facilities.
7. All uses and activities on these areas shall have prior written approval from the Planning Commission. Any other use requirements in this Ordinance, associated with a contemplated use or activity, shall be adhered to if the use or activity is approved.
E. Cemeteries, Public or Private, Including Mausoleums, Provided:
1. They shall only be located within AG Districts.
2. Entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
3. No principal or accessory building shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from any abutting residentially zoned boundary line or in any event within two hundred (200) feet of any existing residential dwelling located on abutting property.
4. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
F. Towers and Antennas: (Replaced, Ord 1999-04)
1. Intent: It is the intent of this Section to provide regulations controlling the placement, design, and construction of commercial communication towers including their accessory uses and attached communication antennas. Changing technologies in the field of communications has resulted in a reliance upon more versatile and convenient forms of communication. Businesses, individuals and government have all developed a dependence upon the capability to contact others. The demand for this communication service has placed a burden on local communities in their ability to regulate communication towers, support structures, and attached communication antennas. This ordinance intends to reduce the impact of these communication elements on adjacent land uses by reasonably regulating their location, height, safety, general appearance, and eventual removal. Additionally, this Ordinance intends to promote and encourage the co-location of attached communication antennas on existing towers and support structures.
2. Definitions: Not included in this definition are the following, provided that they meet the requirements of the Union Township Zoning Ordinance: citizen band radio facilities, short wave facilities, ham and amateur radio facilities, television reception antennas, satellite dishes, a farmer’s communication system, and government facilities which are subject to state and federal law or regulations that preempt municipal regulatory authority.
a) Communication Tower: A radio, telephone, cellular telephone or television relay structure of monopole (a single support column which does not require guide wires) construction attached directly to the ground or other structure utilized for the transmission or reception of radio, telephone, cellular telephone, television, microwave, or any other form of telecommunication signals. Included in this definition are accessory structures and/or enclosures.
b) A communication tower shall not be included under the existing definition of essential services.
Union Township 30-6 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
c) Attached Communication Antenna: Any communication facility affixed to an existing structure, such as a building tower, water tank, utility pole, or other feature utilized to receive and transmit federally or state licensed communication services via duly licensed segments of the radio frequency spectrum. This definition shall not include support structures.
d) Co-Location: The activity of placing more than one Attached Communication Antenna on a Communication Tower or other existing structure.
e) Indemnity: Insurance or other security against possible damage, loss, or hurt; reparation.
3. Regulations: The following regulations shall govern the placement, design and construction of commercial communication towers including their accessory uses, attached communication antenna and co-location.
a) SPECIAL USE PERMIT: Communication Towers and attached Communication Antennas are permitted in the AG-(Agricultural) district only if they meet the requirements of the district in which they are located, the requirements of Section 12, Site Plan Review, and the requirements of Section 30, Special Use Permits, and the Special Use Permit is approved by the Union Township Board.
b) CO-LOCATION: Attached Communication Antennas which are proposed to be attached to existing towers and/or other structures, in any zone, shall be approved by the Planning Commission if the existing structure is a legal conforming use, and meets the requirements of the district in which they are located, the requirements of Section 12 Site Plan Review and the applicable requirements of Section 30.
4. Application Requirements: In addition to normal application requirements, all applications for Communication Towers and Attached Communication Antennas, regardless of the zoning district in which they are proposed to be located, constructed or modified, shall include the following information:
a) Site Plan: A plan which meets the requirements of Section 12. The site plan shall include the location of the tower/antenna, the tower/antenna height, type of construction and a Landscape Plan which provides screening for the support structure base, accessory buildings and enclosures.
b) Proposed Use: A complete written and graphic description of the proposed Communication Tower and/or Attached Communication Antenna. This written and graphic description shall include an explanation of the existing technology which is being proposed.
c) Location Justification: A written explanation of the reason for the proposed location with reference to the coverage area and capacity.
d) Ownership Interest: The nature and extent of the applicant’s ownership or lease interest in the property, building or structure upon which the facilities are proposed for placement.
e) Other Tower Locations: A map depicting other Communication Tower locations within three miles of the proposed site.
Union Township 30-7 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
f) Co-Locations: Applications for Communication Towers must be accompanied by documentation that the applicant has investigated the potential of co-location (sharing tower facilities) with other providers who have Towers in Union Township or neighboring communities. The documentation must include written evidence that the applicant has had direct communication and response regarding the potential for co-location with the owners/operators of such other communication towers. All applications for construction of a Communication Tower will be required to provide plans for future co-location with other owners/operators.
g) Engineering Certification: The applicant shall provide verification with a certified, sealed print that the antenna mount and structure have been reviewed and approved by a professional engineer and that the proposed installation is in compliance with all the applicable codes.
h) Liability: The applicant shall provide documentation that indemnity and insurance coverage exist for the communications tower in the event that damage or personal injury occurs or the provider abandons the structure. The specific dollar amount of the indemnity and insurance coverage shall be approved by the Township and the cancellation of such policy shall not be effective without the approval of the Township.
i) Landscaping Plan: Landscaping, screening, fencing and buffering plans shall be submitted for review and approval. The plans shall take into consideration any existing vegetation and any other natural features of the site.
j) Visual Impact: The applicant shall demonstrate how the visual impact of the proposed communication towers and attached communication antennas will be reduced through the use of color or other techniques.
5. Performance Standards for Communication Towers and Attached Communication Antennas: Communication Towers and Attached Communication Antennas must meet the following applicable performance standards:
a) Site Plan Review: Communication tower application must receive Site Plan approval from the Planning Commission.
b) Engineering Certification: The application shall provide verification that the antenna mount and structure have been reviewed and approved by a professional engineer and that the proposed installation is in compliance with all the applicable codes. The communication tower must be set back from all property lines a distance equal to one and one half (1 ½) times its height, unless engineering specifications have been verified by the Township Engineer that the structural integrity of the communication tower will withstand high winds and impacts, and the likelihood of a communication tower failure is minimal. The applicant shall incur all cost associated with the Township engineering review.
c) Airport Locations: Communication towers in excess of one hundred (100) feet in height above grade level shall be prohibited within a (2) mile radius of a public airport and ½ mile of a public helipad and documented private landing airstrip and be kept out of the landing approach zone.
d) Spacing: In order to prevent a concentration of towers in one geographic area, the minimum spacing distance between communication towers shall be three (3) miles.
Union Township 30-8 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
e) Height: The maximum height of a Communications Tower and attached communication antennae shall be 200 feet. A Communications Tower greater than 200 feet may be permitted, if in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the applicant has sufficiently demonstrated that a proposed Communications Tower in excess of 200 feet will reduce the total number of potential Communications Towers within Union Township and the surrounding areas.
f) Accessory Structures: Accessory structures are limited to the use associated with the operation of the communications tower. Accessory structures shall not exceed 600 square feet in area and a height of 20 feet. Accessory structures shall not be located closer than 50 feet from all property lines.
g) Design Certification: The final plans for the communications tower shall be certified by a registered structural engineer and meet all requirements of the Federal Communications Commission, the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and the Federal Aviation Administration and other applicable statutes and regulations.
h) Abandonment: The communication tower shall be removed by the property owner or lessee within three (3) months of being abandoned. The tower shall be removed to the top of the footing. If the tower has not been removed within the period specified, the Township Supervisor, with the approval of the Township Board, may have the structure removed. All costs of removal shall be charged to the owner and/or lessee of such tower.
i) Unsafe and Unlawful Communication Towers: When any communications tower is determined to be unsafe or is unlawfully erected or maintained and is found to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance the use of the tower shall be discontinued until all violations are corrected or it shall be removed.
j) Additional Equipment: Personal Communication Service (PCS) and Cellular Service providers shall provide disclosure of additional antennas or other equipment whenever installed on an existing structure.
k) Additional Performance Requirements: The following and additional regulations pertaining to communications towers and attached communication antennas shall apply:
1) All towers shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device to prevent unauthorized access.
2) Antennae and metal towers shall be grounded for protection against a direct strike by lightning and shall comply as to electrical wiring and connections with all applicable local statues.
3) All towers shall be located so that they do not interfere with reception in nearby residential areas. In the event a communication tower causes interference, the communication company shall take all steps necessary to correct and eliminate such interference.
4) Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
5) There shall not be any type of advertising signs on site.
Union Township 30-9 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
6) The Site of a Tower shall not serve as a regular place of employment for any employees of the owner or lessee of the Tower.
7)..All parking areas shall be located on site and be hard surfaced unless an alternative surfacing material is approved by the Planning Commission.
8) Tower structures and communication facilities shall incorporate a color scheme which reduces visual impact.
9) The use of guide wires is strictly prohibited. Only monopole towers are allowed.
G. Conservation Areas, Public or Private, and Structures for the Conservation of Water, Soil and Open Space, Forest, and Wildlife Resources, Provided:
1. They are located only in AG Districts.
H. Country Clubs and Golf Courses, Provided:
1. They are located within AG, R-1, R-2A, R-2B, and R-3 Districts.
2. Entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2, above.
3. A minimum front yard of one hundred (100) feet shall separate all uses. operations, and structures permitted herein, and shall be landscaped in accordance with plans approved by the Planning Commission.
4. No principal or accessory building shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from any abutting residentially zoned boundary line or in any event within two hundred (200) feet of any existing residential dwellings located on abutting property.
5. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
I. Filling Stations for the Sale of Gasoline, Oil, Minor Accessories, and Other Incidental Service, Provided:
1. They are only located in AG, B-4, B-5, B-6, or B-7 Districts.
2. The curb cuts for access to a filling station shall not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than twenty-five (25) feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential Districts.
3. The minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles that are required to wait. Filling stations that are intended solely for the sale of gasoline, oil, and minor accessories; having no facilities for repair or servicing of automobiles (including lubricating facilities); may be permitted on lots meeting the minimum lot area requirements of the District they are located in.
4. No principal or accessory building shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from any abutting residentially zoned boundary line or in any event within one hundred (100) feet of any existing residential dwellings located on abutting property.
5. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
Union Township 30-10 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
6. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent Districts.
J. Group Day-Care Homes:
1. Group day-care homes are only located within AG, R-1, R-2A, R-2B, and R-3 Districts.
2. The home shall not be located closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to any of the following:
a) Another licensed group day-care home.
b) Another adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Act 218 of the Public Acts of 1979.
c) A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to seven (7) or more people licensed under Article 6 of the Public Health Code, Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978.
d) A community correction center, resident home, halfway house, or other similar facility that houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections.
Group day-care homes must have appropriate fencing for the safety of the children in the group day-care home as determined by the Township Zoning Administrator.
Group day-care homes must maintain the property consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Group day-care homes do not exceed sixteen (16) hours of operation during a twenty- four (24) hour period.
One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee not residing in the residential home.
One (1) sign announcing the service shall be permitted as regulated in Section 11.7.
K. Hunting Clubs or Gun Clubs, Provided:
1. They are only located within AG Districts.
2. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
L. Junk Yards, Provided:
1. They be located within I-2 Districts.
2. They shall be licensed under the provisions of Act 641 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended.
3. All uses shall be established and maintained in accordance with all applicable State laws.
4. The site shall be a minimum of five (5) acres in size.
Union Township 30-11 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
5. A solid fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height shall be provided around the site to screen said site from surrounding property. Such fence or wall shall be of sound construction, painted, or otherwise finished neatly and inconspicuously. Such fence or wall shall be a permanent finish or construction.
6. All activities shall be confined within the enclosed area. There shall be no stocking of material above the height of the fence or wall, except that movable equipment used on the site may exceed the wall or fence height. No equipment, material, signs, or lighting shall be used or stored outside the enclosed area.
7. All enclosed areas shall be setback at least one hundred (100) feet from any front street or property line. Such front yard setback shall be planted with trees, grass, and shrubs to minimize the appearance of the installation. The spacing and type of the plant materials shall be approved by the Zoning Official.
8. No open burning shall be permitted.
9. Entrance and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
10. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
M. Miniature Golf and Driving Range, Provided:
1. They are located in B-4 Districts.
2. Entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
3. A minimum front yard of one hundred (100) feet shall separate all uses, operations, and structures permitted herein, and shall be landscaped in accordance with plans approved by the Planning Commission.
4. Golf driving ranges shall provide safety screening as deemed reasonable and necessary by the Planning Commission.
5. No principal or accessory building shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from any abutting residentially zoned boundary line or in any event within two hundred (200) feet of any existing residential dwelling located on abutting property.
6. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
N. Mortuary Establishments, Provided:
1. They are only located in B-4 Districts.
2. Adequate assembly area is available off the street for vehicles to be used in funeral processions. Further, such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off street parking area. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main buildings of mortuary establishments.
3. Entrance and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
4. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
O. Planned Shopping Centers, Provided:
1. They shall be located only within B-4 or B-5 Districts.
Union Township 30-12 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
2. The standards for this District are intended to promote safe and convenient access to shopping and business facilities and to avoid or minimize undue traffic congestion or other adverse affects upon property within adjacent Districts.
3. Before a Building Permit may be issued for this District, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance must be granted. Approval of all plans shall be required before a Certificate of Zoning Compliance can be granted for a shopping center development. Approval shall be obtained from the County Highways prior to approval for the site plan. The application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall contain:
a) A market analysis, by a recognized market analyst, stating the economic justification and need for the establishment of a center of the type and size proposed by the applicant. This analysis shall be based upon but not limited to such factors as the trade area of the community; travel time from various parts thereof to the proposed center site; general development trends; expected sales volumes the center as indicated by the demand for certain types of retail merchandise; existing or anticipated competing commercial facilities; and other data and analysis that relate to the need and potential success of the proposed center.
b) A site plan defining the areas to be developed for buildings, the areas to be devoted to parking; the location of pedestrian and vehicular circulation and the points of ingress and egress; the location of walls, landscaped areas, terraces, and other open spaces; the provision of spaces for loading, unloading, and servicing; the location, size, and number of signs; and the required transition strips.
c) A traffic survey, prepared by a qualified traffic engineer, indicating the effect of the proposed shopping center of adjacent streets. Said survey shall disclose the points of origin, direction, and amount of traffic flow to and from the proposed center, as well as adequate means of ingress and egress.
d) A list of proposed uses to be included in the proposed center, with the area of each to be devoted to retail space.
e) Engineering and Architectural Plans for:
1) The treatment and disposal of sewage.
2) The disposal of surface water from roofs, parking lots, and all hard surfaced areas of the development.
3) The proposed handling of traffic congestion, glare, air pollution, fire, or safety hazards.
f) The proposed hours of business and the estimated number of employees and customers anticipated during peak business hours.
g) Final plans of the entire shopping center, including a time schedule for completion of construction.
4. The data required in this section shall be submitted with an application for a special use permit for the purpose of creating a planned shopping center District.
5. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.4
P. Planned Unit Developments: Refer to Section 31 for all Planned Unit Development provisions.
Union Township 30-13 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
Q. Public and Institutional Uses, Provided:
1. They are located within AG, R-1, R-2A, R-2B, and R-3 Districts.
2. That such use will be in conformity with the character of the adjacent neighborhood and that they are essential to service the neighborhood or community and cannot feasibly be located in a zone where they would otherwise be permitted. The Planning Commission shall establish requirements for setback, lot size, side yard, parking, screening, and other conditions necessary to conform the same to the character of the adjacent neighborhood.
3. Entrance and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
4. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
R. Race Tracks, Provided:
1. They are only located within AG Districts.
2. Entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
3. Race tracks shall be enclosed by an obscuring screen fence at least eight (8) feet in height. Fences shall be of permanent finish and construction, painted or otherwise finished neatly, attractively, and inconspicuously.
4. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
5. Days and hours of operation are limited to Fridays between 6 p.m. and 11 p.m., Saturdays between 1 p.m. and 11 p.m.; however, in no event more than six (6) hours, and Sundays between 1 p.m. and 6 p.m.
S. Sand and Gravel Pits, Provided:
1. They are located within AG Districts.
2. All excavation shall comply with Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act 347 of the Public Acts of 1972 of the State of Michigan, as amended. All areas so used shall be rehabilitated progressively as they are worked out or abandoned to a condition entirely free from hazards and blending with the surrounding natural ground. All slopes and banks shall be reasonably graded to prevent excessive erosion.
3. No business or industrial buildings or structures of a permanent nature shall be erected, except when such building is a permitted use within the District in which the gravel pit is located.
4. Driveways and parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
5. Entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
6. The Planning Commission may require that part or all of the operation be screened with a wire or wood fence six (6) feet in height. In addition, evergreen screening planting may be required on any side adjacent to land in residential or commercial use.
7. No excavation should come within one hundred (100) feet of a residence or within fifty (50) feet of a property line or a road right-of-way. All operations coming within the minimums must retain a 2:1 slope (two (2) feet horizontal, one (1) foot vertical). This regulation must also be observed by owner and operator of existing gravel pits where excavation is in progress on the effective date of this Ordinance.
Union Township 30-14 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
8. All truck operations shall be directed away from residential streets, whenever practical.
9. All permit applications for excavations must be co-singed by landowner and operator.
T. Second Living Quarters on a Farm: The use of a second single-family dwelling unit or one (1) two-family dwelling unit as a second living quarters on a farm may be permitted for a member, or members, of the owner's family or for an unrelated family having permanent employment on the farm, provided:
1. Allowed as a special use provided they are located in AG Districts.
2. Lot area requirements of AG District are met.
3. No dwelling permitted under this section may be located in a front yard space of the principal dwelling or closer to the front lot line than fifty (50) feet.
4. A dwelling shall be no closer than thirty (30) feet to the rear or side wall of the principal dwelling on the premises or closer than thirty (30) feet to any barn, accessory farm structure, or to any lot line of adjoining property.
5. Approval from the Central Michigan District Health Department must be obtained for water well and sewage disposal facilities.
U. Self-Storage Buildings (Amended Ord 2000-10) : Facilities used to provide temporary storage needs for business, apartment dwellers, and other individuals on a self-service basis subject to the following:
1. Allowed as a special use provided they are located in B-4 or B-5 Districts.
2. Provided they shall be architecturally designed so an not to have a flat roof, and shall instead have a mansard, gable, hip or gambrel roof design.
3. Provided they meet all required conditions of the B-4 or B-5 zone.
4. All entrances and exits shall be designed in accordance with the Isabella County Road Commission requirements. It is further required that all sites shall provide points of ingress and egress that are located upon a public road. Local traffic movement shall be accommodated within the site so the entering and exiting vehicles will make normal and uncomplicated movements into or out of the public road.
5. Greenbelt planting and screening will be required so as to obscure view from any adjacent residential District. Screening will also be required where property is within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any residentially zoned property. Screening shall consist of non-deciduous trees, not less than three (3) feet in height, planted and maintained in live condition not less than fifteen (15) feet on centers.
6. Maximum length of any self-storage building shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet.
7. No storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers, or explosive materials, as defined in the fire prevention code, or toxic materials shall be permitted within the self-storage building or upon the premises.
8. No storage outside of the self-storage buildings shall be permitted.
The use of the premises shall be limited to storage only and shall not be used for operating any other business, for maintaining or repairing of any vehicles, recreational equipment or other items, for any recreational activity, hobby, or purpose other than the storage of personal items and business items as herein be fore set forth.
Union Township 30-15 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
10. All entries, drives and parking areas shall be hard surfaced and shall provide drainage and grading to move storm water away from the storage units.
V. State-Licensed Residential Facilities:
1. State-licensed residential facilities are only located within Ag Districts.
2. State-licensed residential facilities as defined and properly licensed by Act 218 of the Public Acts of 1979 and Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1973, as amended, which provide resident services for seven (7) or more persons under twenty-four (24) hour supervision, shall only be permitted in AG Districts. Notifications of such proposed special use shall be mailed to all residents within a one thousand five hundred (1,500) foot radius to the property lines of the proposed site as directed by MCLA 125.216(a); MSA 5.2961 (16A).
W. Veterinarian Services:
1. Veterinarian services shall be permitted only in the AG District.
2. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all lot lines.
3. If animals are housed outdoors, the animals shall be housed at least one hundred (100) feet from all lot lines and at least five hundred (500) feet from any R-1, R-2A, R-2B, R- 3, R-4, or R-5 District.
X. Mobile and Modular Home Sales, Provided
1. They shall be located in a B-6 or B-7 district as a Special Use only (Amended Ord. 1998-21).
2. Entrances and exits as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
3. Driveways and Parking areas as specified in Section 30.4.B.2.
4. They shall meet the standards in Section 24.4.
5. Maximum lot coverage (By All Buildings including display models) shall not exceed 30% of Gross Lot Area unless the conditions and requirements of Section 24.4.E. are complied with.
6. The premises shall not be used for repairing or restoration of any mobile or modular homes, or other items unless such repair or restoration shall be conducted in a fully enclosed building.
7. Service vehicles shall be parked on a paved surface and completely screened from view of adjacent properties.
8. Lighting of outdoor display areas shall be shielded so as to deflect light away from adjacent properties. Such lighting shall also be deflected away from any adjacent properties. Such lighting shall also be deflected away from any adjacent street so as not to interfere with traffic.
9. The distance between display models shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
10. Display units shall be skirted immediately upon placement on the sales lot.
Y. Multiple-Family Dwellings of Five or More Units, Provided: (New, Ord 1995-6)
1. The building(s) are located in a R-3 District.
Union Township 30-16 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
2. The building(s) shall have access to a major street.
3. Parking is prohibited in front and side yard setbacks.
4. A minimum of 25 percent of side and rear yard setbacks are retained as open landscaped areas.
5. The Planning Commission may require parking beyond the minimum provisions contained in Section 10.
6. The lot shall not have a common lot line with a lot in an R-1 single family residential district.
Z. Boarding Kennels (New Ord 98-11):
1. Boarding kennels shall be allowed as a special use in AG zones. Boarding kennels are permitted uses in I1 and I2 zones, see district requirements.
2. Boarding kennel may be erected as an accessory building per Section 8.1.A,B.
3. No animals other than customary household pets may be housed. Exotic and wild animals are not allowed.
4. The boarding kennel shall not be located nearer than 100 feet from any property line and 2,450’ from a residential district. Construction shall be compatible with surrounding neighborhood.
5. Single story buildings only are allowed.
6. The building shall be constructed as to be sound proof at the property lines.
7. The building shall be constructed as to not omit noxious odors.
8. All kennel runs shall be contained within the building.
9. All waste shall be disposed in accordance with Health Department standards for septic systems, or municipal sewer. Parking shall be required as per section 10.5 and 10.6.
10. Signs shall be permitted as per section 11.
11. Site plan review shall be in accordance with section 12.
12. Grooming and/or bathing of boarding animals is allowed.
Screening shall be required so as to obscure the view from any adjacent dwelling. Screening shall consist of non-deciduous trees, not less than three (3) feet in height, planted and maintained in live condition, not less than fifteen (15) feet on center.
AA. Auto wash establishments when completely enclosed in a building. (Ord 2001-04)
Accessory facilities and operations such as, but not limited to, vacuums, may be placed outside the structure with Planning Commission approval. The site shall be designed for safe and efficient traffic circulation.
AB. Multi-use: A combination retail and residential structure.
Multi-Use structures:
Union Township 30-17 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
1. Can be located in any B-zone and must be two stories only.
2. The rental units are to be located on the second floor only and are limited to no more than four (4) single-family units.
3. Each residential unit must be at least 1,000 square feet (gross).
4. Must provide the full amount of required business and accessible parking spaces plus two (2) parking spaces per residential unit. Residential parking must be set aside by location or signage to indicate it is reserved for the occupants.
5. Must provide access to the residential areas without entering the business portion of the structure. Additional access to the residential areas maybe provided from the business area.
6.Must meet the township definition of “family” in determining number of occupants per unit.
7. May be permitted in existing legal non-conforming structures that are located in business zones. When these structures are single story, only one residential unit maybe retained on the first floor. If a second story is present or added, only the second story maybe used for residential purposes. Site plan review shall be required when converting any residential structure to a Multi-Use structure.
8. Require a Special Use Permit.
AC. Utility Grid Wind Energy System, On-site Use Wind Energy System over 65 feet high, and Anemometer Towers over 65 feet high.
An Utility Grid Wind Energy System, On-site Use Wind Energy System over 65 feet high, and Anemometer Towers over 65 feet high shall meet the following standards in addition to the general special use standards (section 8.1.G of this ordinance):
1. Property Set-Back:
a. Anemometer Tower setback shall be the greater distance of the following:
1) The setback from property lines of the respective zoning district;
2) The setback from the road right-of-way; and
3) A distance equal to the height of the tower from property lines, from the lease unit boundary, or the Setback Agreement Boundary area, whichever is less.
b. Utility Grid and On-site Use Wind Energy System setback shall be the greater distance of the following:
1. The setback from property lines of the respective zoning district;
2. The setback from the road right-of-way; or
3. A distance equal to the height of the tower including the top of the blade in its vertical position from property lines, from the lease unit boundary, or the Setback Agreement Boundary area, whichever is less.
c. Any Operations and Maintenance Office building, sub-station, or ancillary equipment shall comply with any property set-back requirement of the respective
Union Township 30-18 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
zoning district. Overhead transmission lines and power poles shall comply with the set-back and placement requirements applicable to public utilities.
d. Sound Pressure Level: The sound pressure level shall not exceed 55 dB(A) measured at the property lines or the lease unit boundary, whichever is farther from the source of the noise. This sound pressure level shall not be exceeded for more than three minutes in any hour of the day. If the ambient sound pressure level exceeds 55 dB(A), the standard shall be ambient dB(A) plus 5 dB(A).
e. Safety: Shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access to electrical and mechanical components and shall have access doors that are kept securely locked at all times when service personnel are not present. All spent lubricants and cooling fluids shall be properly and safely removed in a timely manner from the site of the wind energy system. A sign shall be posted near the tower or Operations and Maintenance Office building that will contain emergency contact information. Signage placed at the road access shall be used to warn visitors about the potential danger of falling ice. The minimum vertical blade tip clearance from grade shall be 20 feet for a wind energy system employing a horizontal axis rotor.
f. Post-Construction Permits, Construction Codes, Towers, and Interconnection Standards: Shall comply with all applicable state construction and electrical codes and local building permit requirements.
g. Pre-Application Permits:
1. Utility Infrastructure: Shall comply with Federal AviationAdministration (FAA) requirements, the Michigan Airport Zoning Act (Public Act 23 of 1950 as amended, M.C.L. 259.431 et seq.), the Michigan Tall Structures Act (Public Act 259 of 1959 as amended, M.C.L. 259.481 et seq.), and local jurisdiction airport overlay zone regulations. The minimum FAA lighting standards shall not be exceeded. All tower lighting required by the FAA shall be shielded to the extent possible to reduce glare and visibility from the ground. The tower shaft shall not be illuminated unless required by the FAA. Utility Grid wind energy systems shall comply with applicable utility, Michigan Public Service Commission, and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission interconnection standards.
2. Environmental:
a. The site plan and other documents and drawings shall show mitigation measures to minimize potential impacts on the natural environment including, but not limited to wetlands and other fragile ecosystems, historical and cultural sites, and antiquities, as identified in theEnvironmental Analysis.
b. Comply with applicable parts of the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Act 451 of 1994, M.C.L. 324.101 et seq.) (including but not limited to:
i. Part 31 Water Resources Protection (M.C.L. 324.3101 et seq.),
ii. Part 91 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (M.C.L. 324.9101 et seq.) ,
iii. Part 301 Inland Lakes and Streams (M.C.L. 324.30101 et seq.),
Union Township 30-19 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
iv. Part 303 Wetlands (M.C.L. 324.3030 1 et seq.),
v. Part 323 Shoreland Protection and Management (M.C.L. 324.32301 et seq.),
vi. Part 325 Great Lakes Submerged Lands (M.C.L. 324.3250 1 et seq.), and
vii. Part 353 Sand Dunes Protection and Management (M.C.L. 324.35301 et seq.)) as shown by having obtained each respective permit with requirements and limitations of those permits reflected on the site plan.
F. Performance Security: To ensure repairs to roadways and other public infrastructure, applicants shall obtain all necessary permits and bonds from the Isabella County Road Commission prior to moving equipment or materials or installing driveways.
G. Utilities: Power lines should be placed underground, when feasible, to prevent avian collisions and electrocutions. All above ground lines, transformers, or conductors should comply with the Avian Power Line Interaction Committee(APLIC),http://www.aplic.org/) published standards to prevent avian mortality.
H. The following standards apply only to Utility Grid Wind Energy Systems:
1. Visual Impact: Utility Grid wind energy system projects shall use tubular towers and all Utility Grid wind energy systems in a project shall be finished in a single, non- reflective matte finished color. A project shall be constructed using wind energy systems of similar design, size, operation, and appearance throughout the project. No lettering, company insignia, advertising, or graphics shall be on any part of the tower, hub, or blades. Nacelles may have lettering that exhibits the manufacturer’s and/or owner’s identification. The applicant shall avoid state or federal scenic areas and significant visual resources listed in the local unit of government’s Plan.
2. Avian and Wildlife Impact: Site plan and other documents and drawings shall show mitigation measures to minimize potential impacts on avian and wildlife, as identified in the Avian and Wildlife Impact analysis.
3. Shadow Flicker: Site plan and other documents and drawings shall show mitigation measures to minimize potential impacts from shadow flicker, as identified in the Shadow Flicker Impact Analysis.
4. Decommissioning: A planning commission approved decommissioning plan indicating
a. the anticipated life of the project,
b. the estimated decommissioning costs net of salvage value in current dollars, c) the method of ensuring that funds will be available for decommissioning and restoration, and
c. the anticipated manner in which the project will be decommissioned and the site restored.
5. Complaint Resolution: A planning commission approved process to resolve complaints from nearby residents concerning the construction or operation of the project
Union Township 30-20 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
6. Electromagnetic Interference: No Utility Grid wind energy system shall be installed in any location where its proximity to existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception antennae for radio, television, or wireless phone or other personal communication systems would produce electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or reception unless the applicant provides a replacement signal to the affected party that will restore reception to at least the level present before operation of the wind energy system. No Utility Grid wind energy system shall be installed in any location within the line of sight of an existing microwave communications link where operation of the wind energy system is likely to produce electromagnetic interference in the link’s operation unless the interference is insignificant.
7. Additional requirements for Site Plan Review of Utility Grid Wind Energy System, Anemometer Towers over 65 feet, and On-site Use Wind Energy System over 65 feet. In addition to the requirements for a site plan found in section 12 of this Ordinance, site plans and supporting document for Anemometer Towers over 65 feet, Utility Grid Wind Energy Systems, and On-site Use Wind Energy Systems which are over 65 feet high shall include the following additional information:
H. Documentation that sound pressure level, construction code, tower, interconnection (if applicable), and safety requirements have been reviewed and the submitted site plan is prepared to show compliance with these issues.
I. Proof of the applicant’s public liability insurance for the project.
J. A copy of that portion of all the applicant’s lease(s) with the land owner(s) granting authority to install the Anemometer Tower and/or Utility Grid Wind Energy System; legal description of the property(ies), Lease Unit(s); and the site plan shows the boundaries of the leases as well as the boundaries of the Lease Unit Boundary.
K. The phases, or parts of construction, with a construction schedule.
L. The project area boundaries.
M. The location, height, and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures and fencing.
N. The location, grades, and dimensions of all temporary and permanent on-site and access roads from the nearest county or state maintained road.
O. All new infrastructure above ground related to the project.
P. A copy of Manufacturers’ Material Safety Data Sheet(s) which shall include the type and quantity of all materials used in the operation of all equipment including, but not limited to, all lubricants and coolants.
Q. For Utility Grid Wind Energy Systems only:
1. A copy of a noise modeling and analysis report and the site plan shall show locations of equipment identified as a source of noise which is placed, based on the analysis, so that the wind energy system will not exceed the maximum permitted sound pressure levels. The noise modeling and analysis shall conform to IEC 61400 and ISO 9613. After installation of the Utility Grid wind energy system, sound pressure level measurements shall be done by a third party, qualified professional according to the procedures in the most current version of ANSI S12.18. All sound pressure levels shall be measured with a sound meter that meets or exceeds the most current version of ANSI S1.4
Union Township 30-21 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
specifications for a Type II sound meter. Documentation of the sound pressure level measurements shall be provided to the local government within 60 days of the commercial operation of the project.
2. A visual impact simulation showing the completed site as proposed on the submitted site plan. The visual impact simulation shall be from four viewable angles.
3. A copy of an Environment Analysis by a third party qualified professional to identify and assess any potential impacts on the natural environment including, but not limited to wetlands and other fragile ecosystems, historical and cultural sites, and antiquities. The applicant shall take appropriate measures to minimize, eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts identified in the analysis, and shall show those measures on the site plan. The applicant shall identify and evaluate the significance of any net effects or concerns that will remain after mitigation efforts.
4. A copy of an Avian and Wildlife Impact Analysis by a third party qualified professional to identify and assess any potential impacts on wildlife and endangered species. The applicant shall take appropriate measures to minimize, eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts identified in the analysis, and shall show those measures on the site plan. The applicant shall identify and evaluate the significance of any net effects or concerns that will remain after mitigation efforts. (Sites requiring special scrutiny include wildlife refuges, other areas where birds are highly concentrated, bat hibernacula, wooded ridge tops that attract wildlife, sites that are frequented by federally and/or state listed endangered species of birds and bats, significant bird migration pathways, and areas that have landscape features known to attract large numbers of raptor. At a minimum, the analysis shall include a thorough review of existing information regarding species and potential habitats in the vicinity of the project area.. Where appropriate, surveys for bats, raptors, and general avian use should be conducted. The analysis shall include the potential effects on species listed under the federal Endangered Species Act and Michigan’s Endangered Species Protection Law. The analysis shall indicate whether a post construction wildlife mortality study will be conducted and, if not, the reasons why such a study does not need to be conducted.)
5. A copy of a shadow flicker analysis at occupied structures to identify the locations of shadow flicker that may be caused by the project and the expected durations of the flicker at these locations from sun-rise to sun-set over the course of a year. The site plan shall identify problem areas where shadow flicker may affect the occupants of the structures and show measures that shall be taken to eliminate or mitigate the problems.
6. A second site plan, which includes all the information found in section 12 of this Ordinance, and shows the restoration plan for the site after completion of the project which includes the following supporting documentation:
a. The anticipated life of the project.
b. The estimated decommissioning costs net of salvage value in current dollars.
c. The method of ensuring that funds will be available for decommissioning and restoration.
d. The anticipated manner in which the project will be decommissioned and the site restored.
Union Township 30-22 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
A description of the complaint resolution process developed by the applicant to resolve complaints from nearby residents concerning the construction or operation of the project. The process may use an independent mediator or arbitrator and shall include a time limit for acting on a complaint. The process shall not preclude the local government from acting on a complaint. During construction the applicant shall maintain and make available to nearby residents a telephone number where a project representative can be reached during normal business hours.
AD. (New Or 2011-03) Marihuana Club, Provided:
1. Marihuana Clubs are located only in R3-A, R3-B districts by special use permit.
2. State Law. A Marihuana Club shall at all times comply with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq and the Administrative Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time.
3. Inspections. Quarterly inspections shall be made by the Township to confirm the Marihuana Club is operating in accordance with applicable laws.
4. Activity on Site. There shall be no transfer, delivery, acquisition, sale, ingestion, smoking or other consumption, of controlled substances, including marihuana, on the site.
5. Dwelling Unit. A Marihuana Club shall not be located on the same parcel as a dwelling unit.
6. Drive thru. Drive thru facilities are prohibited on a Marihuana Club site.
7. Dispersal and Spacing. For sites located in R3-A and R3-B zoning districts the parcel on which a Marihuana Club is located shall be situated at least one thousand (1000) feet from the parcel on which another Marihuana Club is located, as measured between property lines.
A Marihuana Club shall be situated at least five hundred (500) feet from a parcel on which a church, house of worship, school, licensed day care, community center or public park is located as measured between property lines. For purposes of this section a school shall be any public or private institution of learning, elementary through secondary (k-12) and any preschool.
8. Conditions. Prior to granting approval for a Marihuana Club, the planning commission may impose any conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, or operation of the Marihuana Club which are necessary for the protection of the public interest.
9. Site Requirements.
Union Township 30-23 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
a. Driveways and parking areas shall be as specified in 30.4.B.2.
b. Entrances and exits shall be as specified in 30.4.B.2.
c. Signage consistent with the Township’s signage provisions of the zoning ordinance shall be allowed on the site.
AE Rooming Dwellings and Boarding Dwellings. (New Ord 13-04). Rooming Dwellings or Boarding Dwellings for up to five occupants, regardless of familial status, or a single family plus two additional occupants may be permitted by Special Use. The two additional occupants may be related or unrelated to each other.
After payment of the required fees, an application, with a site sketch and floor plan for a Rooming Dwelling or Boarding Dwelling shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission with a public hearing and approved by the Township Board. The Township Board may approve occupancies of up to four unrelated persons in a Rooming Dwelling where conditions do not warrant five occupants. In all cases, the following conditions shall be met:
A) Parking: 4 parking spaces per unit shall be provided and designed such that no space is blocked by another vehicle, or otherwise require a vehicle to be moved to use the parking space. Additional parking spaces beyond 4 per unit may be created which require a vehicle to be moved to utilize the parking space. Parking spaces shall be constructed of gravel, asphalt, concrete or other durable hard surface and connected by similar hard surfaces to the driveway or entrance to the property. Where a garage is provided and counted as a parking space, it shall remain available for parking at all times. More than one parking area may be utilized to fulfill these requirements.
B) Bedrooms and bathrooms: A minimum of 3 bedrooms and one bathroom (toilet and bathing) per unit shall be provided. Bedrooms shall be a minimum 70 SF for a single occupant, and 100 SF for each additional occupant in the bedroom. When approved for five occupants, each unit so approved shall provide a minimum of one bathroom and a half bathroom (toilet only).
C) Open Spaces: No Rooming Dwelling or Boarding Dwelling shall be approved on a lot with less than the required lot area.
D) Common Entrance(s): All occupants of a Rooming Dwelling or Boarding Dwelling shall enter or exit the structure through one or more common entrances. Any entrance to the residence which creates a separate or exclusive living area, with or without sanitary or cooking facilities, shall be deemed to be an additional unit. One Unit Rooming Dwellings located in an R2 zoning district may convert the structure to a two unit Rooming Dwelling after an approved Special Use Permit for a Two Unit Rooming Dwelling has been issued. Three unit dwellings are not permitted in any R1 or R2 zone.
E) Waste disposal per Section 8.23: A 6’ solid screening wall shall be installed to screen outdoor containers from view unless waived by the Planning Commission and approved by the Board. Plastic bags shall not be stored outside unless in a container designed to prevent access by animals.
F) If the structure utilizes a septic system and proposes to add a bedroom(s), a System Evaluation by Central Michigan Health Department is required prior to construction.
Union Township 30-24 Special Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
G) Revocation of Special Use Permit. The following may cause the Special Use Permit to be revoked after a Show Cause Hearing by the Planning Commission; failure to maintain the conditions placed on the special use contained in the approval, or failure to comply with the Union Township Rental Housing Code. The residence maybe occupied by no more than one single family per unit if the special use is revoked.
Union Township 31-1 P.U.D. Planned
Zoning Ordinance Unit Development
SECTION 31 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (P.U.D.)
31.1 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (P.U.D.), AS DEFINED AND ALLOWED IN THE SUBSECTION BELOW:
Intent: The Planned Unit Development is a method by which creative large scale development of land is encouraged. The P.U.D. is a device that makes use of varying lot sizes and integrates different building structures. Typically, structures in these developments are clustered in such a manner as to achieve the same overall density that would be achieved if the developer had laid out the development in the conventional grid Zoning pattern. In addition to the clustered structures, open spaces are provided to ensure recreational facilities with different building types or land uses and thereby to achieve creativity, flexibility, and variety. Under this section any un-incorporated area in the Township and all proceedings in regard thereto, shall be done with consideration for maintenance of reasonable conditions regarding emission and transmission of injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, gas, smoke, dust, litter, odor and light glare, traffic, congestion, drainage, lateral land support, effect on property values, light and air, overcrowding of persons, sanitation, general appearance of the area, and other similar considerations having an effect on public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the surrounding community.
31.2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS
It is hereby determined that through careful land use and site planning it is sometimes possible to develop substantial tracts of land for uses, and with structures and other facilities that are not fully in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance, nevertheless, are not harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare and, in fact, may be thought to improved efficiency of land uses, be beneficial thereto. It is in the public interest to provide regulations, as an alternative to the regulations otherwise provided in this Ordinance, to make possible such development and use while, at the same time, assuring that any such development and use is not harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare.
31.3 PROCEDURE
A. Final Development Plan: Development or improvement of lots or areas within said P.U.D. area, after approval and adoption of a preliminary development plan, shall be accomplished by submission to the Planning Commission of a final development plan. The final development plan shall include the following information as the Planning Commission finds reasonably necessary to consider said plan:
1. A plot plan based on an accurate survey showing location of present and proposed buildings and improvements; streets; railroads; lots; buildings; drives; parking lots; water and sewer lines; and topographical features, including contours at a workable interval; ditches; water courses; ground cover; and other pertinent physical features of the site.
2. A description of the proposed operation in sufficient detail to indicate the noise, smoke, odor, vibration, dust and dirt, noxious gases, glare and heat, fire hazards, industrial wastes, and traffic that may be produced by such operation.
3. Engineering and architectural plans for controlling problems of the type enumerated under Item 2, above, if deemed necessary by the developer or if required by the Planning Commission or their authorized representative.
Union Township 31-2 P.U.D. Planned
Zoning Ordinance Unit Development
4. Final development architectural sketches or general specifications as to the type of construction and material to be used in the proposed building.
5. The period of time within which the project will be completed.
6. Additional information that the Planning Commission or the Zoning Official may find reasonably necessary to evaluate the proposed development and its effect on surrounding areas.
All aspects of such plan that might have an adverse effect on public health, safety, and welfare, or upon values of nearby property, must be disclosed in the application for approval of such plan.
B. If the Planning Commission shall determine that the proposed use of the land, as shown on the final development plan, might have an enervating, debilitating, or offensive effect on adjacent properties; whether industrial, commercial, residential, or other through the effects of noise, smoke, odor, dust and dirt, noxious gases, glare and heat, vibrations, fire hazards, industrial wasted, traffic, or adverse aesthetic effects; they may require the owner, through the use of qualified technical persons and acceptable testing techniques, to demonstrate the devices that shall be utilized to control the factors determined to be offensive. Upon acceptance by the Planning Commission of such control devices, they shall be incorporated as a part of the final development plan.
C. The Planning Commission shall consider the final development plan and shall when appropriate, direct that specific changes be made to conform with the spirit, purpose, and intent of this Ordinance.
Final approval or disapproval of a final development plan shall be made by the Township Board. A copy of said final development plan, if finally approved, shall be forwarded to the Township Clerk for filing.
D. The Township Board and the Planning Commission are specifically authorized to require the recording of a plat in connection with any such application when such would be required by Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended.
Both the Preliminary sketch review and the Final Plan Review shall be conducted after a Public Hearing as provided in Section 7.8.
31.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (P.U.D.)
A. In order to obtain a special use permit to be used as a Planned Unit Development, the proposed area shall consist of at least five (5) acres.
B. No transition or use substitution privileges provided elsewhere in the Ordinance shall apply to Planned Unit Development.
C. It must be demonstrated that adequate public utilities and municipal service are available to support the development.
31.5 PERMITTED USES
The Planned Unit Development (P.U.D.) allows the clustering of residential uses, industrial uses, and commercial uses and authorized structures of differing heights.
Union Township 31-3 P.U.D. Planned
Zoning Ordinance Unit Development
The following are Planned Unit Development uses that may be permitted with the specified zoned Districts.
A. R-2A, R-2B, and R-3 Districts: All uses allowed by right or by special use within their respective District.
B. B-4 and B-5 Districts: All uses allowed by right within their respective Districts, plus the following uses:
1. Housing for aged in the B-4 District only.
2. Shopping centers and malls.
C. B-6 District: All uses permitted by right in the B-6 District.
D. B-7 District: All uses permitted by right in the B-7 District, plus the following uses:
1. One- and two-family dwellings.
2. Multiple-family dwellings.
E. I Industrial Districts: All uses allowed by right within this District, plus the following uses:
1. Industrial parks.
31.6 REQUIRED CONDITIONS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
The following minimum conditions and requirements shall be complied with and shown on all plans and specifications.
A. Municipal facilities shall be available and provided as part of the site plan development and approved by the Central Michigan District Health Department.
B. Density: In order to prevent overtaxing of public services and facilities, the Planning Commission shall control the permitted density.
C. Height: A dwelling or principal building shall not be more than thirty-five (35) feet.
D. Building Spaces: Rather than using traditional front, side, and rear yard requirements, minimum spacing distances below may be required, although the Planning Commission has the discretion to increase these standards.
1. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of at least fifty (50) feet.
2. Side Yard: All principal buildings shall have two (2) side yards and no side yard shall be less than twenty (20) feet from the buffer zone.
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of at least thirty-five (35) feet.
E. Usable Open Space: A minimum usable open space area of thirty (30) square feet per dwelling shall be provided within group housing developments. Such open space shall be provided at ground level, unoccupied by principal or accessory buildings, and available to all occupants of the group housing development. Each open space area, so provided, shall have a minimum total area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet and shall be unobstructed to the sky. It shall not be devoted to service driveways or off street parking or loading spaces, but shall be usable for greenery, drying yards, recreational space, and other leisure activity.
Union Township 31-4 P.U.D. Planned
Zoning Ordinance Unit Development
F. The minimum horizontal distance between buildings (front to front, rear to rear, or front to rear) shall be fifty (50) feet for buildings one (1) story in height. The distance shall be increased by not less than five (5) feet for every story added. The minimum distance between buildings may be decreased by as much as ten (10) feet toward one (1) end, if it is increased by a similar distance at the other end and consistent modifications are permitted by the Planning Commission to accommodate plans that are not conventional in their outline or in their relations to other buildings.
G. The horizontal distance between ends of buildings shall be twenty (20) feet or more for one (1) or two (2) story buildings. Where the end of one (1) building is opposite the face or rear of another building, the minimum horizontal distance between them shall be thirty (30) feet for buildings one (1) story in height. These distances shall be increased by not less than five (5) feet for every story added.
H. No closed courts shall be permitted. Open arcades or garden wall not over six (6) feet in height shall not be deemed enclosing features.
I. Lot Width: The minimum width for a lot used for group housing shall be that area necessary for achieving open space requirements and yard requirements.
J. Off-street parking and signs shall meet provisions of Section 10 and Section 11.
K. Environmental Design: Planned Unit Developments shall be designed to enhance environmental features such as the preservation of tress, flood plains, natural areas, and promote proper site landscaping.
L. Circulation: the Isabella County Road Commission shall specify Standards for circulation of traffic. This shall include the relationship of internal circulation systems to external collectors and arterioles, as well as the relationships of streets to structures. This shall also include standards governing private streets.
M. Perimeter Area: To ensure a properly integrated Planned Unit Development with adjacent developments, there shall be a buffer zone surrounding the development. This buffer zone shall be left to the discretion of the Planning Commission to ensure uniformity with adjacent zoned District.
N. Phasing: Performance bonds relating to proportionate construction shall be used to ensure that necessary facilities are constructed. The bonds shall coincide with a phasing program. Both the phasing program and performance bonds shall be established by the Planning Commission.
Union Township 32-5 OS. Office and
Zoning Ordinance Service District
SECTION 32 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
32.1 SEVERABILITY
Should any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
32.2 ANNUAL REPORT
Following the enactment of this Ordinance, the Township Planning Commission shall, from time to time, prepare and file, with the Township Board, a report on the supplements or changes thereto, at least once each year.
32.3 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance was adopted by the Township Board of Union Township, Isabella County, Michigan at a regular meeting duly called and held on the 10th day of April, 1991. It is hereby ordered that said Ordinance be given immediate effective and be in force from and after the aforementioned date.
32.4 REPEAL OF PRIOR ZONING ORDINANCE
The 1981 Union Township Zoning Ordinance is hereby repealed and replaced herewith; and all Ordinances, resolutions, or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of the Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, repealed.
Union Township 32-6 OS. Office and
Zoning Ordinance Service District
ACCESSORY
BUILDING, 3-1, 8-1
Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, 1-11
ADULT ARCADE, AND ADULT VIDEO STORRE, 1-2, 3-1
ADULT BOOKSTORE, 3-1
ADULT CABARET, 3-1
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER, 3-1
AG, 2-1, 6-2, 8-4, 8-7, 8-8, 8-13, 8-18, 11-10, 13-1, 21-1, 30-4, 30-5, 30-6, 30-9, 30-10, 30-13, 30-14, 30-15, 30-16
ALLEY, 3-1
ALTERATION, 3-1
AMBIENT, 3-20
AMENDMENTS, 4-1
ANEMOMETER TOWER, 3-20
APARTMENT, 3-3
association, 3-1, 3-14, 3-15, 3-16, 17-1, 18-1
AUTOMOBILE, 3-3, 8-4
B-4, 2-1, 11-21, 22-1, 22-2, 23-1, 29-1, 30-4, 30-9, 30-11, 30-14, 31-3
B-5, 2-1, 11-21, 22-2, 23-1, 23-4, 29-1, 30-9, 30-11, 30-14, 31-3
B-6, 2-1, 11-21, 22-2, 23-4, 24-6, 24-7, 24-9, 24-10, 29-1, 30-9, 30-15, 31-3
B-7, 2-1, 11-21, 22-2, 23-4, 24-7, 24-9, 24-10, 25-1, 29-1, 30-9, 30-15, 31-3
BASEMENT, 3-3
BED AND BREAKFAST, 3-3, 8-4
BILLBOARDS, 3-3, 11-1
BOARD OF APPEALS, 3-22, 5-1, 5-3
boundaries, 2-1, 2-2, 4-1, 5-3, 7-4, 26-6, 27-12, 30-20
BUILDING, 3-8, 3-9
BULK PLANT, 3-9
CELLAR, 3-3
CLINIC, 3-9
CLUB, 1-3
company, 3-1, 7-6, 30-8, 30-19
CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL, 5-3
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME, 3-9
corporation, 3-1, 3-6, 3-16, 3-17, 5-4, 7-1
CUSTOMARY AGRICULTURAL OPERATION, 3-9
DAY CARE FACILITY, 3-9
dB(A), 3-20, 8-2, 30-18
DECIBEL, 3-20
DEFINITION OF WORDS, 3-22
DISPENSARY, 1-3
DWELLING, 3-10
ENCLOSED LOCKED FACILITY, 3-10
ESSENTIAL SERVICES, 3-10
EXISTING LOT, 3-10
FABRICATION, 3-10
FAMILY, 3-12, 15-1, 16-1, 17-1, 18-1
FARM, 3-12
FENCE, 3-12
FILLING STATION, 3-12
firm, 3-1, 3-6, 3-17, 7-1, 11-9
FLOODPLAIN, 3-12
FLOOR AREA, 3-12
GARAGE, 3-12, 11-13, 11-17, 11-20, 11-24, 11-27, 11-31
HALF STORY, 3-12
HOME OCCUPATION, 3-13
I-1, 2-1, 11-6, 11-25, 26-1, 26-6, 29-1
I-2, 2-1, 11-6, 11-25, 27-7, 27-9, 27-12, 29-1, 30-10
IEC, 3-20, 30-21
INTERPRETATION, 1-11
ISO, 3-20, 30-21
JUNK YARD, 3-13
KENNEL, 3-13
LEASE UNIT BOUNDARY, 3-20
LOT, 3-13, 3-14, 29-1
MAJOR STREET, 3-14
MAP, 4-1
MARIHUANA, 1-3, 3-14
MARIHUANA CLUB, 1-3
MARIHUANA GROWING FACILITY, 1-3
MASSAGE, 3-15
MINOR STREET, 3-15
MOBILE HOME, 3-15, 19-1
MODULAR, 3-16, 20-1
MOTEL, 3-16
MOTOR HOME, 3-19
MULTI-USE STRUCTRES, 3-16
Non Conforming, 8-20
NON-CONFORMING, 3-16, 9-1, 11-3
Nude, 3-16
occupied, 3-1
ON SITE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, 3-20
OPEN SPACE, 3-16
organization, 3-1, 3-14, 3-15, 7-3, 7-6, 11-8, 17-1, 18-1
OS, 2-1, 11-28, 28-1, 29-1
PARKING, 3-16, 3-17, 10-1, 10-3
partnership, 3-1, 3-16
person, 3-1, 3-6, 3-10, 3-15, 3-17, 3-20, 3-22, 4-1, 5-2, 5-3, 5-4, 6-3, 7-1, 7-2, 7-3, 7-4, 7-6, 8-2, 11-6, 22-4, 26-5, 27-11, 30-3
PERSON, 3-16
PET, 3-13
PLANNING COMMISSION, 3-17
PRIMARY CAREGIVER, 3-17
PROCEDURE, 5-1, 12-2, 31-1
PUBLIC OR INSTITUTIONAL, 3-17
PUBLIC UTILITY, 3-17, 5-4
PURPOSE, 1-11
QUALIFYING PATIENT, 3-17
R-1, 2-1, 8-1, 8-4, 8-8, 11-18, 14-1, 21-1, 24-10, 24-11, 30-9, 30-10, 30-13, 30-15, 30-16
R-2A, 2-1, 8-1, 8-4, 8-8, 11-18, 15-1, 21-1, 30-9, 30-10, 30-13, 30-15, 31-3
R-2B, 2-1, 8-1, 8-4, 8-8, 11-18, 16-1, 21-1, 30-9, 30-10, 30-13, 30-15, 31-3
R-3A, 2-1, 17-1, 21-1
R-3B, 2-1, 18-1, 21-1
R-4, 2-1, 11-18, 19-1, 21-1, 30-15
R-5, 2-1, 11-18, 20-1, 21-1, 30-15
RECORDS, 5-1, 5-2
REMOVAL, 5-1, 11-2
RIGHT-OF-WAY, 3-17
ROADSIDE STAND, 3-17
ROTOR, 3-20
Union Township 32-7 OS. Office and
Zoning Ordinance Service District
SETBACK BOUNDRY AGREEMENT, 3-20
Sexually oriented business, 3-17
SHADOW FLICKER, 3-21
SHOPPING CENTER, 3-18
SIGNS, 3-3, 3-4, 9-1, 11-1, 11-3, 11-4, 11-13, 11-17, 11-20, 11-24, 11-27, 11-31
SINGLE OWNERSHIP, 3-18
SITE CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION, 3-18
SITE SKETCH, 4-2
SOUND PRESSURE, 3-21
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS, 3-18
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES, 3-18
STAY OF PROCEEDINGS, 5-2
STORAGE, 3-3, 8-4, 8-11
STORY, 3-18
STREET LINE, 3-19
STRUCTURE, 3-19, 29-1
SUBDIVISION, 3-19, 8-18, 11-12, 11-16, 11-19, 11-23, 11-26, 11-27, 11-30
SWIMMING POOL, 3-19, 8-13
TOWNSHIP BOARD, 3-19
TRAVEL TRAILER, 3-19
trust, 3-1, 3-16
USE, 3-1, 3-14, 3-16, 3-17, 3-19, 5-4, 8-1, 8-5, 8-13, 9-1, 10-3, 14-1, 30-1, 30-6
used, 3-1
USES, 3-17, 8-19, 9-1, 12-1, 13-1, 15-1, 16-1, 17-1, 18-1, 19-1, 20-1, 22-1, 23-1, 24-6, 24-7, 25-1, 25-2, 26-1, 27-7, 28-1, 30-3, 31-2
UTILITY GRID WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, 3-20, 3-21
VARIANCE, 3-19
VEHICLE, 3-3, 3-9, 3-13, 8-4
WILD ANIMAL, 3-20
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, 3-21
WIND SITE ASSESSMENT, 3-21
YARD, 3-22, 11-13, 11-17, 11-20, 11-24, 11-27, 11-31, 29-1
Yard Sale, 3-22
ZONE DISTRICTS, 2-1
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS, 3-22
ZONING MAP, 2-1
ZONING OFFICIAL, 3-22, 7-1
ZONING PERMIT, 3-22, 6-1